Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON INDUSTRY
REPORT NO.
274
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2016)(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd May, 2016)
Demands for Grants (2016-17) Pertaining to
The Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT

47
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2016-17) Pertaining to
The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(v)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-17
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE —AT A G LANCE ............................ 18-22
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 23-26
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 27-46

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015 )
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi     — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale
3. Shri Narendra Budania
4. Shri Vivek Gupta
5. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
6. Shri T. K. Rangarajan
7. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari
9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
14. Shri S. P . Muddahanume Gowda
15. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
21. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
23. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
24. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
25. Shri B. Senguttuvan
26. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
27. Shri Y . V . Subbareddy
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli
29. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
30. Shrimati Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen)
31. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Joint Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Seventy-Fourth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Public Enterprises).
2. This report is based on the material supplied by the Department of Public Enterprises such
as the detailed Demands for Grants, Annual Report, Outcome Budget, Answers to Questionnaire
sent by the Secretariat and submissions made by the Secretary of the Department and its senior
officers on 22
nd March, 2016.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft report at its meeting held on
2nd May, 2016.
K.C. TYAGI
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
2nd May, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
V aisakha 12, 1938  (Saka) Standing Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AS : Accounting Standard
A E : Actual Expenditure
AAIFR : Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
BRPSE : Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises :
B E : Budget Estimates
BPE : Bureau of Public Enterprises
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CAPEX : Capital Expenditure
CPSEs : Central Public Sector Enterprises
CLB : Company Law Board
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CGD : Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment
CRR : Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment
DPE : Department of Public Enterprises
DIP AM : Department of Investment and Public Asset Management
EC : Evaluation Committee
FY : Financial Year
IEM : Independent External Monitor
ICPE : International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises
MoCA : Ministry of Company Affairs
MoF : Ministry of Finance
NCLT : National Council of Law Tribunal
NCLAT : National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
NIESBUD : National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development
PSE : Public Sector Enterprises
RDC : Research, Development and Consultancy
(iv)

RE : Revised Estimates
SHGs : Self Help Group
SLPE : State Level Public Enterprises
VRS : V oluntary Retirement Scheme
VSS : V oluntary Separation Scheme
(v)

1
REPORT
Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs) were set up to serve the broad macro-economic objective
of higher economic growth, self-sufficiency in production of goods and services, long term
equilibrium in balance of payment and low and stable prices besides meeting socio- economic
obligations. Performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), during the year 2014-15,
is summarized below:
(i) There were 298 Central Public Sector Enterprises (excluding 7 insurance companies)
under the administrative control of various Ministries/Departments as on 31.3.2015.
Out of these 298 CPSEs, 235 were in operation and 63 CPSEs have yet to
commence business. Schedules-wise list of the CPSEs and list of Maharatna,
Navratana and Miniratna CPSEs are placed at Annexure I and II, respectively.
Out of 235 operating CPSEs as many as 157 CPSEs showed profit and 77 CPSEs
incurred losses during 2014-15.
(ii) The cumulative investment (paid up capital plus long terms loans), which was
` 29 crores in 5 enterprises at the time of first Five Year Plan ( i.e. as on 31.3.1951),
has gone up to ` 10,96,057 crores in 298 CPSEs as on 31.3.2015. While the increase
in ‘investment’ in all the CPSEs went up by 10.48% in 2014-15 over 2013-14, the
increase in ‘capital employed’ went up by 7.40% during the same period.
(iii) The ‘net profit’ of 157 profit making CPSEs was ` 1,30,363 crores in 2014-15 as
against 164 profit making enterprises in 2013-14. The ‘net loss’ of 77 loss making
enterprise stood at ` 27,360 crores during the year as against 70 loss making
enterprises in 2013-14.
(iv) In comparison to 2013-14, the profitability ratios in terms of net profit to turnover/
revenue, net profit to capital employed, net profit to net worth, sales to capital
employed have declined, whereas interest to gross profit show an increase in
2014-15.
2. The Financial Year (FY) 2015-16 saw some important milestones in the realm of CPSEs in
India.  The revival/restructure/closure of sick CPSEs had evolved into a painful delayed process.
To address this, Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) brought out guidelines to “Streamlining
the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick, incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector
Enterprises: General principles and mechanism of restructuring” in October, 2015. The guidelines
enumerated the criteria for identifying the CPSEs as sick, incipient sick and weak. Subsequently,
the formal closing down of Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE), one
of the agencies involved in the revival/restructuring process of CPSEs, was announced in
November, 2015. After the closing down of BRPSE, the administrative Ministries/Departments were
put in charge of the primary responsibility of keeping watch over the health of CPSEs under them.
Further, the restructuring mechanism was also made time bound. The proposed National Council
1

2
of Law Tribunal (NCLT), as prescribed by Companies Act, 2013 was made the sole agency to
process the revival/restructure/closure of CPSEs in India thereby ending the hitherto existent multi
agency arrangement.
3. Further, in the Budget 2016-17, the Finance Minister announced that the assets of CPSEs
had to be leveraged for generation of resources for investment in new projects.  DPE has been
assigned the responsibility of monitoring Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) by CPSEs in infrastructural
projects. The Budget also contained an announcement that a comprehensive approach for efficient
management of Government investment in CPSEs would be adopted.  Regarding disinvestment/
strategic sale of CPSEs, the Government also had laid out a new method wherein the NITI Aayog
has been tasked with identifying the CPSEs for disinvestment, mode of sale, percentage of sale and
methods of evaluation.  DPE has been made part of the process of disinvestment at its different
stages and the same is in tune with the enhancement of the mandate of DPE carried out in the
second half of the year 2015.
Department of Public Enterprises- Mandate
4. In their 52
nd Report, the Estimates Committee of 3 rd Lok Sabha (1962-67) stressed the need
for setting up a centralized coordinating unit, which could also make continuous appraisal of the
performance of public enterprises which led to the setting up of the Bureau of Public Enterprises
(BPE) in 1965 in the Ministry of Finance.  Subsequently, as a result of the reorganization of the
Ministries/Departments of the Union Government in September, 1985, BPE was made part of the
Ministry of Industry.  In May, 1990, BPE was made a full-fledged Department known as the
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).  Presently, it is part of the Ministry of Heavy Industries
and Public Enterprises.
5. The Department of Public Enterprises is the nodal department for all the Central Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and formulates policy pertaining to CPSEs. It lays down, in particular,
policy guidelines on performance improvement and evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation
and personnel management in CPSEs. It furthermore collects and maintains information in the form
of a Public Enterprises Survey on several areas in respect of CPSEs.
6. In fulfilling its role, the Department Coordinates with other Ministries, CPSEs and
concerned organizations. As per the Allocation of Business Rules of the Government, the following
subjects have been allocated to the DPE:
Residual work relating to erstwhile Bureau of Public Enterprises including Industrial
Management Pool.
Coordination of matters of general policy affecting all Public Sector Enterprises.
Evaluation and monitoring the performance of Public Sector Enterprises, including the
Memorandum of Understanding mechanism.
Matters relating to Permanent Machinery of Arbitration for the Public Sector Enterprises.
Counselling, training and rehabilitation of employees in Central Public Sector Undertakings
under V oluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS).

3
Review of capital projects and expenditure in Central Public Sector Enterprises.
Measures aimed at improving performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises and other
capacity building initiatives of Public Sector Enterprises.
Rendering advice relating to revival, restructuring or closure of Public Sector Enterprises,
including the mechanisms therefor.
Matters relating to Standing Conference of Public Enterprises.
Matters relating to International Center for Public Enterprises.
Categorization of Central Public Sector Enterprises, including conferring ‘Ratna’ status.
Survey of Public Enterprises.
The Department of Public Enterprises implements two Plan Schemes viz. (i) Scheme of
Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) for the rationalised employees of CPSEs and (ii)
Scheme of Research, Development and Consultancies (RDC) on Generic issues related to Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs and SLPEs).
7. During the oral evidence as part of the examination of Demands for Grants (2016-17) of
DPE, the Committee pointed out that the mandate of the Department was significant and it had the
responsibility of overseeing the working of the CPSEs in India which had a cumulative turnover
of ` 22,00,000 crore. Further, the Committee also took into cognizance the expansion of the
mandate of the Department which now included evaluation of CPSEs, the monitoring of their
performance and the review of CAPEX by the CPSEs. Besides, DPE also had the responsibility of
running the PMA mechanism.
8. The Secretary, DPE while answering the queries of the Committee stated that-
“DPE has a chequered history. We started as a bureau and when we became a
Department, we were given certain responsibilities that have, sometimes, been changing.  At
one point of time, DPE was doing disinvestment, but some years back, the Department of
Disinvestment has been created.  So, that issue has been separated.  Just in August, we were
given the role of monitoring CAPEX and hon. Member has raised a point on that issue.
We are monitoring that from August last year only and we are trying to improve our system.
I do agree that there has been delay in projects.  But the delays in the projects of CPSEs
are being monitored now as closely as we can and we will keep on trying to improve the
system. There has also been a point made about the PMA mechanism.  The Departments
sometimes go to courts; the corporates also, sometimes, go to courts.  This issue has been
coming up again and again and we have had meetings at higher level in Cabinet
Secretariat and the Departments have been asked to desist from going to court and try to
settle it at the level of PMA. The pendency is there.  But, definitely, it has been a
mechanism that has helped us.  In certain issues which are not accepted by the parties
concerned, the appeal would lie with the Secretary, Law, and it is always settled within the
ambit of the Government without resorting to going to Courts.”

4
9. In their written replies to the queries of the Committee regarding the enhancement of
mandate, the Department submitted that the Amendment of Government of India (Allocation of
Business) Rules, 1961 has been done vide Presidential Notification in August, 2015 to enhance the
role of DPE in monitoring of performance of CPSEs and effective management of their assets by
allocating some additional subjects to DPE. These included review of capital projects and
expenditure in CPSEs, measures aimed at improving performance and rendering advice relating to
revival, restructuring or closure of Public Sector Enterprises including the mechanisms therefor.
DPE had accordingly initiated steps for monitoring the CAPEX projects of 33 CPSEs, Railway
Board and four other organizations. Similarly, for strengthening of performance evaluation process,
MoU guidelines for 2016-17 had been revised and parameter proposed were result oriented rather
than process oriented. Guidelines for Streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of
sick/ incipient sick and weak CPSEs were issued on 29 October, 2015.
10. The Committee notes that the mandate of DPE has been augmented with the addition
of roles in monitoring of performance of CPSEs and effective management of their assets.
This has been done by addition of subjects to the Allocation of Business of DPE.  The
Committee is of the considered opinion that though the Budget allocation of DPE is small
compared to the major Ministries/Departments of the Government, the role to be essayed
by them is critical.  As the nodal Department of all CPSEs in India, their effective
evaluation and monitoring is going to be ‘humongous task.   The newly added responsibility
of CAPEX monitoring, measures to improve performance of CPSEs and other capacity
building initiatives and advice regarding revival/restructuring/closure of CPSEs will render
the working of DPE pivotal to the way CPSEs perform in the country.
11. Accordingly, the Committee observes that DPE should realize and imbibe the
magnitude and importance of the responsibilities that have been entrusted to them and take
more proactive measures to play out this role.  Rather them imagining themselves just as
a nodal coordinating agency, DPE should reinvent themselves as an arm of the Government
which can take decisive steps on its own or in coordination with other Ministries/
Departments   to create a facilitative milieu for CPSEs to perform to their potential.  The
Committee is of the firm view that DPE should not be restricting themselves to just issuing
guidelines and providing advice.  The new mandate gives them ample space to effectively
follow up the implementation of the advices rendered by them through their guidelines.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that to be able to do this, DPE has to equip
themselves better and come out with measures implementable on ground and also
endeavour to create a coordinative platform involving the respective administrative
Ministries and other relevant Government agencies through which matters relating to the
working of CPSEs in the country can be resolved at a single stage avoiding time lag in
administrative decisions, the single most degenerative factor in case of decisions related to
CPSEs.
DPE during the Twelfth Plan Period (2012-17) till now.
12. When asked about to provide an overview of the CPSE ecosystem in the country during
the Twelfth Plan Period (2012-17) till now, and to bring out all major events/factors that made an
impact in the Sector by providing a brief outline of the initiatives of the Government during this

5
period, it was submitted by the Department that the global economic performance has been
subdued over the previous couple of years and the developing economies were struggling to cope
with the declining commodity prices, reduced capital inflows into their economies and increasing
financial volatility. The CPSEs in India were performing to the best of their abilities in the prevailing
economic scenario. Brief outline of the initiatives of the Government during this period were as
under:-
Amendment of Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 has been
made vide Presidential Notification in August 2015 to enhance the role of DPE in
monitoring of performance of CPSEs, effective management of their assets and capacity
building in Good Governance practices by allocating some additional subjects particularly
Review of capital projects and expenditure in Central Public Sector Enterprises.
Winding up of Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) has
been done by Government in November 2015 to reduce the number of layers for expeditious
decision on restructuring/ revival of CPSEs.
Guidelines on streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/
incipient sick and weak CPSEs have been issued in October 2015 by Department of Public
Enterprises. A criterion has been laid down in the said guidelines for identifying the CPSEs
as sick, incipient sick and weak CPSEs.
13. The Committee notes that DPE claims that the CPSEs in India are performing to the
best of their abilities in the prevailing economic scenario of declining commodity prices,
reduced capital inflows into their economies and increasing financial volatility. Even while
taking the claim of DPE in its face value and acknowledging the fact that the Committee
is not in knowledge of the performance of all the CPSEs in India, the Committee cannot
but share its observation that the current status of all the 31 CPSEs under the Department
of Heavy Industry (DHI) is sick / incipient sick and weak as per DPEs guidelines for
“Streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick / incipient sick and weak
Central Public Sector Enterprises: General principles and mechanism of restructuring”.
Accordingly, the Committee observes that the stand taken by DPE that CPSEs are
performing well under the given conditions as status-quoits and wants the Department to
adopt a new forward looking stance.
14.  In respect of DPE, the physical and financial targets of the Schemes fixed and
achievements made during the Twelfth Plan period and the scheme-wise break-up of the same are
as under:
(Details of the Plan outlay and achievements upto 29.2.1016)
(
` in crore)
Sl. Scheme 12 th Plan Actual
No. Allocation Expenditure
1. Scheme of Counselling, Retraining & Redeployment (CRR) 31.60 14.61
2. Scheme of Research, Development & Consultancies (RDC) 5.50 3.56

6
3. Scheme for Skill Development/ Training programme to
executives/ employees of Enterprises 5.00 2.26
4. Information Technology 2.90 2.05
5. N. E. Region 5.00 1.04
TOTAL 50.00 23.52
Further when queried about the Mid Term Review of the performance of the schemes of
DPE during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department submitted that MTR of plan schemes had
not been undertaken.
15. The Committee note that while replying to the query on Mid Term Review (MTR) of
schemes during Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department has restricted themselves by just
submitting that no review has been undertaken.  The Committee observes that the
Department while replying to the Committee should keep in mind that answers given to a
Parliamentary Committee should be holistic and self-contained.  In the absence of a
substantial reply, the Committee is precluded from comprehending the reason for not
undertaking the MTR.  This information has to be provided to the Committee.
16. Further, from the submission of the DPE, the Committee takes note that of the
Twelfth Plan outlays for various schemes of DPE, three schemes have seen roughly around
only 50% of utilization and one has seen only 20% of expenditure.  The money allocated
for Information Technology alone has seen a healthy utilization.  Here again, since a review
of the scheme has not been undertaken the reasons for the gross underperformance
observed in the plan schemes are alien to the Committee. Regardless of this, the
Committee expresses its dissatisfaction in the way the plan schemes of DPE have
underperformed during the Twelfth Plan period.  DPE should make themselves aware of the
reasons behind this situation and take necessary steps to prevent them from recurring and
report the same to the Committee.
Demand for Grants 2016-17:
17. The major head-wise Budgetary provision, together with a brief explanation in precise terms
of the expenditure proposal is given below:-
(` in Thousand)
Revenue BE (2016-17)
Sl. Major            Sub-Head Plan Non-Plan Total
No. Head
1. 3451 Secretariat Economic Services — 9,77,00 9,77,00
2. 3451 Information Technology — 50,00 50,00
Sl. Scheme 12 th Plan Actual
No. Allocation Expenditure

7
3. 2552 North Eastern Areas 1,00,00 — 1,00,00
4 2852 A wards to Public Enterprises for — 15,00 15,00
excellence in performance
5. 2852 Counselling, Retraining/ Redeployment, 3,00,00 — 3,00,00
setting up of new centres/addition of
nodal agencies, etc. (CRR Scheme)
6. 2852 Research, Development and Consultancy 6,00,00 — 6,00,00
on generic issues related to Central Public
Sector Enterprises and State Level Public
Enterprises
TOTAL 10,00,00 10,42,00 20,42,00
Brief explanation of Budget Provision:-
(i) Secretariat Economic Services: Provision is for Secretariat Expenditure like pay and
allowances, TA/DA, sitting fees for Task Force Member of Search Committee,
medical treatment, office expenses etc.
(ii) Information Technology:  Provision is for acquisition of Hardware, Software,
Maintenance of Software and Modernization of office premises of DPE.
(iii) North Eastern Areas: Every Ministry/Department has to earmark 10% of their total
budget allocation of plan fund for North Eastern Region and Sikkim.  This provision
is proposed to be utilized for the various developmental works/schemes for the
benefit of North Eastern Region and Sikkim.
(iv) Awards to Public Enterprises for Excellence in Performance: Provision is for Awards
for Excellence in MoU to CPSEs head.
(v) Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment of Rationalized Employees of CPSEs
(CRR Scheme): Fund is provided as Grant-in-aid to nodal agencies for counselling,
retraining and redeployment of separated employees / VRS optees (or their
dependents) of CPSEs. Fund is also utilized for monitoring and evaluation of the
Scheme.
(vi) Research, Development and Consultancy (RDC) on Generic issues related to
Enterprises(CPSEs & SLPEs): Fund utilized for (1) Organizing conferences /
seminars / workshops and undertaking thematic studies / consultancies on
generic issues of CPSEs  including MoU and its negotiation and evaluation
process, (2) Training of Executives and employees of Central  and State Enterprises
and D/o Public Enterprises (DPE)  officials  for Skill Development (3) Training of
Directors on the boards of CPSEs with specials emphasis on non-officials Directors
on various corporate  Governance issue. (4) Payment of Contribution to
Sl. Major            Sub-Head Plan Non-Plan Total
No. Head

8
International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPEs) (5) Bringing out annual
survey of CPSEs/SLPEs. (6) Various expenditure associated with administrative and
logistic arrangement of MOU related activities. (7) Payment of Consultants/
Programmers etc. associated with RDC Scheme.
18.      When queried  by the Committee about items like Contribution to International Centre for
Promotion of Enterprises (ICPEs) and Skill Development/Training Programmes of Executives of
State Level Public Enterprises (SLPEs) schemes and provisions for projects/schemes for NER and
Sikkim areas not being given any separate allocation for FY 2016-17, the Department replied that
the with a view to rationalize Plan Schemes as per direction of Ministry of Finance, SLPEs had
been merged with RDC Scheme in the FY 2016-17. Payment of Government of India’s annual
membership fee to ICPE had also been included in the revised RDC Scheme. Thus, no separate
allocation for contribution to ICPE was made. It was also added that earmarking of funds to the
tune of ` 0.80 had been done for NE region under the RDC Scheme.
19. The Committee notes that departing from the pattern of previous years, the
Department has only two plan schemes in FY 2016-17 - Counselling, Retraining and
Redeployment of Rationalized Employees of CPSEs (CRR) and Research, Development and
Consultancy (RDC) on Generic issues related to Enterprises (CPSEs & SLPEs).  A merger
of schemes has been undertaken in the case of RDC making the current RDC scheme more
expansive containing more components than earlier.  The Committee expects this measure
to impart more financial and operational flexibility to DPE resulting in better utilization of
allocated funds.  Accordingly, the Committee observes that DPE should make the most of
the new initiative brought out by the Ministry of Finance and avoid deficient utilization and
curtailment of funds these schemes were prone to earlier.
Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) Scheme for separated Employees of CPSEs.
20. Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) Scheme is a scheme run by DPE to
provide opportunities of self/wage employment to the employees or dependents of Central Public
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) separated under V oluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)/Voluntary
Separation Scheme (VSS) or retrenched due to closure/restructuring of the enterprise. The Scheme
aims at providing short duration skill development/entrepreneurship development training
programmes to equip the beneficiaries for self/wage employment including for new vocations and
has been implemented since the year 2001-02. It was subsequently notified in November, 2007 in
order to wider its scope and coverage.
21. While examining the Demands 2016-17 of DPE, it was noted that the Budget Expenditure
(BE) for the CRR Scheme of ` 3.20 crore (for the year 2016-17) had been allocated under two
Heads i.e. ` 0.20 crore under Major Head 2552 and ` 3.0 crore under Major Head 2852. The
Committee wanted to know the reasons for allocation of money under two different Heads. To this
query, the Department replied that under Major Head 2852, funds to the tune of ` 3.00 crore had
been allocated during 2016-17 under the Scheme of CRR. Major Head 2552 was meant for
allocation of funds earmarked for NE Region and thus ` 0.20 crore was earmarked under CRR
Scheme for the NE Region during 2016-17.

9
22. Further, the Committee asked for the figures of the total VRS optees, grade-wise and
CPSE-wise, during the last 5 years and the number of employees among them who had been
beneficiaries of the CRR scheme. The Committee wanted to know how many trainees were actually
re-employed/self-employed after CRR training. The Budget Estimate (BE), Revised Estimate (RE)
and Actual Expenditure (AE) figures for CRR Scheme for the last 5 years till 2015-16 were also
sought. DPE informed that the grade-wise figures of VRS are not maintained centrally in the
Department. CPSE-wise and year-wise figures of VRS and VRS/VSS optees/dependents trained
during last five years as provided by DPE has been placed at Annexure-III.  The details of VRS/
VSS optees/dependents trained and redeployed as per information provided by Nodal Agencies were
provided as shown below:
Year                           No. of VRS/VSS optees/dependents
Trained Redeployed
2011-12 9,400 4,812
2012-13 7,506 4,121
2013-14 3,340 1,624
2014-15 2,525 1,073
2015-16 2,940* 1,027 (Tentative)
*As on 29.02.2016
BE, RE and funds utilised during last five years:-
(` in crore)
Y ear B E RE Funds utilised
2011-12 7.80 7.80 8.17 (*funds re-appropriated from RDC
Scheme and I.T.)
2012-13 8.60 6.95 5.06
2013-14 7.00 5.40 4.73
2014-15 4.40 2.42 2.43
2015-16 2.90 2.78 2.39*
(Bills for the amount of ` 9.50 lakhs are
under process for payment)
*As on 29.02.2016
23. When the Committee wanted to know about the outcome of the reviews of the scheme
undertaken by the nodal agencies and the modifications done in the CRR scheme after the review,
the DPE submitted that in the year 2012-13, National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small
Business Development (NIESBUD), an autonomous body of the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises was engaged to evaluate the CRR Scheme. Major findings and

10
recommendations had been circulated to Nodal agencies for compliance. Some of the key findings
and recommendations were as under:
Adoption of DPE’s strategic approach of mixing both private and Government sector
organisations as nodal agencies has paid dividend. With varied experience, these nodal
agencies have been able to infuse synergy for the furtherance of the CRR Scheme over
the years at grassroots.
The widening of the ambit of the scheme by involving dependents of separated employees
has proved to be beneficial. This provision has been continued while implementing the
scheme in the current year.
The analysis of quantitative data posted by VRS optees/dependents points towards greater
fulfilment of objectives and goals as outlined in the scheme.
Academic orientation of the training imparted by nodal agencies has market friendly ideology
with scope for self-employment in case of both Government and private agencies.
CRR Scheme necessitates involvement of State based Government organisations engaged in
skill development and livelihood promotion activities.
More stress is needed on follow-ups and redeployment after linking with micro credit/
finance. In this context, Nodal Agencies have already been directed to explore possibilities
of hand holding projects and linkages particularly in context with training to dependents
under CRR to enhance redeployment/self-employment opportunities.
The quality of mobilisation (motivation) by nodal agencies in relation to counselling of VRS
optees/dependents has been found to have moderate impact on (i) retention of expected
motivation during the training; and (ii) in the job employment or in self- employment
activities.
More stress is needed to explore the possibility of formation of Self Help Group (SHGs)
by the agencies. Nodal Agencies have been asked to form SHGs wherever feasible with
provision for creation of corpus funds. Nodal Agencies have also been advised to have
sessions on bankable projects and hand holdings with participation of financial institutions.
24. The Committee has always been appreciative of the objectives served by the CRR
scheme which basically offers a social security net to employees of CPSEs who optees for
VRS or get retrenched. The Committee takes into cognizance the fact that NIESBUD had
undertaken an evaluation of the scheme in 2012-13 and had recommended a host of
improvements. One of the major recommendations was the need to stress more on follow
ups and redeployment after linking with micro credit/finance. Handholding projects and
linkages were also recommended to enhance redeployment/self employment opportunities of
the former employees and their dependents trained under the scheme. DPE have submitted
that there recommendations had been circulated to the Nodal Agencies for compliance.
However, Committee finds that the number of people redeployed after being trained under
the scheme has always hovered around 50% or less of the total trained personnel. The

11
situation has continued even after the recommendations of NIESBUD made in 2012.
Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department should take
appropriate measures expeditiously to improve the number of trainees who get redeployed
subsequent to the training under the scheme.  In this regard, the Committee also wants
DPE to consider focussed Skill Development under current impetus accorded to skill
development by the Government.  The Nodal Agencies under the Scheme should identify the
skill sets that are in demand in the local area in terms of employability and provide
training to people under the Scheme. To the Committee, this is one of the measures that
can be taken to improve the redeployment ratio. Further, this will also contribute towards
the efforts of the Government to address the huge skill deficit of the workforce in the
country in different spheres.
Scheme of Research, Development and Consultancies on Generic issues related to Public
Sector Enterprises.
25. On the scheme of Research, Development and Consultancies (RDC) on Generic issues of
Public Sector Enterprises, DPE informed that the scheme was introduced in the year 2007-08 and
was being implemented since 2008-09. It was further informed that in February, 2016 RDC
guidelines were revised to broad base its coverage. The broader coverage was expected to help in
the wider usage of fund.  The objectives of scheme of RDC were to (i) undertake thematic studies
on the Generic issues of Public Sector Enterprises in the changing global economic scenario;
(ii) conduct seminars and workshops on the Generic issues to adopt collaborative and cooperative
learning for experience sharing; (iii) conduct training programmes for capacity building and skill
development;  (iv) constant improvement in performance evaluation and management processes of
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs); (v) incentive best practices in focus areas through grant
of awards/incentives to CPSEs and SLPEs; and (vi) to deal with any other pertinent issue related
to Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).
26. During the examination of Demands 2016-17 of DPE, questions were raised on the BE
allocation for RDC scheme of ` 6.80 crore being made under two Major Heads- ` 0.80 crore under
the Major Head 2552 and ` 6.00 crore under Major Head 2852. In reply to this, DPE submitted
that the Plan funds are allocated separately for Major Head 2852 and Major Head 2552 which was
meant for North-East Areas. During the year 2016-17, ` 6.00 crore under RDC Scheme has been
allocated under Major Head 2852 while ` 0.80 crore has been allocated under Major Head 2552
for the North-Eastern Areas. It was further submitted that with a view to rationalize Plan Schemes
as per direction of Ministry of Finance, Skill Development/Training Programme of Executives of
State Level Public Enterprises (SLPEs) has been merged with RDC Scheme in the year 2016-17.
Payment of Government of India’s annual membership International Centre for Promotion of
Enterprises (ICPEs) which was earlier made through non-plan expenditure had also been included
in the revised RDC Scheme. Therefore, no separate allocation for contribution to ICPE was made
in 2016-17. Accordingly, from 2016-17 onwards RDC scheme will operate as an umbrella scheme
with wider scope and objectives.
27. However, regarding the allocation and utilisation of the funds of RDC during 2015-16, the
Committee noted that the BE for the scheme was ` 3.5 crore which was curtailed to ` 2.81 crore

12
at RE. The Committee wanted to know the actual utilization made under the scheme. The
Department informed that ` 1.89 crore had been utilized under the scheme till 14 th March, 2016.
It was also submitted that since the scheme had been made an umbrella scheme from 2016-17
onwards with broader coverage, the utilization of funds under the scheme was expected to
improve.
28. The Committee note that during 2015-16, with only a fortnight left for the
completion of the Financial Y ear almost ````` 1 crore out of the total ````` 2.81 crore allocated to
the scheme at RE has been left unspent. The Committee take exception to such
underutilization under an important initiative like RDC scheme.  However, the Committee
takes into account the hope expressed by DPE that from 2016-17 onwards the performance
of the scheme is expected to improve as it has seen broad basing of its objectives and new
components have been added as part of subsuming some other schemes into it.  Further,
the umbrella nature of the scheme is thought to provide more financial inter-
operationability.  This will also help the Department to tide over the earlier problem of last
quarter spending peculiar to the earlier RDC scheme for which the Ministry of Finance has
already granted an exemption from spending limits.
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
29. Through the Companies Act, 2013 the Government has given statutory backing to CSR,
making India the first country in the world to provide legal mandate to CSR. This has been done
via Section 135 and Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 which enumerates the activities that
can be undertaken under CSR for welfare of the society at large in a sustainable manner. The
Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 2014 were notified on 27
th February,
2014 by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, (MoCA) and came into force from 1 st April, 2014. On
the completion of a year after the implementation of the CSR Rules, 2014, the Government
appointed a High Level Committee to suggest measures for Improved Monitoring of the
Implementation of CSR policies.  As submitted to the Committee by MoCA, the report of the High-
Level Committee was still under their consideration.
30. The Committee during its examination of CSR activities of various CPSEs at an earlier
occasion had found that the CSR fund utilization by CPSEs has many lacunae. Accordingly, the
Committee recommended to DPE that they should have a monitoring system to look into the
spending of these funds. It was felt that to set up such mechanism in DPE, necessary institutional
and budgetary support should be provided to the Department. In this direction, DPE was asked to
take up the recommendation with the MoCA and the competent authority. Regarding this, the
Department stated that they had already started monitoring sector-wise details of CSR funds spent
by CPSEs during 2014-15 through the available resources in the Department.  Further, the matter
of setting-up a monitoring system within DPE has also been taken up with the MoCA.
31. The Committee is happy to know that the Department has already initiated steps to
act on its recommendation regarding setting-up of a monitoring system to look into CSR
fund utilization by CPSEs. It is also appreciated that the matter has also been taken up
with the MoCA which administers the Companies Act, 2013. The Committee observes that
DPE should work in synchronisation with the MoCA in the matter relating to the

13
monitoring of the CSR fund utilization to ensure efficient internalisation of the CSR
culture by CPSEs, thereby setting an example for the private sector also to emulate.
Revival/Restructuring of sick/loss incurring CPSEs.
32. As part of its examination of DFG 2016-17 of DPE, the Department was asked to explain,
step by step, the mechanism which was in place now and before i.e. , when Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) was in existence (till November, 2015) for
revival/restructuring/closures of CPSEs while bring out the roles of each agency, i.e.  the
administrative Ministry, BRPSE, BIFR and various other approving authorities in the process. The
Department was also asked to make a comparison of the erstwhile process of dealing with a sick
CPSE with the process made effective beyond November, 2015 with the NCLT and the NITI Ayog,
as the authorities of approval.
33. In reply, DPE submitted that before the winding up of BRPSE, proposals relating to revival/
restructuring of sick CPSEs received in DPE from the administrative Ministries/Departments
concerned, were referred to BRPSE for its recommendations. BRPSE considered the restructuring
or revival plan of CPSEs and gave its recommendations. The recommendations were advisory in
nature. The administrative Ministry/Department concerned processed the recommendations of
BRPSE and obtained approval of the competent authority and thereafter implemented the
decisions.
34. Consequent upon the decision of the Government (on 7.10.2015) for winding up of BRPSE,
DPE issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 on “Streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring
of sick/incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enterprises”. The administrative Ministry/
Department concerned was now responsible to monitor the sickness of CPSEs functioning under
them and take timely redressal measures for revival/restructuring/disinvestment of sick/loss making
CPSEs with the approval of the competent authority.
35. Based on the information available in Public Enterprises Survey, 2014-15, DPE has prepared
a list of sick, incipient sick and weak CPSEs as on 31.3.2015 and has sent the list to the
concerned administrative Ministries/Departments of CPSEs on 10.2.2016 to confirm the
classification (identification of sick/incipient sick and weak CPSEs) for taking action as per the
DPE guidelines dated 29.10.2015 regarding revival and restructuring of sick and weak CPSEs.
36. Regarding the roles of different agencies involved in the process, DPE submitted that NCLT
and BIFR came under MoCA and Department of Financial Services, respectively. The role of DPE
was formulation of policy guidelines for dealing with sickness in CPSEs as per its guidelines issued
for revival/restructuring of sick CPSEs on 29.10.2015. The role of other agencies could be
explained by the administrative Ministries/Departments concerned. Further, the Department also
stated that the setting-up of NCLT is likely to replace BIFR. Ministry of MoCA was yet to notify
the setting-up of NCLT. In that case, BIFR would continue with its extant functions. DPE also
stated that the details regarding the setting-up of NCLT and the future of BIFR have been sought
from MoCA and Department of Financial Services, respectively.
37. During the oral evidence of DPE, the Committee further queried on the reasons behind
winding up of BRPSE for which the Department replied that the Government felt that the BRPSE

14
was an additional layer and needed to be removed.  In that process, the responsibility was given
to the administrative Ministry concerned to watch, to see and to review the performance. DPE has
prescribed a few things to do as part of this to the administrative Ministry. One of them was to
see whether they have become sick or they have become weak. If it falls in that category, DPE
instructed the administrative Ministry to keep a close watch and try to turn them around and do
mid-course correction and, wherever necessary, move for its restructuring or improving its
performance.  As per DPE guideline issued 29 th October, 2015 it had been always the role of the
administrative Ministry/Department concerned to address the issues of sick and weak CPSEs and
to take timely redressal measures for revival/restructuring/disinvestment of sick/loss making CPSEs
with the approval of the competent authority in a time bound manner.
38. During the oral evidence, the Committee asked DPE to submit in writing the salient features
of the guidelines of DPE issued on 29
th November, 2015 on streamlining the mechanism for revival/
restructuring of sick/incipient sick and week CPSEs in India, specially identifying the role of NCLT,
NITI Ayog, BIFR, DPE and the respective administrative Ministry in the case of such CPSEs.
39. Regarding the role of other agencies, it was submitted by DPE that the Companies Act,
2013 vide Section 407 to 434 (both inclusive), provide inter-alia  for setting-up of (a) the National
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and (b) the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT).
The Act provided for revival and rehabilitation of sick companies which were enumerated in
Section 253 to 269 of the Companies Act, 2013.  However, since these sections were yet to be
notified by MoCA, NCLT and NCLA T were yet to be operationalised. At present, the Board of
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR)/Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction (AAIFR) were authorized in the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1965 for approval of revival and rehabilitation of Sick Companies, including CPSEs. DPE added
that MoCA had informed that the NCLT would replace (a) the existing Company Law Board;
(b) BIFR; (c) AAIFR and; (d) would also acquire the jurisdiction of the High Courts in the matter
where it was vested in the High Courts under the Act. Bodies referred at (b) and (c) would stand
abolished upon notification of the SICA (Repeal) Act, 2003.  MoCA has further informed that the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2015 had been introduced in the Parliament and it also proposed
to amend the Companies Act, 2013 with regard to insolvency (revival as well as winding up)
related provisions.
40. Firstly, the Committee notes with dissatisfaction the disowning by DPE of the subject
matter related to the agencies involved in the revival/restructure/closure of CPSEs in India.
The Committee is critical of the tendency of the Department to compartmentalise the
replies by contending that the roles of NCLT and BIFR would be explained by the respective
Ministry/Department concerned. As the nodal Department for the overseeing of all CPSEs
in the country, DPE is expected to provide a cogent reply to the Committee even if the
subject matter falls under the domain of other Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The
responsibility of action on the subject being with another Ministry/Department/Agency can
be justified, but that should not preclude the collection of information on the subject.
41. The Committee notes that the Government has come up with some important
initiatives in the area of revival/restructure/closure of CPSEs.  As the Committee gathers,
the earlier mechanism involved the administrative Ministry/Department, the BRPSE, the

15
BIFR and finally the approving authority, the Cabinet. This multiplicity of agencies involved
delay in granting approval to revival plans and most of the revival proposals when finally
approved would have already become redundant due to escalation of costs owing to the time
over run.  This vexed situation contributed to the further downfall of the sick/loss incurring
and weak CPSEs.
42. Now, as per the new system the respective administrative Ministry/Department will
oversee the performance of its CPSEs based on the guidelines for “Streamlining the
mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak Central Public
Sector Enterprises: General principles and mechanism of restructuring” issued by DPE.
Further, the Government has done away with the BRPSE and BIFR and AAIFR and they
would stand abolished once the NCLT is constituted.  The NCLT, provided for in the
Companies Act, 2013, will henceforth be the sole entity to decide upon the revival/
restructure proposals of CPSEs. Also, the revival/restructure process has been rendered
time bound.  In this regard, the Committee observes that the step taken to put the
administrative Ministry/Department in-charge of the monitoring of the health of their
respective CPSEs is an appropriate decision as mid-course correction and other reformative
measures can be taken swiftly without any time lapse as no third party is getting involved.
The Committee expects that all the lacunae which plagued the earlier system will be
eliminated in the new mechanism.
43. Further, it is observed that now with the enhanced mandate, DPE can also have a
proactive role to play in the process. The NCLT has been envisaged for all type of companies
in India, not just CPSEs. In this scenario, the Committee recommends that DPE has to take
this into account and take appropriate measures in coordination with the MoCA to ensure
that the CPSEs, due to their particular requirements of meeting socio-economic obligations,
are not put at a disadvantaged position in their efforts to get revived/restructured as they
would be treated as per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.
New policy on management of Government investments in PSEs, including disinvestment
and strategic sale.
44. In his Budget speech, the Finance Minister announced that a new policy would be put in
place for management of Government investments in PSEs, including disinvestment and strategic
sale. In this regard, the Committee queried whether any road map has been put in place for the
same, the suggestions of DPE on framing the new policy and as to which nodal Ministry would
be responsible for formulating and implementing the policy.
45.  In reply, DPE submitted that the issue of disinvestment and strategic sale would be handled
by Department of Disinvestment. DPE also stated that the Government, on a proposal of
Department of Disinvestment, has decided for a multi-tier structure of decision making and
implementation of the decisions on strategic disinvestment/sale of CPSEs. As per the approved
structure, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) is at the apex level, then a Core
Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD), which would function as a supervisory and
recommendatory body, and there would be an Evaluation Committee (EC) for valuation and
suggesting a reserve price, opening financial bids and giving recommendations on price.

16
46. Further, DPE submitted that the Government has approved the following procedure and
mechanism for strategic disinvestment to be carried out by Department of Disinvestment, now
renamed as Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM):
(i) The NITI Aayog would identify CPSEs for strategic disinvestment. NITI Aayog
would also advice the Government on mode of sale, and the percentage of shares
to be sold of the CPSEs and suggest methods for valuation of the CPSE.
(ii) Constitution of CGD and its functions: (a) consider the recommendations of the
NITI Aayog on strategic disinvestment and recommend to CCEA on mode and
quantum of disinvestment; (b) lay down guidelines for evaluation by Evaluation
Committee; (c) recommend to CCEA on the terms and conditions of sale, the price
of sale and the strategic partner; and (d) supervise and monitor the process of
implementation of CCEA decision on strategic disinvestment.
(iii) Constitution of Evaluation Committee (EC) for strategic disinvestment and its
functions: the recommendations of the Administrative Department/Ministry on
valuation will be considered by the EC, which will fix the reserve price, open and
evaluate financial bids and make its recommendations to CGD.
(iv) Appointment of Independent External Monitor (IEM) to vet the process and settle
grievances; and
(v) Authorizing Ministry of Finance to put in place an appropriate mechanism for
protection of strategic disinvestment.
Secretary, DPE is a member of the CGD while Joint Secretary, DPE is a member of
Evaluation Committee that would consider the recommendations of the administrative Ministries/
Departments on valuation of the Company for strategic disinvestment/sale. Also, the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India has issued Accounting Standard (AS) 10 on “Accounting for Fixed
Assets”. This included accounting for land, including its re-valuation.
47. On 13
th January, 2016, the Department of Economic Affairs constituted a Committee under
the Chairmanship of Department of Economic Affairs for suggesting broad guidelines on the issues
relating to Procedure for Exchange, Transfer, Leasing and Sale of Land held by the Government,
Government Controlled Statutory Authorities and CPSEs. DPE has representation in the Committee.
The recommendation of the Committee may be reviewed by the Cabinet Secretary before
finalization and submission of the report of the Committee.
48. Having representatives in the CGD, and the EC, the Committee asked DPE to clarify the
stand/decision/policy of the Government regarding disposal of land assets of CPSEs, but the
Department was non-committal in their reply to the Committee. With a view to have a deeper
understanding of the new policy of disinvestment, the Committee wanted to know the role of NITI
Aayog in disinvestment of CPSEs and why DPE was not given the assignment. For which
Secretary, DPE replied that the NITI Aayog would be the authority to identify CPSEs in which
disinvestment would need to be carried out and also wherever there was a need for strategic
alliances or strategic sale, and perhaps even those which need to be closed down.  After the
recommendations were made, the responsibility would not vest with the DPE, but with the

17
Department of Disinvestment. The Department of Disinvestment would take it forward. DPE was
to give them information and other backups wherever it was required. As far as the policy for
disinvestment was concerned, there was a Committee in the Ministry of Finance (MoF) which was
working on the policy of sale and how to utilize the excess land or the disposable land or the land
not in use with the CPSEs and autonomous bodies.  The approach was being worked out by the
Committee and as per the present approach the land would be first offered to the Government and
then to the CPSEs for the Government schemes and programmes. As per DPE, the controversial
part was the sale to private people. It was further submitted in this regard that such type of policy
was being deliberated at the moment as to how the Government would approach that issue. The
Committee was looking into it and DPE as a member in that would be giving feedback on the
subject.
49. The Committee notes that the Finance Minister has made couple of important policy
pronouncements – first, regarding disinvestment of Government share in CPSEs and second,
on the disposal of fixed assets of the CPSEs identified for winding up/closure.  The
Department has submitted that a mechanism has been structured to look into the
operationalisation of the said announcements. The multi-tier structure has CCEA at the
summit, NITI Aayog would identify the CPSEs and the critical parameters for
disinvestments/strategic sale. The CGD is to function as supervisory and recommendatory
body and an EC to valuate the assets of CPSEs concerned. The Committee has taken
specific note of the submission of DPE that this entire subject falls under the purview of
the Department of Disinvestment. However, the Committee observes that the subject will
have a profound bearing on the CPSEs in the country and DPE should evince keen interest
in the way things shape up on this front. This is even more important considering that the
very mandate of DPE has been enhanced on these lines and, it being member in all the
relevant Committees of disinvestment, the Department has to make more holistic
interventions on the issues/policies pertaining to CPSEs.
50. Further, the Committee has always taken a firm stand that the fixed assets,
particularly land, of wound up CPSEs should be retained with the Government or its
agencies. It is apprehended that the sale of such land to private players might have the
potential to generate many unethical practices. Accordingly, the Committee is of the strong
and unanimous opinion that the land belonging to wound up CPSEs shall be retained with
the Central Government or State Government or other Government agencies. Since
Secretary, DPE is the member of CGD it is firmly recommended that this view of the
Committee should be emphatically placed before the CGD while formulating any policy in
this area, for the present or in future. The Secretary has agreed to place the view point
of this Committee before CGD, when they deliberate on the approaches to be followed for
disposal or usage of land which is in the hands of sick PSEs or autonomous bodies.  The
Committee sincerely hopes that the view point would be considered in CGD.

18
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE—A T A GLANCE
1. The Committee notes that the mandate of DPE has been augmented with the addition
of roles in monitoring of performance of CPSEs and effective management of their assets.
This has been done by addition of subjects to the Allocation of Business of DPE.  The
Committee is of the considered opinion that though the Budget allocation of DPE is small
compared to the major Ministries/Departments of the Government, the role to be essayed
by them is critical.  As the nodal Department of all CPSEs in India, their effective
evaluation and monitoring is going to be humongous task. The newly added responsibility
of CAPEX monitoring, measures to improve performance of CPSEs and other capacity
building initiatives and advice regarding revival/restructuring/closure of CPSEs will render
the working of DPE pivotal to the way CPSEs perform in the country. (Para 10)
2. Accordingly, the Committee observes that DPE should realize and imbibe the
magnitude and importance of the responsibilities that have been entrusted to them and take
more proactive measures to play out this role.  Rather them imagining themselves just as
a nodal coordinating agency DPE should reinvent themselves as an arm of the Government
which can take decisive steps on its own or in coordination with other Ministries/
Departments   to create a facilitative milieu for CPSEs to perform to their potential.  The
Committee is of the firm view that DPE should not be restricting themselves to just issuing
guidelines and providing advice.  The new mandate gives them ample space to effectively
follow up the implementation of the advices rendered by them through their guidelines.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that to be able to do this, DPE has to equip
themselves better and come out with measures implementable on ground and also
endeavour to create a coordinative platform involving the respective administrative
Ministry and other relevant Government agencies through which matters relating to the
working of CPSEs in the country can be resolved at a single stage avoiding time lag in
administrative decisions, the single most degenerative factor in case of decisions related
to CPSEs. (Para 11)
3. The Committee notes that DPE claims that the CPSEs in India are performing to the
best of their abilities in the prevailing economic scenario of declining commodity prices,
reduced capital inflows into their economies and increasing financial volatility. Even while
taking the claim of DPE in its face value and acknowledging the fact that the Committee
is not in knowledge of the performance of all the CPSEs in India, the Committee cannot
but share its observation that the current status of all the 31 CPSEs under the Department
of Heavy Industry (DHI) is sick/incipient sick and weak as per DPEs guidelines for
“Streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak
Central Public Sector Enterprises: General principles and mechanism of restructuring”.
Accordingly, the Committee observes that the stand taken by DPE that CPSEs are
performing well under the given conditions as status-quoits and wants the Department to
adopt a new forward looking stance. (Para 13)
18

19
4. The Committee note that while replying to the query on Mid Term Review (MTR) of
schemes during Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department has restricted themselves by just
submitting that no review has been undertaken.  The Committee observes that the
Department while replying to the Committee should keep in mind that answers given to a
Parliamentary Committee should be holistic and self-contained.  In the absence of a round
reply, the Committee is precluded from comprehending the reason for not undertaking the
MTR.  This information has to be provided to the Committee. (Para 15)
5. Further, from the submission of the DPE, the Committee takes note that of the XII
Plan outlays for various schemes of DPE, three schemes have seen roughly around only
50% of utilization and one has seen only 20% of expenditure.  The money allocated for
Information Technology alone has seen a healthy utilization.  Here again, since a review of
the scheme has not been undertaken the reasons for the gross underperformance observed
in the plan schemes are alien to the Committee. Regardless of this, the Committee
expresses its dissatisfaction in the way the plan schemes of DPE have underperformed
during the Twelfth Plan period.  DPE should make themselves aware of the reasons behind
this situation and take necessary steps to prevent them from recurring and report the same
to the Committee. (Para 16)
6. The Committee notes that departing from the pattern of previous years, the
Department has only two plan schemes in Financial Year 2016-17 - Counselling, Retraining
and Redeployment of Rationalized Employees of CPSEs (CRR) and Research, Development
and Consultancy (RDC) on Generic issues related to Enterprises (CPSEs & SLPEs).  A
merger of schemes has been undertaken in the case of RDC making the current RDC
scheme more expansive containing more components than earlier.  The Committee expects
this measure to impart more financial and operational flexibility to DPE resulting in better
utilization of allocated funds.  Accordingly, the Committee observes that DPE should make
the most of the new initiative brought out by the Ministry of Finance and avoid deficient
utilization and curtailment of funds these schemes were prone to earlier. (Para 19)
7. The Committee has always been appreciative of the objectives served by the CRR
scheme which basically offers a social security net to employees of CPSEs who optees for
VRS or get retrenched.  The Committee takes into cognizance the fact that NIESBUD had
undertaken an evaluation of the scheme in 2012-13 and had recommended a host of
improvements.  One of the major recommendations was the need to stress more on follow
ups and redeployment after linking with micro credit/finance. Handholding projects and
linkages were also recommended to enhance redeployment/self employment opportunities of
the former employees and their dependents trained under the scheme. DPE have submitted
that there recommendations had been circulated to the Nodal Agencies for compliance.
However, Committee finds that the number of people redeployed after being trained under
the scheme has always hovered around 50% or less of the total trained personnel. The
situation has continued even after the recommendations of NIESBUD made in 2012.
Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department should take
appropriate measures expeditiously to improve the number of trainees who get redeployed
subsequent to the training under the scheme. In this regard, the Committee also wants DPE

20
to consider focussed Skill Development under current impetus accorded to skill development
by the Government.  The Nodal Agencies under the Scheme should identify the skill sets
that are in demand in the local area in terms of employability and provide training to
people under the scheme. To the Committee, this is one of the measures that can be taken
to improve the redeployment ratio. Further, this will also contribute towards the efforts of
the Government to address the huge skill deficit of the workforce in the country in
different spheres. (Para 24)
8. The Committee note that during 2015-16, with only a fortnight left for the
completion of the Financial Y ear almost ````` 1 crore out of the total ````` 2.81 crore allocated to
the scheme at RE has been left unspent. The Committee  take exception to such
underutilization under an important initiative like RDC scheme.  However, the Committee
takes into account the hope expressed by DPE that from 2016-17 onwards the performance
of the scheme is expected to improve as it has seen broad basing of its objectives and new
components have been added as part of subsuming some other schemes into it.  Further,
the umbrella nature of the scheme is thought to provide more financial inter-
operationability.  This will also help the Department to tide over the earlier problem of last
quarter spending peculiar to the earlier RDC scheme for which the Ministry of Finance has
already granted an exemption from spending limits. (Para 28)
9. The Committee is happy to know that the Department has already initiated steps
to act on its recommendation regarding setting-up of a monitoring system to look into
CSR fund utilization by CPSEs. It is also appreciated that the matter has also been
taken up with the MoCA which administers the Companies Act, 2013. The Committee
observes that DPE should work in synchronisation with the MoCA in the matter relating
to the monitoring of the CSR fund utilization to ensure efficient internalisation of the
CSR culture by CPSEs, thereby setting an example for the private sector also to
emulate. (Para 31)
10. Firstly, the Committee n otes with dissatisfaction the disowning by DPE of the
subject matter related to the agencies involved in the revival/restructure/closure of CPSEs
in India.  The Committee is critical of the tendency of the Department to compartmentalise
the replies by contending that the roles of NCLT and BIFR would be explained by the
respective Ministry/Department concerned. As the nodal Department for the overseeing of
all CPSEs in the country, DPE is expected to provide a cogent reply to the Committee even
if the s ubject matter falls under the domain of other Ministries/Department/Ag encies. The
responsibility of action on the subject being with another Ministry/Department/
Agency can be justified, but that should not preclude the collection of information on the
subject. (Para 40)
11.    The Committee notes that the Government has come up with some important
initiatives in the area of revival/restructure/closure of CPSEs.  As the Committee gathers,
the earlier mechanism involved the administrative Ministry/Department, the BRPSE, the
BIFR and finally the approving authority, the Cabinet. This multiplicity of agencies involved
delay in granting approval to revival plans and most of the revival proposals when finally
approved would have already become redundant due to escalation of costs owing to the time

21
over run.  This vexed situation contributed to the further downfall of the sick/loss incurring
and weak CPSEs involved. (Para 41)
12. Now, as per the new system the administrative Ministries will oversee the
performance of its CPSEs based on the guidelines for “Streamlining the mechanism for
revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enterprises:
General principles and mechanism of restructuring” issued by DPE. Further, the
Government has done away with the BRPSE and BIFR and AAIFR and they would stand
abolished once the NCLT is constituted.  The NCLT, provided for in the Companies Act,
2013, will henceforth be the sole entity to decide upon the revival/restructure proposals of
CPSEs.  Also, the revival/restructure process has also been rendered time bound.  In this
regard, the Committee observes that the step taken to put the administrative Ministry in
charge of the monitoring of the health of their respective CPSEs is an appropriate
decision as mid-course correction and other reformative measures can be taken swiftly
without any time lapse as no third party is getting involved.  The Committee e xpects
that all the lacunae which plagued the earlier system will be eliminated in the new
mechanism. (Para 42)
13. Further, it is observed that now with the enhanced mandate, DPE can also have a
proactive role to play in the process. The NCLT has been envisaged for all type of companies
in India, not just CPSEs.  In this scenario, the Committee recommends that DPE has to
take this into account and take appropriate measures in coordination with the MoCA to
ensure that the CPSEs, due to their particular requirements of meeting socio-
economic obligations, are not put at a disadvantaged position in their efforts to get
revived/restructured as they would be treated as per the provisio ns of the Companies Act,
2013. (Para 43)
14.  The Committee notes that the Finance Minister has made couple of important policy
pronouncements – first, regarding disinvestment of Government share in CPSEs and second,
on the disposal of fixed assets of the CPSEs identified for winding up/closure.  The
Department has submitted that a mechanism has been structured to look into the
operationalisation of the said announcements. The multi-tier structure has CCEA at the
summit, NITI Aayog would identify the CPSEs and the critical parameters for
disinvestments/strategic sale. The CGD is to function as supervisory and recommendatory
body and an EC to valuate the assets of CPSEs concerned. The Committee has taken
specific note of the submission of DPE that this entire subject falls under the purview of
the Department of Disinvestment. However, the Committee observes that the subject will
have a profound bearing on the CPSEs in the country and DPE should evince keen interest
in the way things shape up on this front.  This is even more important considering that the
very mandate of DPE has been enhanced on these lines and it being member in all the
relevant Committees of disinvestment, the Department has to make more holistic
interventions on the issues/policies pertaining to CPSEs. (Para 49)
15. Further, the Committee has always taken a firm stand that the fixed assets,
particularly land, of wound up CPSEs should be retained with the Government or its
agencies. It is apprehended that the sale of such land to private players might have the

22
potential to generate many unethical practices.  Accordingly, the Committee is of the strong
and unanimous opinion that the land belonging to wound up CPSEs shall be retained with
the Central Government or State Government or other Government agencies. Since
Secretary, DPE is the member of CGD it is firmly recommended that this view of the
Committee should be emphatically placed before the CGD while formulating any policy in
this area, for the present or in future. The Secretary has agreed to place the view points
of this Committee before CGD, when they deliberate on the approaches to be followed for
disposal or usage of land which is in the hands of sick PSEs or autonomous bodies.  The
Committee sincerely hopes that the view point would be considered in CGD. (Para No 50)

23
MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 2nd May, 2016 in Committee Room ‘A ’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri K.C. Tyagi     —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Narendra Budania
2. Shri Vivek Gupta
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri Pramod Tiwari
6. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary
8. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
9. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
10. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
11. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
12. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
13. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
3. Shri J.K. Mallick, Joint Director
4. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director
5. Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
6. Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the  Committee  welcomed  the Members and briefed the Committee
about the agenda of the meeting to consider and adopt the draft 272nd Report on Review of Provisions of
Corporate Social Responsibility under the Companies Act, 2013 and 273rd, 274th and 275th Reports of the
Committee on Demand for Grants (2016-17) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industry and Department
25

26
of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) and Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises, respectively. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 272nd, 273rd,
274th and 275th Reports after a brief discussion.
2. The Committee then decided to present/ lay its 272nd, 273rd, 2741h and 275th Reports in both the
Houses of Parliament on 3rd May, 2016. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee, Shri
K.C. Tyagi, Member, Rajya Sabha and in his absence, Shri Bhupender Yadav, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in
the absence of both the Chairman, Shri K.C. Tyagi and Shri Bhupender Yadav, Shri Narendra Budania,
Member, Rajya Sabha to present these reports in Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Rabindra
Kumar lena, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy, Member, Lok Sabha to
lay copies of all the said Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
3. Thereafter, the Committee discussed the need to continue its examination of performance of various
schemes of the Ministries under its mandate and performance of select PSUs and their Corporate Governance
standards. Accordingly, it decided to undertake a study visit to Srinagar and Bangalore during the second half
of May, 2016 and also authorize the Chairman to make arrangements and obtain necessary approvals.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.

27
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE  I
Schedule-wise List of Central Public Sector Enterprises
As on January, 2016
Schedule. - A
1. Airports Authority of India
2. Air India Limited
3. Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam Ltd.
4. BEML Ltd.
5. Bharat Electronics Ltd.
6. Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
7. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
8. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd.
9. Central Warehousing Corporation.
10. Coal India Ltd.
11. Container Corporation of India Ltd.
12. Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Ltd.
13. Electronics Corporation of India Ltd.
14. Engineers India Ltd.
15. Fertilizers and Chemicals (Travancore) Ltd.
16. Food Corporation of India
17. GAIL (India) Ltd.
18. Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd.
19. Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd.
20. Hindustan Copper Ltd.
21. Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
22. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
23. HMT Ltd.
24. Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd.
25. I T I Ltd.
26. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
27. IRCON International Ltd.
29

30
28. Indian Railway Finance Corporation Ltd.
29. Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.
30. Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd.
31. MMTC Ltd.
32. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.
33. Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd.
34. Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Ltd.
35. MECON Ltd.
36. MOIL Limited
37. Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation Ltd.
38. National Aluminium Company Ltd.
39. National Building Construction Corporation Ltd.
40. National Fertilizers Ltd.
41. NHPC Ltd.
42. National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.
43. National Textiles Corporation Ltd.
44. NTPC Ltd.
45. Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd.
46. North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd.
47. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.
48. Oil India Ltd.
49. ONGC Videsh Ltd.
50. Power Finance Corporation
51. Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
52. RITES Ltd.
53. RailTel Corporation of India Ltd.
54. Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd .
55. Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd.
56. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.
57. Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd.
58. Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd.
59. Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India Ltd.
60. Shipping Corporation of India Ltd.
61. State Trading Corporation of India Ltd.

31
62. Steel Authority of India Ltd.
63. Telecommunications Consultants (India) Ltd.
64. THDC India Limited
Schedule - B
1. Andrew Yule and Company Ltd.
2. Balmer Lawrie and Company Ltd.
3. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.
4. Bharat Dynamics Ltd.
5. Bharat Petro Resources Ltd.
6. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd.
7. Brahmaputa Crackers and Polymers Ltd.
8. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Ltd.
9. Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council.
10. Braithwaite and Company Ltd.
11. Bridge and Roof Company (India) Ltd.
12. British India Corporation Ltd.
13. Burn Standard Company Ltd.
14. Cement Corporation of India Ltd.
15. Central Coalfields Ltd.
16. Central Electronics Ltd.
17. Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd.
18. Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
19. Cochin Shipyard Ltd.
20. Cotton Corporation of India Ltd.
21. Dredging Corporation of India Ltd.
22. Eastern Coalfields Ltd.
23. Engineering Projects (India) Ltd.
24. Elnnore Port Ltd.
25. Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd.
26. Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd.
27. Goa Shipyard Ltd.
28. Handicrafts and HandIooms Export Corporation Ltd.
29. Hindustan Cables Ltd.
30. Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd.

32
31. HLL Lifecare Ltd.
32. Hindustan Newsprints Ltd.
33. Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd.
34. Hindustan Shipyard Ltd.
35. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Company Ltd.
36. Hindustan Vegetable Oils Corporation Ltd.
37. HMT (International) Ltd.
38. HMT Machine Tools Ltd.
39. HMT Watches Ltd.
40. India Tourism Development Corporation Ltd.
41. India Trade Promotion Organization
42. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
43. Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd.
44. Indian Rare Earths Ltd.
45. Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd.
46. Instrumentation Ltd.
47. MSTC Ltd.
47. Madras Fertilizers Ltd.
48. Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd.
49. Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd.
50. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd.
51. National Handloom Development Corporation Ltd.
52. National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Ltd.
53. National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd.
54. National Seeds Corporation Ltd.
55. National Small Industries Corporation Ltd.
56. Northern Coalfields Ltd.
57. Numaligarh Refinery Ltd.
58. Orissa Mineral Development Company Ltd.
59. PEC Ltd.
60. Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd.
61. Projects and Development India Ltd.
62. Scooters India Ltd.
63. South Eastern Coalfields Ltd.

33
64. Tyre Corporation of India Ltd.
65. Uranium Corporation of India Ltd.
66. W A P C O S Ltd.
67. Western Coalfields Ltd.
Schedule - C
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Ltd.
2. Artificial Limbs Mfg. Corporation of India
3. BBJ Construction Ltd.
4. Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
5. BHEL Electric Machines Ltd.
6. Bharat Wagon and Engineering Company Ltd.
7. Bisra Stone Lime Company Ltd.
8. Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Ltd.
9. Central Cottage Industries Corporation of India Ltd.
10. Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd.
11. Central Railside Warehouse Company Ltd.
12. Certification Engineers International Ltd.
13. Delhi Police Housing Corporation
14. Educational Consultants (India) Ltd.
15. FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals (India) Ltd.
16. Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd.
17. Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd.
18. Hindustan Insecticides Ltd.
19. Hindustan Photo Films Manufacturing Company Ltd.
20. Hindustan Prefab Ltd.
21. Hindustan Salts Ltd.
22. HMT Bearings Ltd.
23. HMT Chinar Watches Ltd.
24. Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Ltd.
25. HSCC (India) Ltd.
26. Hotel Corporation of India Ltd.
27. Jute Corporation of India Ltd.
28. Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
29. Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd.

34
30. National Backward Classes Finance and Development Corporation.
31. National Film Development Corporation Ltd.
32. National Handicapped Finance and Development Corporation.
33. National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation
34. National Research Development Corporation of India.
35. National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation.
36. National SC Finance and Development Corporation
37. National ST Finance and Development Corporation
38. Nepa Ltd.
39. North Eastern Handicrafts and Handloom Development Corporation Ltd.
40. North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Ltd.
41. Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Ltd.
42. Richardsonec Cruddas (1972) Ltd.
43. STCL Ltd.
44. Triveni-Structurals Ltd.
45. Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd.
Schedule - D
1. Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited
2. Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd.
3. Orissa Drugs and Chemicals Ltd.
4. Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.

35
ANNEXURE  II
List of Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna CPSEs
As per available information
Maharatna CPSEs
1. Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
2. Coal India Limited
3. GAIL (India) Limited
4. Indian Oil Corporation Limited
5. NTPC Limited
6. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
7. Steel Authority of India Limited
Navratna CPSEs
1. Bharat Electronics Limited
2. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
3. Container Corporation of India Limited
4. Engineers India Limited
5. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
6. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
7. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited
8. National Aluminium Company Limited
9. National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited
10. NMDC Limited
11. Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited
12. Oil India Limited
13. Power Finance Corporation Limited
14. Power Grid Corporation of India Limited
15. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
16. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited
17. Shipping Corporation of India Limited
35

36
Miniratna Category - I CPSEs
1. Airports Authority of India
2. Antrix Corporation Limited
3. Balmer Lawrie and Co. Limited
4. Bharat Coking Coal Limited
5. Bharat Dynamics Limited
6. BEML Limited
7. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
8. Bridge and Roof Company (India) Limited
9. Central Warehousing Corporation
10. Central Coalfields Limited
11. Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited
12. Cochin Shipyard Limited
13. Dredging Corporation of India Limited
14. Kamarajar Port Limited
15. Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited
16. Goa Shipyard Limited
17. Hindustan Copper Limited
18. HLL Lifecare Limited
19. Hindustan Newsprint Limited
20. Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited
21. Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited
22. HSCC (India) Limited
23. India Tourism Development Corporation Limited
24. Indian Rare Earths Limited
25. Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited
26. Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited
27. India Trade Promotion Organisation
28. IRCON International Limited
29. KIOCL Limited
30. Mazagaon Dock Limited
31. Mahanadi Coalfields Limited
32. Manganese Ore (India) Limited
33. Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemical Limited

37
34. Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited
35. MMTC Limited
36. MSTC Limited
37. National Fertilizers Limited
38. National Seeds Corporation
39. NHPC Limited
40. Northern Coalfields Limited
41. North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited
42. Numaligarh Refinery Limited
43. ONGC Videsh Limited
44. Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
45. Projects and Development India Limited
46. Railtel Corporation of India Limited
47. Rail Vikas Nigam Limited
48. Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited
49. RITES Limited
50. SJVN Limited
51. Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited
52. South Eastern Coalfields Limited
53. State Trading Corporation of India Limited
54. Telecommunications Consultants India Limited
55. THDC India Limited
56. Western Coalfields Limited
57. WAPCOS Limited
Miniratna Category-II CPSEs
58. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited
59. Broadcast Engineering Consultants (I) Limited
60. Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited
61. Central Railside Warehouse Company Limited
62. Ed.CIL (India) Limited
63. Engineering Projects (India) Limited
64. FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited
65. Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited
66. HMT (International) Limited

38
67. Indian Medicines and Pharmaceuticals Corporation Limited
68. MECON Limited
69. Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited
70. National Film Development Corporation Limited
71. National Small Industries Corporation Limited
72. PEC Limited
73. Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited

39
ANNEXURE  III
CPSE-wise number of persons trained and redeployed (2011-12)
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  Trained No. of  Trained
persons redeployed
1. Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 6 4
2. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (NR) 288 102
3. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. 2 0
4. Bharat Refractories Ltd. 164 103
5. Bieco Lawrie Ltd. 1 1
6. Bridge and Roof Co. (India) Ltd. 2 1
7. British india Corporation Ltd. 40 26
8. Burn Standard Company Ltd. 334 198
9. Central Coalflelds Ltd. 204 148
10. Central Inland Water transport Corpn. Ltd. 70 45
11. Coal India Ltd. 11 2
12. Cycle Corporation of India Ltd. (NR) 2 2
13. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 251 121
14. Food Corpn. of India 21 0
15. Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. 3 1
16. Hindustan Cables Ltd. 96 42
17. Hindustan Copper Ltd. 164 78
18. Hindustan Photo films Manufacturing Corpn. Ltd. 100 43
19. Hindustan Steel Works Costn. Ltd. 265 170
20. Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (NR) 141 54
21. HMT Chinar Watches Ltd. 200 115
22. HMT Ltd. 100 49
23. HMT Machine Tools Ltd. 190 94
24. Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Ltd. 196 146
25. ITI Ltd. 50 18
26. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 86 36
27. Indian Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. 6 0
39

40
28. Indian Medicines and Pharmaceutical Corpn. Ltd. 1 1
29. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 8 0
30. Instrumentation Ltd. 180 89
31. Manganese Ore (lndia) Ltd. 1 0
32. Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd. 402 363
33. National Aluminium Company Ltd. 2 0
34. National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Ltd. 1418 768
35. Nepa Ltd. 175 119
36. NeyVeli lignite Corpn. Ltd. 348 172
37. NTC (Delhi, Punjab and Rajasthan) Ltd. 384 142
38. NTC (Gujarat) Ltd. 100 28
39. NTC (Madhya Pradesh) Ltd. 194 74
40. NTC (Maharashtra North) Ltd. 184 46
41. NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. 443 198
42. NTC (Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry) Ltd. 650 210
43. NTC (Uttar Pradesh) Ltd. 194 97
44. NTC (West Bengal, Assam, Bihar and Orissa) Ltd. 738 410
45. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. 16 0
46. Oil India Ltd. 44 0
47. Pyrites, Phosphates and Chemical Ltd. 14 2
48. Rehabilitation Industries Corpn. Ltd. (NR) 2 2
49. Smith Stanistreet and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (NR) 1 0
50. Steel Authority India Ltd. 420 219
51. Triveni Structurals Ltd. 13 6
52. Western Coalfields Ltd. 475 267
9400 4812
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  Trained No. of  Trained
persons redeployed

41
CPSE-wise number of persons trained and redeployed (2012-13)
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  persons No. of  persons
Trained redeployed
1. Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 150 86
2. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 262 161
3. Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. 54 47
4. Bharat Electronics Ltd. 10 4
5. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (NR) 341 178
6. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. 2 1
7. Bharat Refractories Ltd. 85 54
8. British India Corporation Ltd. 94 44
9. Burn Standard Company Ltd. 148 86
10. Central Coalfields Ltd. 120 53
11. Central Inland Water transport Corpn. Ltd. 17 11
12. Cycle Corporation of India Ltd.  (NR) 1 1
13. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 894 389
14. Heavy Engineering Corpn. Ltd. 300 145
15. Hindustan Cables Ltd. 17 9
16. Hindustan Copper Ltd. 527 298
17. Hindustan Steel Works Costn. Ltd. 259 178
18. Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (NR) 157 78
19. HMT Chinar Watches Ltd. 45 16
20. HMT Ltd. 1408 786
21. Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Ltd. 57 28
22. ITI Ltd. 48 20
23. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 45 21
24. Indian Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. 6 5
25. Indian Medicines and Pharmaceutical Corpn. Ltd. 1 0
26. Instrumentation Ltd. 149 87
27. Mineral Exploration Corpn. Ltd. 1 1
28. National Instruments Ltd. 2 1
41

42
29. National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Ltd. 449 238
30. Nepa Ltd. 164 92
31. NeyVeli lignite Corpn. Ltd. 100 76
32. NTC (Delhi, Punjab, and Rajasthan) Ltd. 350 158
33. NTC (Gujarat) Ltd. 172 89
34. NTC (Madhya Pradesh) Ltd. 117 78
35. NTC (Uttar Pradesh) Ltd. 331 159
36. NTC (West Bengal, Assam, Bihar, and Orissa) Ltd. 232 153
37. Pyrites, Phosphates and Chemical Ltd. 18 3
38. Steel Authority India Ltd. 163 126
39. Triveni Structurals Ltd. 72 55
40. Turgabhadra Steel Products Ltd. 118 88
41. Western Coalfields Ltd. 20 18
7506 4121
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  persons No. of  persons
Trained redeployed

43
CPSE-wise number of persons trainee and redeployed (2013-14)
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  persons No. of  persons
Trained redeployed
1. Airport Authority of India 1 0
2. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 299 169
3. Bharat Dynamics Ltd. 1 1
4. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (NR) 25 4
5. Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd. 2 0
6. Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd. 74 26
7. Bharat Refractories Ltd. 77 52
8. British India Corporation Ltd. 30 17
9. Burn Standard Company Ltd. 501 191
10. Central Coalfields Ltd. 297 180
11. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 50 32
12. Hindustan Cables Ltd. 150 95
13. Hindustan Copper Ltd. 17 9
14. Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. 89 24
15. Hindustan Paper Corpn. Ltd. 137 57
16. Hindustan Steel Works Costn. Ltd. 150 86
17. Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (NR) 16 9
18. HMT Chinar Watches Ltd. 50 24
19. ITI LTD. 153 48
20. Instrumentation Ltd. 10 6
21. MMTC Ltd. 100 66
22. Manganese Ore (India) Ltd. 230 118
23. National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Ltd. 289  101
24. Nepa Ltd. 49 31
 25. NTC (Delhi, Punjab, and Rajasthan) Ltd. 23 15
26. NTC (Gujarat) Ltd. 52 0
27. NTC (Madhya Pradesh) Ltd. 74 23
28. NTC (Maharashtra North) Ltd. 179 91
43

44
29. NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. 20 11
30. NTC (Uttar Pradesh) Ltd. 11 6
31. NTC (West Bengal, Assam, Bihar and Orissa) Ltd. 62 22
32. Oil India Ltd. 22 5
33. Steel Authority India Ltd. 100 49
34. Triveni Structurals Ltd. 22 8
35. Western Coalfields Ltd. 100 48
3340 1624
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  persons No. of  persons
Trained redeployed

45
CPSE-wise number of persons trained and redeployed (2014-15)
Sl. No. CPSEs No. of  persons No. of  persons
Trained redeployed
1. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. 104 45
2. Bharat Refractories Ltd. 56 42
3. British India Corporation Ltd. 77 21
4. Central Coalfields Ltd. 250 112
5. Eastern Coalfields Ltd. 595 218
6. Hindustan Copper Ltd. 275 136
7. Hindustan Paper Corpn. Ltd. 61 0
8. Hindustan Steel Works Costn. Ltd. 68 49
9. Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (NR) 26 16
10. ITI LTD. 6 2
11. Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. 8 0
12. Nepa Ltd. 102 40
13. NTC (Delhi, Punjab and Rajasthan) Ltd. 529 268
14. NTC (Madhya Pradesh) Ltd. 48 35
15. NTC (South Maharashtra) Ltd. 50 23
16. NTC (Uttar Pradesh) Ltd. 111 27
17. NTC (West Bengal, Assam, Bihar and Orissa) Ltd. 1 0
18. Oil India Ltd. 39 0
19. Steel Authority India Ltd. 39 25
20. Triveni Structurals Ltd. 5 1
21. Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. 25 0
22. Western Coalfields Ltd. 50 13
2525 1073
45

46
Details of Training Programmes
S. Institute Dates Subject No. of
No Participants
1. IIM Calcutta 17-21 August, Project Management 31
2015
2. IIM Lucknow 24-28 August, Setting up Professional 28
2015 Goal Oriented Targets &
Performance Evaluation
3. IIPA Delhi 07-11 Sept, Leadership and other 33
2015 enablers for achieving
Business Excellence
4. IIT Guwahati 09-11 Sept, Production Planning, 25
2015 Inventory Control and
Supply Chain Management
5. IIM Shilong 05-09 October, Corporate Governance 32
2015
6. IIM Bangalore 19-21 Corporate Governance 29
October, 2015
7. ICWAI 02-06 Financial Management and 25
Management November, Accountability
Accounting 2015
Research
Foundation,
Hyderabad
8. IIT Guwahati 18-20 Production Planning, 35
November, Inventory Control and
2015 Supply Chain Management
9. IIM 14-16 , Setting up Professional 37
Ahmedabad December, Goal Oriented Targets &
2015 Performance Evaluation
TOTAL 275