167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE's 153RD     REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  (2004-05) PERTAINING TO
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTIRES  
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES   )
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  5TH MAY, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 5TH MAY, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
1.COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                                 
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
3.COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE FOR ACTION TAKEN REPORT                                           
4.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
5.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6.MINUTES                                                                                                                           
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
PRESENT
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
 RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Agarwal    
Shri Surendra Lath       
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj  
Dr. K. Malaisamy        
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Dr. Vijay Mallya          
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
Smt. Vanga Geetha
 LOK SABHA
Shri Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Kailash Baitha                  
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
Shri Subhash  Deshmukh         
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria                      
Shri Sunil Khan                        
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato         
Shri Prakash Paranjpe             
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel           
Shri Rajnarayan                                   
Shri Bagida  Ramakrishna        
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana     

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
Smt. Rubab Sayeda                 
 Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
 Shri Manvendra Singh             
Shri Ganesh Singh                    
Shri Suraj Singh                       
Shri Chandramani Tripathi        
Shri Girdhari Yadav     
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Industry,  having   been   authorised  by the 
Committee, hereby present this   167
th     Report  on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's 153rd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries (Ministry of Small
Scale Industries).
2.The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Government (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries) on the recommendations contained in its 153 rd    Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of
Small Scale Industries (Ministry of Small Scale Industries).
3.The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 3rd May, 2005 considered and  adopted the Report.
 
4.The Committee in its meeting held on 3
rd May, 2005 considered and  adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI
3rd May, 2005
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
 Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
                       
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE FOR ACTION TAKEN REPORT
1.         Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato          -                       Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.         Dr. Vijay Mallya
4.         Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
5.         Dr. K. Malaisamy
LOK SABHA
6.         Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
7.         Shri Sunil Khan
8.         Shri Suraj Singh
REPORT
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries  on the
Recommendations contained in the  153
rd    Report (of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on 
Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries .  The Report  was presented /laid on the Table
of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the 26th August, 2004.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries    in respect of the   recommendations contained in the
Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter - I-  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:- Paras:- 16.9; 16.10; 22.4; 23.5; 25.3; 26.2;
27.2; 28.3; 32.4; 38.6; 40.8;
The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry  has accepted its  recommendation as  mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report. 
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies:- Paras:- 4.3
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and explanation  advocated by the Ministry  and
therefore   does not want to  pursue  further. 
Chapter - III-  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry:- Paras:- 2.1;
3.1; 11.3; 20.2; 22.3; 22.9; 31.3; 35.4; 36.11; 37.5;
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-III  and desires that the

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
Ministry should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these recommendations.  
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry have not been received:- Paras:- 29.2;
30.2; 33.3; 39.4;  40.6;
In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has  either   furnished the interim replies or couched its language in 
vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in 
respects of recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of
the Committee.
3.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
 1.0      Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
1.1The Committee observes that Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is a very good scheme aimed at technological up-gradation
in SSI sector.  The progress so far has been very tardy and in fact the scheme is yet to take off.  The Committee commend the
announcements made in the budget speech (2004-05) and hopes that it would show better results.  The Committee impresses upon
the Ministry of SSI to provide better package incentives to SSI units for technology up-gradation and work out and effective
strategy.(Para 16.9)
Action Taken
1.1.1    The Government attaches high importance to technology upgradation in small scale sector. In view of this, two schemes,
namely, Technology Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH), later renamed as Small Industry Cluster Development
Programme (SICDP) and Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) were launched. The performance under these schemes is
constantly reviewed by High Power Committees chaired by either Secretary (SSI & ARI) or Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (SSI). Need-based modifications are made in the schemes according to the feed-back received from the Industry
Associations, State Industry Departments and other related organisations. The proposal on enhancement in the rate of capital
subsidy and ceiling of loan eligible for support under CLCSS as per the announcements made in the Union Budget 2004-05, is
being included in the ‘Promotional Package for Small Enterprises Sector’ and shall be implemented soon.
Recommendation
1.2       The Committee recommends that the Government should undertake the following steps for improving the functioning of
credit linked capital subsidy:
Organising awareness programmes at various location all over the country to increase the awareness level of industry association,
banks, SIDBI and Industry Departments of respective States; 
Review of progress of the scheme in meetings State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs);
Incorporating inputs on the scheme into in service training courses of Bank Managers; and
Publicity measures to increase general awareness about the scheme(Para 16.10)
Action Taken
1.2.1    The Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is implemented by the SIDBI. The actions taken by it on the above-mentioned
issues are as follows:
SIDBI has advised all Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs) to conduct workshops, seminars, conferences, etc., for popularizing the
scheme. To supplement the efforts of SIDBI, Office of DC (SSI) has also organized 15 awareness programmes on Credit Linked
Capital Subsidy Scheme so far, through its Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs). The industry associations, banks, SIDBI and
State Industry Departments also participated in these seminars.
The operation of the CLCSS is being reviewed at the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings in most States.
Copies of the scheme have been forwarded to the Staff Training Centres of various banks. Training sessions on CLCSS are also
being held at Bankers Training Colleges.
The following measures are being taken to increase general awareness of the Scheme:
(a) Interactive sessions with bankers and entrepreneurs are being held in various potential centers/ clusters. Three such meetings
have been organized in Chennai, Hyderabad and Pune during August and September, 2004.
The details of the scheme are being circulated at the meetings and seminars organized by industry associations, State Governments,
etc. The guidelines on CLCSS have also been posted on the SIDO Website.
Letters have been written to all District Industry Centres/ various Industry Associations furnishing details of the scheme and
requesting them to circulate their details among the industries located in their respective areas.
Recommendation
1.3Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
1.3.1    The Committee further observes that the credit guarantee fund scheme gets further rough whether due to high upfront
charges of banks like service charge, processing fee and that too differing from bank to bank under this scheme also one time
Guarantee Fee of 2.5% of the sanctioned amount and 1% Service Fee on the outstanding loan is collected as on 31
st March each
year.  These fees are however, fixed and do not vary from bank to bank.  The Committee feels that this fee should further be
reduced and recommends that the Ministry of SSI should take up necessary action in this regard.
                                                                                                         (Para 22.4)
Action Taken
1.3.2    The Guarantee Fee/Service Fee is uniformly set for all the MLIs under the scheme and the MLIs are free to bear the same,

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
share it with the borrowers or charge it from the borrowers. Further, the Government has recently approved reduction of the annual
service fee under the scheme to 0.75 per cent of the credit facility sanctioned and has been made effective from 1 February 2005.
          
Recommendation
1.4       Lump sum provision for projects/schemes for the benefit of the North Eastern Areas and Sikkim
1.4.1    The Committee hopes that the actions expected to be taken during 2004-05 in the North East Region by NSIC would prove
instrumental in employment generation and poverty alleviation in the region.  (Para 23.5)
Action Taken
1.4.2    NSIC has initiated various initiatives for the promotion and development of small scale industries in the North-Eastern
Region (NER).  The present status of implementation of various projects is given below:
25 pilot projects on food processing have been identified in cooperation with North-Eastern Council and project profiles for these
projects are under publication. 
A three-year project for capacity building of the SSI sector in food processing in the NER is being implemented with International
Centre for Advancement of Manufacturing Technology (ICAMT) of UNIDO.
A catalogue for handicrafts and handloom products is under publication in association with All Assam Handicrafts Association.
A Display Centre has been established in the NSIC office premises at the Okhla Industrial Estate, New Delhi, which displays about
500 products, sourced from SSI units of the NER.
Another Display Centre for North Eastern States is being established at New Market, Kolkata shortly.
1.4.3    These initiatives of the NSIC are aimed at creation of new enterprises in the NER.  The existing enterprises would benefit by
way of acquisition of new technologies and new market opportunities in domestic and international markets for expanding their
operations.
1.4.4    NSIC is of the view that these efforts would culminate directly and indirectly in building of new enterprises and generation
of sustainable employment opportunities, thus proving instrumental in raising the income levels and poverty alleviation in the NER.
 
Recommendation
1.5       Tiny and Micro Enterprises
1.5.1    The Committee recommends that effective measures must be taken for (i) better imparting of entrepreneurs skills and
training, (ii) acquiring marketing techniques (iii) access to appropriate  technology (iv)  strengthening capital  base and institutional
credit and (v) providing  infrastructural  facilities.     (Para 25.3)
Action Taken
1.5.2    The three national-level training institutes viz., Indian Institute for Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati, National Institute for
Small Industry Extension Training (NISIET), Hyderabad and National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business
Development (NIESBUD), Noida and the Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) and branch SISIs organize a number of training
programmes across the country to train potential/existing entrepreneurs in the tiny sector for improving their techno/managerial
knowledge and skills. Besides, training programmes are also organized in specific technical trades in the Regional Testing Centres
(RTCs), Product & Process Development Centres (PPDCs) and Tool Rooms for imparting appropriate training. The Small
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) conducts programmes for imparting of training in entrepreneurs skills and marketing
techniques for entrepreneurs in micro enterprises. 
1.5.3    The Ministry of SSI is implementing the Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme, under which financial assistance
is made available to individuals in tiny/small sector to participate in international exhibitions, overseas study/tours, production of
overseas publicity material, sector-specific market studies, initiating/contesting anti-dumping cases and reimbursement of cost for
adoption of bar-coding. SIDBI also extends support to tiny/small units for undertaking various activities like marketing research,
advertising, branding, participation in trade fairs, etc. Further, assistance is extended to specialised organisations which provide
marketing assistance, infrastructure and support services to industrial concerns in the small scale sector.
1.5.4    The Ministry of SSI implements various schemes like Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), Small Industries
Cluster Development Programme (SICDP), etc., for assisting the tiny/small units in technology upgradation. Further, SIDBI has set
up a Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) in collaboration with the United Nations – Asian and Pacific Centre for
Transfer of Technology (UN-APCTT) to help SSIs tap opportunities at the global level for acquisition of technology and establish
business collaborations.
1.5.5    The Government and the Reserve Bank of India have taken several measures/initiatives for extending adequate credit
facilities to the tiny units. These, inter alia, include 60% of the SSI lending earmarked for tiny units, providing collateral-free loans
up to Rs. 25 lakh to SSI units having good track record, enhancement of the credit limit under Laghu Udhyami Credit Card 
(LUCC) from Rs. 2 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh based on satisfactory track record, etc. The Ministry of SSI is also implementing schemes
like the Credit Guarantee Scheme and Micro-Finance Programme for augmenting the flow of credit to the tiny and micro
enterprises. The Government has also operationalised a Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) Fund w.e.f. April 1, 2004. Under the
Fund, 80 per cent of the corpus is earmarked for SSI units having investment in plant and machinery upto Rs.1 crore and loans are
provided at interest rate of 2 per cent below the PLR of SIDBI.
1.5.6    SIDBI has in place a National Equity Fund (NEF) with the objective of providing equity-type support to entrepreneurs for
setting up new projects in tiny/small scale sector, for undertaking expansion, modernization, technology upgradation and
diversification by existing tiny, SSI and service enterprises.  SIDBI is also implementing Micro Credit Scheme for promoting,
financing and development of micro-enterprises in the country.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
1.6.7    The Ministry of SSI is implementing the Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme with the objective to make
available developed plots for setting up tiny and small units with basic infrastructure facilities viz. power, water, roads,
telecommunications, common service facilities etc. Under the Scheme, a grant of 40% of the project cost for each IID Centre,
subject to a maximum of Rs.2 crore is provided. The quantum of grant in case of states in the North-East region, Jammu &
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal is 80% of the project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs.4 crore
1.5.8    The major schemes being operated by SIDBI for financing the activities relating to creation of infrastructural facilities for
SSIs are (i) Scheme of Refinance Assistance for Infrastructure Development and (ii) Scheme of Direct Assistance for Development
of Industrial Infrastructure for SSI Sector. Under these schemes, assistance is provided for setting up Industrial areas/ estates,
technology parks, common utility centres, setting up of warehousing facilities for SSI products/ units etc.
Recommendation
1.6Technology Upgradation   in SSI sector
1.6.1    The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should chalk out action plan for promoting Public -Private partnership
for technology up-gradation in SSI sector.  The Committee is of the considered view that Public-Private partnership would give the
requisite boost to the technology up-gradation in the SSI sector. Para  27.2)
Action Taken
1.6.2    Various schemes are being implemented by the Small Industries Development Organisation of the Ministry of SSI to create
facilities with Public-Private Partnership (PPP) for technology upgradation. Some of these are:
Financial assistance for establishment of Sub-contracting Exchanges by Industry Associations.
Assistance to Industry Associations for establishment of Testing Centres.
Small Industry Cluster Development Programme, under which assistance is available for creation of common facility centres.
Integrated Infrastructural Development Scheme.
In order to further promote Public-Private Partnership for technology upgradation under the above Schemes, efforts will be made to
identify more such projects where facilities can be created for technology upgradation under the Public-Private Partnership mode.
Focus will be on building the managerial capacity of the Industry Associations and Consortiums of SSI units to run those facilities
created under a PPP mode efficiently.
1.6.3    The details of the above-mentioned Schemes are briefly given below:
(a)The government has been implementing since 1970 a scheme to assist Industry Associations and NGOs for setting up the Sub-
Contracting Exchanges (SCXs) throughout the country with the objective of securing buyers for the products manufactured by the
SSI sector. Under this scheme, financial assistance up to Rs.4.7 lakh is provided as a one-time grant to Industry Associations and
NGOs to set up such exchanges. Till January 2005, 54 SCXs have already been set up in various parts of the country and 7 new
SCXs have been sanctioned recently.
(b)With the objective of providing testing facilities to SSIs for meeting quality standards for their products, a scheme is being
implemented since 1995 under which financial assistance up to 50% of the cost of testing machineries and equipment, restricted to
Rs.50 lakh, is provided to Industries Associations to set up testing laboratories. Since the introduction of the scheme, 13 such testing
centers have been assisted in various places of the country. 
(c)  Technology Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH) was launched in 1998 to  address the issues related to
Technology Upgradation and Modernisation of Small Scale Industries on cluster approach basis. It was later renamed as Small
Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP) in 2003, under which assistance is available for creation of common facility
centres. Under the Scheme, 78 clusters have been taken up for development in various parts of the country. Under this scheme,
assistance is provided industries associations for their capacity building and setting up of common facility centers.
(d) Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme was launched in 1994. The aim of the scheme is to provide developed sites
with infrastructural facilities like power distribution network, water, telecommunication, drainage, pollution control facilities, roads,
banks, raw materials, storage, marketing outlets, common service facilities and technological back up services etc. The State/UT
Governments are entrusted with the task of implementing the scheme through public sector undertaking/corporate bodies/NGOs,
having a sound financial position and good track record. The estimated cost of setting an IID Centre is Rs.5 crore (excluding the
cost of land). Central Government provides 40% assistance upto a maximum of Rs.2 crore (80% or Rs.4 crore for the North East
States, Sikkim, J & K, H.P., and Uttaranchal) as grant and the balance is loan from SIDBI/Banks/Financial Institutions or the State
Funds. Till 31
st January 2005 the Central Government has approved the setting of 97 Centres and Central grant of Rs.82.43 crores
has been released to 63 centres.
Recommendation
1.7       Policy of De-reservation in SSI Sector
           
1.7.1    The Committee is of the view that reservation of items to SSI sector should not become a restriction to the growth of this
sector as far as investment and technology up-gradation is concerned.  The Committee, however, strongly, feels that Government
should take precaution while taking out an item from the reserved list so that labour oriented units remain protected. (Para  28.3)
Action Taken
 1.7.2    Government shares the view expressed by the Committee that in the era of globalization, increasing emphasis is to be placed on SSI
sector to become competitive, both globally and domestically. Accordingly, the investment limit for such items which are reserved for
manufacture by the SSI sector in the categories of hosiery, hand tool, drugs and pharmaceuticals, stationery and sports goods has been raised
from Rs.1 crore to Rs.5 crore, to enable the units to invest more for technological upgradation and withstand the domestic and global
competition without losing the status of SSI.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
1.7.3     It has also been the Government’s policy and practice to take into confidence the stakeholders before deciding on dereservation of
items reserved for exclusive manufacture in the SSI sector. Such consultations enable the Government to dereserve items with a view to
promoting competition, and also take care that there is no adverse impact on the employment in the SSI sector.
Recommendation
1.8Streamlining  and strengthening the Anti-dumping mechanism
1.8.1    The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should make efforts for ensuring the following things:-
Working of renewed provision in Indo-Nepal Treaty in Trade Transit w.e.f. 6th March, 2002, in checking influx of Chinese goods
en-route Nepal;
Conversion of quantitative restriction (QRs) into rationalised tariff regime for providing protection to the domestic SSIs;
Rationalisation of countervailing duties and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance with WTO provision; and
Expeditious disposal dumping cases and anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under open general licence
(OGL) list.
(Para 32.4)
Action Taken
1.8.2    The Government  (Department of Commerce) has revised the Indo-Nepal Treaty on Trade and Transit and the revised
protocol is valid for a period of five years with effect from 6.3.2002. To protect the Indian industry, the following steps have been
taken:
(a)        Rules for granting Certificate of Origin have been changed. Only the following articles can now be imported preferentially:
*          Articles, which are manufactured in Nepal wholly from Nepalese and/or Indian materials.
*          Articles that involve a manufacturing process in Nepal, which brings about a change in classification at the 4-digit level.
*          Articles in which there is value addition of at least 43% from 6
th March 2003.
(b)        Representations received from SSI Associations regarding the problems   being faced by the industry due to revised Indo-Nepal
Treaty on Trade and Transit are taken up with the Department of Commerce, the nodal agency, dealing with the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade
and other concerned Departments/Agencies, viz., Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Central Board of Excise and Customs
(CBEC) so as to protect the interests of domestic industry.
1.8.3     Under the WTO regime, all Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) have been abolished except 430 QRs maintained on account of public
morality, safety, etc.  The current average applied customs tariff on import of products related to the SSI sector (whether reserved for
manufacture in SSI sector or otherwise) is 20%. These tariffs are among the higher tariffs applied by various member states of WTO.  The
Ministry of Commerce while monitoring trade of various products, including the products related to the SSI sector, keeps a watch on the
applied tariff rates on these products so as to provide needed tariff protection by taking suitable action for increasing the tariff.
1.8.4    Even after removal of the QRs, there are ways to protect our domestic industry, such as, Article 6 of the General Agreement
on Trade & Tariffs (GATT), which permits the Government to levy anti-dumping duty. The GATT, 1994 also permits the
Government to reimpose Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) because any WTO member is free to suspend any obligation incurred by
it if imports of products into its territory cause or threaten to cause a serious injury to the domestic producers. Therefore, in an
emergency situation, the Government can reimpose suitable quantitative restrictions. Accordingly, the Government is in the process
of amending the provisions of Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 so that safeguard action in the form of QRs
could be applied, if there are sudden and massive imports.
1.8.5    The small scale industries can be given protection by increasing the applied (customs) tariff rates up to the bound levels,
wherever permissible and required. India’s tariffs have been bound at fairly high levels, enabling the Government to intervene
effectively wherever any unusual increase in imports is noticed.
1.8.6    The Director General of Safeguards has taken up action in respect of 15 products for investigation.  So far, safeguard duties
in respect of 8 cases have been imposed.  The Government is in the process of amending the provisions of Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 so that safeguard action in the form of QRs could be applied if there are sudden and
massive imports. There is also the provision for imposition of   countervailing duty, if required.
 1.8.7   Anti-dumping action has been taken by the Director General of Anti-dumping on certain products of SSI concern, like dry-
cell batteries, with effect from 2.8.2001 and on imports of sports shoes on 25.9.2001.  The time taken by the Indian authority to
dispose of anti-dumping cases compares favourably with other major users of anti-dumping measures in the world, as is evident
from the table given below:
 
Country Average time taken
India 3  - 3½ months (approx.)
USA 4- 4 ½ months (approx.)
EU 9 months (approx.)
Australia 5-6 months (approx.)
New Zealand 5-6 months (approx.)
Recommendation
1.9       Impact of WTO provisions on various sectors of Small Scale Industries
1.9.1    The Committee is pleased to note that the Government is aware of the WTO environment and taking measures for preparing
SSI sector to meet the challenges ofglobalization and liberalization under the WTO regime.  However, the basic concern of the
Committee is the protection and promotion of domestic SSI sector under the prevailing global market economy.  Therefore, the
continuous and concrete efforts should be made  by  the Government to protect the domestic Small Scale Industries from the on-
slaught of adverse impact of globalization and liberalization through appropriate tariff adjustment, anti dumping measures and other

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
safeguards.  Simultaneously the process of strengthening SSI sector and acquiring the requisite competitive resilience should be
enhanced on the ground level
Para 38.6)
Action Taken
1.9.2     Government is fully aware of the WTO environment and have taken appropriate measures for preparing the small scale sector to
meet the challenges of liberalization and globalization. Government is also constantly monitoring the impact of the removal of QRs and
WTO Agreements on the economy including the SSIs in the country. Even after the removal of QRs, protection to the industries is available
in the form of raising Customs duties up to the bound levels, imposing Anti-Dumping duties and countervailing duties, taking safeguard
measures, in case of surge in imports, etc. On the other hand, with the lowering of tariffs and the removal of QRs, the SSI units will be able
to get raw material and other inputs without the hassles of import licenses and at competitive prices. Further, the opening of markets by other
countries, and lowering of their tariffs will provide an opportunity to SSI units to give a big boost to their exports.
1.9.3     Following steps have been taken by the Government toprotect the domestic Small Scale Industries from the onslaught of adverse
impact of globalization and liberalization:
Policy initiatives by the Ministry of SSI & ARI to strengthen the SSI Sector
1.9.4    In order to strengthen the SSI sector a Comprehensive Policy Package was announced on 30th August 2000.  Salient features
of the Package include raising the excise exemption limit from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.1 crore, a scheme of Capital Subsidy of 12% for
investment in technology upgradation in select sectors, raising the eligibility limit for coverage under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
from Rs.10 lakh to Rs.25 lakh and  continuation of financial support (up to Rs.75,000) for obtaining ISO 9000 & ISO 14001
certification up to the end of 10
th Plan.
1.9.5    The Small Scale Industries can be given protection in the form of tariffs by increasing the applied tariff rates up to the bound
levels wherever permissible and required.  Our tariffs have been bound at fairly high levels enabling us to intervene effectively
wherever any unusual increase in imports are noticed. The custom tariff on number of products such as Refined Oil (Palm,
Sunflower, Coconut, Groundnut etc.), Rapeseed, Soyabean, Wheat, Sugar and Milk powder has been raised from time to time to
protect the domestic industry.
Anti-dumping and safeguard investigations in India:
1.9.6    Anti-dumping actions initiated by the Director General of Anti-dumping have been imposed on certain products of SSI
concern like Dry-Cell Batteries with effect from 2.8.2001 and on imports of sports shoes on 25.9.2001. The anti-dumping Authority
in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is responsible for the anti-dumping actions when complaints are made by the SSI sector.
The time taken by the Indian authority to dispose off anti-dumping cases compare favourably with other major users of anti-
dumping measures in the world.
1.9.7    Till date, the Designated Authority has recommended to impose anti-dumping final duty in 143 cases, preliminary duty in 5
cases and 10 cases are still under investigation. 
1.9.8     The Director General of  Safeguards has already taken up action in respect of 15 products for investigations.  So far, safeguard duties
in respect of 8 cases have been imposed. 
Recommendation
1.10     Contribution of SSI Sector in the National Economy
1.10.1  The Committee further recommends that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SSI sector in the national
economy, the Government should focus  on the following issues :- 
Providing full credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector;
Infrastructure upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial clusters;
Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector, which is known as Inspector Raj;
Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential; and
Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale.  modern management practices and skill up-
gradation through advanced training facilities for capacity building in the SSI sector.(Para  40.8 )
Action Taken
1.10.2  The various support measures taken by the Government on credit, technology upgradation & modernisation and marketing
are as follows:
Credit
 
1.10.3  Collateral security dispensed with for loans up to Rs. 5 lakh: Exemption limit of borrowal accounts for obtaining collateral
securities has been raised to Rs. 5 lakh for both tiny and SSI units. Further, the RBI has advised the banks that they may, on the
basis of good track record and financial position of the units, increase the limit of dispensing with collateral requirement for loans
from the existing limit of Rs.5 lakh to Rs.25 lakh.
1.10.4  Composite loan scheme limit enhanced to Rs. 1 crore: The existing Composite Loan Scheme of SIDBI and banks helps
small borrowers by providing working capital and term loans through a single window. To promote credit flow to small borrowers,
the composite loan limit was increased to Rs.1 crore.  
1.10.5  NEF Scheme to cover projects up to Rs. 50 lakh:  As announced in the Comprehensive Policy Package for SSIs, the project
cost ceiling under the National Equity  Fund (NEF) Scheme has been enhanced from Rs.25 lakh to Rs.50 lakh.  The extent of soft
loan assistance is 25% of the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 10 lakh per project.
1.10.6  Specialised SSI bank branch in each district and SSI clusters:  Finance Minister urged the public sector banks to accelerate
their programme of SSI Branches to ensure that every district and SSI clusters within districts are served by at least one specialized
SSI bank branch.  The banks have been advised to obtain ISO certification for their Specialised SSI branches for improving the
quality of banking services. Till March, 2004, 497 Specialised SSI Branches have been operationalised.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
1.10.7  Interest rate:  As per the announcement made by the Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 2003-04, Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) has advised the banks to adopt the interest rate band of 2% above and below their prime lending rates (PLRs) for
secured advances.
1.10.8  Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) Fund:  A Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) Fund of Rs.10,000 crore has been set
up under SIDBI as per the announcements made by the then Hon’ble Finance Minister on 9
th January, 2004.  The SME Fund would,
inter-alia, address the problem of inadequacy of financial resources at competitive rates for the small-scale sector. The fund has
been made operational with effect from April 1, 2004. Till 15 th December 2004, Rs.1001 crore have been disbursed under this
Fund.
1.10.9    Laghu Udyami Credit Cards:  Laghu Udyami Credit Card (LUCC) scheme has been liberalized by enhancing the credit
limit from Rs.2 lakh to Rs.10 lakh, for borrowers who have a satisfactory track record.
1.10.10 Apart from the above, the Government is also implementing the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Small Industries, Micro
Finance Programme and Performance and Credit Rating Scheme for SSIs.
1.10.10    Technology up-gradation & modernisation
1.10.11            In order to enable the SSI units to upgrade their technology so as to improve their productivity, quality,
competitiveness and market acceptability of products, the Ministry has launched the following activities and schemes:
1.10.12            Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP): It takes a holistic approach for development of clusters in
respect of technology upgradation, marketing, exports, skill upgradation etc. So far, 59 clusters have been taken up for development
which include five National Programmes in collaboration with UNIDO for development of Toy, Machine Tools, Locks, Stone and
Hand Tools Industry in the country.
1.10.13 Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS): It provides 12% capital subsidy for induction of Well Established &
Improved Technology in selected sub-sectors/products. Subsidy is proposed to be revised to 15% in the light of announcement
made in General Budget for the year 2004-05. Further, the ceiling on eligible part of loan under the scheme is proposed to be
revised from  Rs. 40 lakh to Rs. 100 lakh.
1.10.14 Reimbursement of 75% of the cost of obtaining ISO-9000 certification subject to a ceiling of  Rs. 75,000/-.
1.10.15 Product & Process Development Centres for different products have been set up to provide consultancy services to SSI
units in process modifications, design development, new products and processes development etc. Tool Rooms set up by the Office
of the D.C. (SSI) at different places in the country provide better tooling facilities to SSI units. Regional Testing Centres and Field
Testing Centres have been established to cater to the needs of testing of the products of SSI units as per National and international
standards.
1.10.16 Marketing support
1.10.17 The Ministry of SSI is implementing the Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme, under which financial assistance
is available to the individual for participation in international exhibitions, overseas study/tours, production of overseas publicity
material, sector specific market studies, initiating/ contesting anti-dumping cases and reimbursement for adoption of bar-coding.
1.10.18  1SIDBI also extends support to SSI units, for undertaking various marketing related activities like marketing research,
advertising, branding, participation in trade fairs etc. Further, it also provides assistance to Specialised Organisations providing
marketing assistance, infrastructure and support services to industrial concerns in the small scale sector.
1.10.19  The Government (Ministry of SSI) is implementing the Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme to make
available developed plots for setting up small and tiny units with basic infrastructure facilities viz. power, water, roads,
telecommunications, common service facilities etc. Under the Scheme, a grant of 40% of the project cost for each IID Centre,
subject to a maximum of Rs.2 crore, is provided. The quantum of grant in case of states in the North-East region, Jammu &
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal is 80% of the project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs.4 crore.
1.10.20   The proposed legislation seeks, inter alia, to harmonise the inspection of SSI units under various laws and reduce the
number and periodicity of such inspections.
(iv)       Service enterprises related to industry enjoy full benefits that are available to SSIs.  To provide further policy back up, a
proposal to enhance the investment limit in fixed assets (excluding land and building) in respect of Small Scale Service & Business
(Industry Related) Enterprises (SSSBEs) is under active consideration of the Government.
1.10.21 The SISIs and branch SISIs organize a number of training programmes to train potential/ existing entrepreneurs for
improving their techno/ managerial knowledge and skills, with a view to facilitate them to start their own SSI units/ manage their
existing units in a better way. The types of programmes conducted include:
-
         Motivation Campaigns.
-         Entrepreneurship Development Programmes.
-         Management Development Programmes.
1.10.22  The three National Training Institutes namely, Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati, National Institute of
Small Industry Extension Training (NISIET), Hyderabad and National Institute for Entrepreneurship and Small Business
Development (NIESBUD), Noida conducted 605 Entrepreneurship Development Programmes  (EDPs) during 2003-04 and trained
38,564 persons.
1.10.23            Besides the above, training programmes are also organized to train entrepreneurs in specific technical trades in the
Regional Testing Centres (RTCs), Product & Process Development Centres (PPDCs) and Tool Rooms for imparting appropriate
training.
1.10.24            The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has also initiated a number of measures, development
programmes and schemes for better imparting of entrepreneurs skills and training, which include Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes, Rural Industries Programme (RIP), etc.
1.10.25            With a view to remedying the shortcoming of Human Resource Development (HRD) in the SSI sector, SIDBI

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
implements two comprehensive schemes, namely, Small Industries Management Assistant’s Programme (SIMAP) and Skill-cum-
Technology Upgradation Programme (STUP). SIMAP is targeted at the educated unemployed while the STUP is targeted at the
owners/ senior managers of SSIs. SIMAP seeks to develop a cadre of industrial managers specially trained to assist the SSI
entrepreneurs in their multiple responsibilities and also open up new avenues of productive employment for young graduates who
are otherwise not professionally qualified.  The programme duration is 14 weeks.  STUP aims to improve the performance of
existing SSI units by developing / strengthening the skills of the entrepreneurs and senior executives of small enterprises.  It is also
aimed at creating awareness among SSI units on process improvements, technological developments, etc., and to induce the units to
upgrade their technological levels.
Chapter - II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
 
Recommendation
2.0       Targets set by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries for 10th Five Year Plan. 
2.1       The Committee is of the view that the growth in production, employment and exports contributes to national economic
development and progress. The performance of SSI sector with regard to the production reveals that it could so far achieve merely
37 to 38% of the targets.  The Committee therefore calls upon the Government to look into this and come out with concrete
suggestions so as to enhance the out put as this sector has been assigned an annual growth target of 12% against 8% for the
economy as a whole.  (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
2.1.1    The targets for production, employment and exports for the small scale industrial sector for the Tenth Five Year Plan period
were set by the Planning Commission on the basis of the information furnished by the Ministry of SSI before conducting the Third
All India Census for Small Industries, with 2001-02 as the reference year. Along with the Census for the registered units, a sample
survey was also conducted for the unregistered units as well. This Sample Survey revealed that there were 91.46 lakh unregistered
SSI units in 2001-02, as against the earlier estimate of 7.11 lakh units. 
           
2.1.2    Based on the database now available, this Ministry has requested the Planning Commission for revision in the Tenth Plan
targets. The Tenth Plan assigned an annual growth rate of 12 per cent and additional employment of 44 lakh, to the SSI sector.
Using these two parameters, the revised targets of  (value of) Production and Employment for the Tenth Plan and the achievements
in the first two years of the Plan on the basis of 3
rd Census data are as under:
Year Production (Rs. crore) at current prices Employment (lakh person)
Target Achievement Target Achievement
2002-03 3,24,906 3,11,993 258.13 260.13
2003-04 3,73,710 3,57,733 266.93 271.36
2004-05 4,29,548  275.73  
2005-06 4,93,405  284.53  
2006-07 5,66,404  293.33  
 
2.1.3    The foregoing table shows that the achievement registered by the SSI sector in terms of production is around 96 per cent of
the revised target for 2002-03, while the achievements in 2002-03 and 2003-04 (estimated) are higher than the targets in respect of
employment generation.
Chapter - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendation
3.0       Service auditing of Organs under the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
3.1       The Committee recommends that the Government should undertake steps for service auditing of organs under the Ministry
of Small Scale Industries so that their delivery system can be improved for the betterment of small scale industries.
  (Para 2.1)
Action Taken
3.1.1    The Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI) [DC(SSI)] undertakes service auditing from time to time so that the
delivery system can be further improved and better services provided to the small scale sector. A detailed review of all the Plan
Schemes was conducted at the beginning of the Tenth Five Year Plan. Besides, Schemes are also evaluated from time to time and
necessary modifications are carried out. In order to keep pace with the changing needs of the SSI sector, the facilities available in
the field organizations are upgraded. Technology Resource Centres (TRCs) have been set up in the Small Industries Service
Institutes (SISIs). A knowledge-based interactive Web Portal of the Office of the DC (SSI) has been launched, which provides
adequate information on Schemes, Services, etc.
3.1.2    The accounts and functioning of the Office of the DC (SSI) and all the field offices are regularly inspected by the Internal
Inspection Team of Principal Accounts Office and also audited by the Principal Director of Audit and respective Accountant
General (Audit) in the State where the field offices are located. The observations/ suggestions given by them are examined and
necessary corrective actions are taken.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
Further Recommendation
3.1.3    The Committee is of the view that Government should undertake service auditing of the organs under the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries by the outside agencies and not by the DC (SSI) so that their delivery system can be improved for the betterment of
the Small Scale Industries in the real terms.  By the service auditing the Committee does not intend just the financial auditing,
although the same is indispensable, but the purpose is to improve the delivery system.
Recommendation
3.2       Necessary Funds at RE Stage
3.2.1    The Committee observes that SSI sector is a major manufacturing sector contributing substantially to the export and
employment generation.  This sector needs a boost which can largely come from the Government.  A reduction of allocation to the
extent of 57% of the Ministry's requirement will adverse affect the growth of SSI sector.  The Committee therefore impresses upon
the Government to provide necessary funds at RE stage.Para 3.1)
Action Taken
3.2.2    The major reduction during the year 2004-05 has been under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme, the Annual Plan allocation
for which was proposed at Rs.495.00 crore but was restricted to Rs.196.29 crore in BE 2004-05. The other schemes that are affected
due to reduced allocation are Tool Rooms, Integrated Infrastructural Development Scheme, Small Industry Cluster Development
Programme and Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme. The Ministry of SSI requested the Planning Commission to provide
additional Plan provision of Rs.415.12 crore at the stage of RE, 2004-05 but this request was not considered.
Further Recommendation
3.2.3    The Committee is perturbed to know that the Planning Commission has not yielded the RE stage the genuine requirement of
the Ministry of SSI in regard to providing additional plan allocation (Rs.415.12 crore) for Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme and
against this requirement only Rs.196.29 crore was provided in BE 2004-05.  Not only this, the other SSI promotional scheme viz
Tool Rooms, Intergraded Infrastructural development Scheme got scuttled as a result of reduced allocation.  The Committee
expresses its deepest concern.  On the one hand the Government is proposing for giving adequate space to SSI units to grow and
thrive, which is  appropriate move keeping in view the global trend for strengthening of Small Enterprises but the planning and
budgetary process  in India is not adequately pushing the SSI sector ahead.  SSI sector has the tremendous potential for employment
generation and its contribution to the national exchequer is also commendable.  So why not the SSI sector is being treated as the
priority sector?  The Committee is of the considered view that SSI sector needs the sympathetic consideration from all quarters for
its accelerated promotion and proliferation and to remain competitive in the liberalized and globalized economy.  Therefore, the
Planning Commission and the government approach towards SSI sector must be focused on the same wavelength with congruence
and consensus-aid-idem which is, in the Committee's view, is lacking at present.
Recommendation
3.3       Grants to National Small Industries Corporation for development of Small Scale Industries
3.3.1    The Committee recommends that the following measures may be undertaken for making NSIC in fulfilling its role more
effectively: -
Flexibility to the NSIC Board to induct professionals in order to build the internal competency levels;
NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies.  This will enable NSIC to play an
effective role in marketing the products of the SSI sector; and
NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs in matters relating to allocation of steel and other raw materials.  At present, allocation
of steel is made to NSIC only in those States where SSIDCs do not exist.  (Para 11.3)
Action Taken
3.3.2
        The NSIC Board inducts professionals as per its requirement, in consultation with the Ministry.
3.3.3        The recommendation has been noted.
3.3.4        The recommendation has been noted.
 
Further Recommendation
3.3.5    While the Committee is pleased to note that NSIC Board induct professional to imbibe the internal competency levels in the
organisation.  However, the Committee wishes that NSIC must leave its presence felt in the length and breadth of the country by
launching the awareness programme on SME sector which is a move the worldwide. 
3.3.6    The Committee would like to know as to what follow-up action has been taken in regard to the following recommendations
contained in 153
rd Report:-
NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies.  This will enable NSIC to play an
effective role in marketing the products of the SSI sector; and
NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs in matters relating to allocation of steel and other raw materials.  At present, allocation
of steel is made to NSIC only in those States where SSIDCs do not exist. 
Recommendation
3.4       Loan Limit under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
3.4.1    The Committee observes that loan limit of Rs. 25 lakh for investment in plant and machinery under the Credit Guarantee
Scheme is not sufficient so the loan limit needs to be enhanced at least to Rs. 1 crore.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of SSI to review the present limit with all concerned and raise the loan limit to the desired level.
(Para 20.2)

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
Action Taken
3.4.2    Initially, loan limit of Rs.10 lakh was fixed for extending guarantee cover to the eligible lending institutions when the Credit
Guarantee Scheme (CGS) was originally formulated by the Government of India in May, 2000. Subsequently, the loan limit for
guarantee cover was enhanced to Rs. 25 lakh when the scheme was formally launched on August 30, 2000. Recently, there has been
a demand from the Banks/ Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) and various SSI Associations to increase the loan limit from Rs.25
lakh to Rs.50 lakh under the scheme, which is under consideration of the Government.
 
Further Recommendation
3.4.3    The committee is of the view that the Government should consider without further delay the enhancement of loan limit to
Rs. one crore under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
Recommendation
 
3.5       Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
3.5.1    The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the provision of the loans up to 25.00 lakh without collateral/third
party guarantee and the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India thereto, Banks insists on the collateral security and the third party
guarantee and despite the Committee's repeated recommendation to change the mind set of the Branch Manager, nothing fruitful has
come out. The Committee also notes that the Trust has been making concerted efforts to create awareness about the Scheme among
the Branch Managers of the banks by organizing regional/zonal based Workshops-cum-Training Programmes where the information
relating to the Scheme and the benefits available are explained in detail.  There is however, absence of mechanism assessing the
impact of success of credit guarantee scheme.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure the success of this scheme.
(Para 22.3)
Action Taken
3.5.2    The progress of the Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) is reviewed every month and quarter by the Secretary, Ministry of SSI.
The scheme is also monitored by the Board of Trustees (BoT) of CTGSI, which meets at regular intervals to review its working and
take other policy decisions.  With effect from the current financial year, the BoT has also laid down targets under the scheme.  As
on 28 February 2005, a total of 22,684 proposals were approved for guarantee cover for aggregate credit of Rs.484.60 crore. With
the concerted efforts made by the CGTSI through its Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) in creating awareness of the scheme, the
performance is expected to pick up further in the coming months.             
Further Recommendation
3.5.3    The Committee is of the considered view that to make the Small Scale Industries to grow into Medium Enterprises, it is
essential to make the Guarantee Fund Scheme a big success.  It is so because only with the concerted efforts made by the CGTSI
through its Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) in creating awareness of the scheme, the performance of SSI sector expected to
pick up further. Since there is absence of effective mechanism for assessing the impact of the success of the Credit Guarantee
Scheme, the Committee impresses upon the Ministry again to ensure the success of this scheme.
Recommendation
3.6       Members Lending Institutions (MLIs)
3.6.1    The Committee observes that it is desirable that the Government expeditiously fulfills its commitment towards building the
Corpus of Rs. 2500 crore with a view to enhance the comfort level of Members Lending Institutions (MLIs) participating in the
Scheme. With the building of adequate corpus fund, the fears of MLIs could be allayed as still some of the banks have reservations
about the Scheme because of their bad experience in the past with a similar scheme operated by the RBI.
(Para 22.9)
Action Taken
3.6.2    The corpus of the scheme, which was Rs.686.19 crore at the end of 2003-04, has been enhanced to Rs.931.55 crore.  For
2005-06, the Budget Estimate under the scheme is Rs.200 crore.
Further Recommendation
3.6.3    The Committee is of the view that Government should implement the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme with all out efforts,
otherwise, half-heartedly approach would only deter in achieving  the objectives and targets of the Scheme.  The Credit Guarantee
Scheme intended to promote and proliferate the SSI  sector through Member Lending Institution (MLIs) needs to be given proper
attention and infusion of sufficient corpus money,  which has been projected to the tune of Rs.2500 crore by the Government.  But
allocation of fund on the shoe-string policy would prove loggerhead in making the scheme a success.
Recommendation
3.7       Credit Rating
3.7.1    The Committee strongly recommends for a Credit Rating Mechanism covering both the credit and performance factors.  The
Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of initiating and popularizing the Credit Rating System for
SSI units. (Para 26.2)
Action Taken
3.7.2    A new scheme of ‘Performance and Credit Rating of Small Scale Industries’ is being implemented through the National
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC). The basic objective of the scheme is to sensitize the SSI sector on the need for credit rating
and encourage the SSI units to maintain a good financial track record, which would earn them a higher rating for their credit
requirement whenever they approach the banks/financial institutions for their working capital and investment requirements.  A one-

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
time grant is provided to SSI units availing the benefit under the scheme, up to 75% of the fee charged by the Rating Agency,
subject to a ceiling of Rs.40,000. The balance amount towards the fee shall be borne by the SSI unit itself.
3.7.3     In addition, SIDBI in association with select public sector banks and one of the existing rating agencies is in the process of setting up
of a dedicated Credit Rating Agency for SMEs. Six banks namely, Bank of Baroda, Bank of India, Canara Bank, Oriental Bank of
Commerce, Punjab National Bank, and Union Bank of India have conveyed their ‘in principle’ consent to join the proposed venture. The
scope of deliverables in the proposed rating agency would include developing a variety of scoring models and rating products, including an
appropriate rating mechanism for industrial products. The credit agency would also endeavour to build comprehensive data bank on sub
sectors and clusters of the SME sector and also undertake commercial dissemination of information. Over the period, the operations of the
agency are expected to give boost to the flow of credit to the sector. 
Further Recommendation
3.7.4    The Committee observes that Credit Rating Agency is yet to start its functioning and it is the responsibility of the Ministry
of SSI and SIDBI to ensure its success.  The Committee would like to be informed of its progress periodically.
Recommendation
3.8       Sunrise industries in the SSI sector
3.8.1    The Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to identify the sunrise industries in the SSI sector e.g.
Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology (BT) Pharmaceuticals and Nano technologies along with IT Enabled Services (ITES)
and concrete steps may be undertaken to reinforce appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SSI industries which have the
potential to be the winners of tomorrow.  The issue such as IPR protection and management of rapid up-scaling of operations could
be taken up on priority basis.(Para  31.3)
Action Taken
3.8.2    The promotional activities for encouraging sunrise/knowledge-based industries are undertaken through the Small Industries
Service Institutes (SISIs). During 2003-04, 33 Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDPs) related to information
technology were conducted by the SISIs. During 2004-05, 10 EDPs have been conducted by the SISIs, so far. The three National
Training Institutes namely, IIE, Guwahati, NISIET, Hyderabad and NIESBUD, Noida also conducts EDPs on sunrise/knowledge-
based industries. During 2003-04, these institutes conducted 605 EDPs, including those related to sunrise/knowledge-based
industries.
3.8.3    Various measures have been taken to look into the problems of the small scale Drugs and Pharmaceuticals industries, which
include, raising of investment limit from Rs.1 crore to Rs.5 crore for certain items reserved for the SSI sector, financial assistance
through the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for technology upgradation to meet the requirements of Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP), etc.
3.8.4    Considering the importance of the Biotechnology sector amongst the sunrise industries, the Ministry of SSI has taken up the
task of encouraging biotechnology in the SSI sector by conducting a number of sensitization programmes in various parts of the
country in collaboration with the Biotech Consortium India Ltd. (BCIL) of the Department of Biotechnology and various State
Government agencies to acquaint small entrepreneurs about the industrial and business opportunities in the new and growing area.
3.8.5    To assist SSI entrepreneurs in getting basic understanding of the technologies, products and processes, a set of project
profiles have been prepared in coordination with the BICL of the Department of Biotechnology, covering the following areas: Plant
Tissue Culture, Biofertilizers, Biopesticides, Fresh Water Prawn Culture/Hatchery, Vermicomposting, Micropropagation
Technology, Medicinal Plant Extractions, PCR Diagnostics and Organic farming.
Further Recommendation
 
3.8.6    The Committee would like to know the outcome of efforts made by the Ministry of SSI in regard to identification for
promotion of the sunrise industries in the SSI sector viz.  Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology, Pharmaceutical, Nano-
technology.  The Committee would further like to know the details of future outlook of these sunrise industries in Orissa, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttranchal, U.P., Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan - the states which need economic upgradation. 
 
Recommendation
3.9       Working Group on rehabilitation of Sick units
3.9.1    The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should undertake concrete steps for ensuring following
things: -
arresting the mortality rate in SSI sector and extending sufficient  credit facilities to SSI units;
insertion of an arbitration clause in the borrower lender agreement in terms of Indian Arbitration Act in the Banking Ombudsman
Scheme, 2002;
effective outcome of efforts made for Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee;
Result oriented outcome of efforts made by State-level Inter Institutional  Committee's (SLIICs) in regard to avoiding delay in
rehabilitations;
Expeditious progress made in regard to setting up of Local Committees between State Government, SSI Associations and Banks to
sort out credit related issues at local level;
Representation of SSI Associations in the Rehabilitation Cell.
Action Taken
3.9.2    Based on the recommendations of Kohli Working Group, RBI issued detailed revised guidelines to banks in January, 2002
for detection of sickness at an early stage and taking remedial measures, and for rehabilitation of sick SSI units identified as
potentially viable. As per the revised guidelines, the rehabilitation package should be fully implemented within six months from the

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
date the unit is declared as potentially viable/ viable.  During this six-month period of identifying and implementing the
rehabilitation package, the banks/ financial institutions are required to do ‘holding operation’, which will allow the sick unit to draw
funds from the cash credit account at least to the extent of deposit of sale proceeds.
 
3.9.3    The RBI has advised the banks the following broad parameters for grant of relief and concessions for revival of potentially
viable sick SSI units:
(a)     Interest on Working  Capital        1.5% below the prevailing fixed/prime lending rate, wherever applicable.
(b) Funded Interest Term Loan Interest free
(c) Working Capital Term Loan 1.5% below the prevailing fixed / prime lending rate, wherever applicable
(d) Term Loan The rate of interest on term loans may be reduced, where considered
necessary, by not more than 3 per cent in the case of tiny/decentralised
sector units and by not more than 2 per cent for other SSI units, below the
document rate.
(e) Contingency Loan Assistance Interest at concessional rate for working capital assistance.
3.9.4    The banks have been given the freedom for extension of relief/concessions even beyond the parameters in cases where it is
considered absolutely necessary. Further, the Governor, RBI, in the Annual Policy Statement for 2004-05, announced formulation
of a mechanism for debt restructuring on the lines of the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) for medium enterprises. A Special
Group was constituted to suggest appropriate operational guidelines in this regard. The report of the Special Group for formulation
of Debt Restructuring Mechanism for Medium Enterprises has been released by the RBI on 9
th November, 2004 for views/feedback.
In response, the Ministry of SSI has suggested to the RBI the following:
All partnership/proprietorship firms under manufacturing and services [besides corporates] in the small and medium enterprises
(SME) sector should be covered under the proposed debt restructuring mechanism.
Single-lender borrowing accounts should also be covered under the Medium Sector Debt Restructuring (MSDR) system.
The limit for outstanding debt, eligible to be considered for extending restructuring package, should be brought down to at least Rs.
50 lakh.
The problem of sickness in the SSI sector should be addressed urgently by giving priority to sick SSI units identified as viable in
any scheme of debt restructuring, under the MSDR system or a scheme devised for restructuring outstanding debts of sick SSI units
in various forms such as moratorium, rescheduling, infusion of fresh capital, concessional rate of interest, etc. 
For single-lender as also multiple lender borrowing accounts for outstanding level of loan below Rs. 50 lakh (suggested floor for the
MSDR system), banks/FIs should issue necessary guidelines on debt restructuring on the lines of MSDR system with the approval
of their respective Boards. This should be incorporated in the guidelines issued by the RBI on the MSDR system for implementation
by banks/FIs in order to provide an effective mechanism for restructuring of debts of SMEs.
3.9.5    A meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee to review the flow of credit to the SSI sector was held on 28
th December
2004 under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The decisions taken in the meeting for
improving the flow of credit to the SSI and tiny sector are as under:
All banks to fix self-set target on advances to the SSI sector for the year 2004-05, based on their previous year’s achievement and
overall trends in growth of net bank credit, and intimate the same to the RBI.
The banks and SSI Associations may meet periodically under the aegis of the local chapter of Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and
discuss various issues concerning flow of credit to the SSI sector.
The banks should give more focus on meeting the financial requirements of the tiny sector as majority of the SSI units are in the
tiny sectors.
The State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs) may discuss issues relating to broad basing the coverage of SSI and tiny units under
bank credit while preparing the Credit Plan for 2005-06.
All banks to report on progress made in financing by them under cluster approach on a half-yearly basis to the RBI.
3.9.6  The decisions taken in the meeting have been circulated among all the Scheduled Commercial Banks, by the RBI, for
initiating necessary steps to implement the above decisions.
3.9.7    The arbitration provision as provided in the revised Banking Ombudsman (BO) Scheme, 2002 is voluntary and the BO
would be able to proceed with the arbitration proceeding only when both the parties to dispute agree for reference to Banking
Ombudsman for arbitration. 
3.9.8     An institutional mechanism exists at the district level in some of the States. Some of the State Governments have formed Sick Units
Rehabilitation Committee headed by Deputy Commissioner / District Collector of the District.  The reasons for sickness in the SSI sector as
well as individual cases of sickness are being deliberated in these and measures are initiated to address the issue.  This forum also initiates
measures to bring general awareness about the problems of sickness and remedial steps to curtail the growth of sickness. The Zila Udyog
Mitra or Sick Unit Rehabilitation Committee has been set up by the Government of Maharashtra in most of the districts (where industries
exist in large numbers) under the chairmanship of Deputy Commissioner/ District Collector of the district concerned. The Government of
Punjab (Industry Department) has also constituted the Sick Unit Rehabilitation Committee in most of the districts of Punjab (where
industries exist in large numbers) under the chairmanship of Deputy Commissioner/ District Collector of the district concerned. Further, the
Government of Uttar Pradesh (Industry Department) has constituted the Sick Unit Rehabilitation Committee at the Commissionerate level
(consisting of 3-4 districts) under the chairmanship of the Commissioner concerned. The Government of Karnataka (Industry Department)
has also constituted the Sick Unit Rehabilitation Committee in the district of Bangalore (where industries exist in large numbers) under the
chairmanship of the In-charge of District Industry Centre.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
3.9.9     State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) has been set up in each State under the convenorship of RBI with the Industry
Secretary/ Commissioner of the State concerned as the Chairman, to deal with the problems of coordination for rehabilitation of sick SSI
units. The meetings of SLIIC are generally held at quarterly intervals. A Sub-Committee of SLIIC has also been set up under the
convenorship of SLBC convenor bank (depending on the number of individual rehabilitation cases to be discussed) wherein borrowers and
bankers concerned are invited to discuss the issue on one to one basis.
3.9.10   The RBI has informed that Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)/District Consultative Committee (DCC)/ District Level
Review Committee (DLRC)/ State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) are different fora under the Lead Bank Scheme to review and monitor
the performance of the banks in advancing credit to various sectors.  The DCC and DLRC hold meetings quarterly to review the position of
credit flow to different sectors, including credit flow to SSI sector.
3.9.11   The Regional Offices of the Rural Planning and Credit Department (RPCD) of RBI are the convenor of SLIIC. The RBI has
informed them vide circular dated 23
rd September, 1997 regarding the decision that the representatives of the local SSI Associations should
be invited to all the meetings of SLIIC.
Further Recommendation
3.9.12  The Committee understands that sufficient institutional arrangament and guidelines are there for rehabilitation of sick SSI
units, however, the tangible achievement in this regard is desirable which would be reflected in arresting the motality rate in the SSI
sector.  The Committee expects state-wise details in this regard including the impact of structural arrangement and various
guidelines intended for the rehabilitation of the sick SSI units along with further strategic management for the rehabilitation of the
sick SSI units.
 Recommendation
 (RRBs) for extending credit flow to rural Small Scale Industries;
introducing and encouraging Laghu Udyog Credit Cards ; and3.10        Credit flow to SSI Sector
 3.10.1The Committee hopes that implementation the S.P. Gupta Committee's recommendations in regard to credit flow to SSI
sector by pubic sector Banks to facilitate additional capacity generation, expansion of existing units and improving capacity
utilization diversification and to enhance competitiveness of SSI sectors would fetch positive result for Small Scale Industries.  The
Ministry of Small Scale Industries for the furtherance and proliferation may emphasize the following steps.
popularisation of  venture capital funding to SSI units
strengthening credit delivery system and support services agencies;
furtherance and strengthening of Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for extending financial and support services
to SSIs
enhancing the net percentage of credit to Small Scale Industries  vis-a-vis the large Scale Industries
effective steps for Restructuirng of State Financial Corporations (SFCs);
Steps for enhancing flow of additional credit for SSI sector;
Reinforcing Technology Bank for SME upgradation to facilitate technology transfer, project evaluation, risks management etc.;
re-orienting the role of Regional Rural Banks
extending sufficient financial assistance extended to Self Help Groups
ara 36.11)
Action Taken
3.10.2   To encourage venture capital funding of SSI units, banks have been advised by the RBI in April, 1999 that investment in venture
capital will be eligible for inclusion in priority sector lending. This is subject to the condition that the venture capital funds/companies are
registered with the Securities & Exchange Board of India. Investment in venture capital, if any, is required to be reported separately in half-
yearly return on priority sector lending submitted by banks to the RBI.
3.10.3  SIDBI extends venture capital assistance to SSI units directly and by way of subscription to the corpus of other Venture
Capital Funds. SIDBI and the funds promoted by it are the institutions largely extending venture capital assistance to small scale
units. Other funds at present focus on larger investments of about Rs.15-20 crore per unit. In September, 1999, SIDBI created the
SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd. (SVCL) and SIDBI Trustee Company Ltd. (STCL), as wholly owned subsidiaries of SIDBI primarily to
be the Investment Manager and Trustee of the National Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry (NFSIT) respectively. Further,
on October 25, 2004, SIDBI launched a new Venture Capital Fund called SME Growth Fund with a contemplated corpus of Rs. 500
crore for assisting the sunrise sectors viz., auto components, pharma, light engineering, biotechnology, logistics, infrastructure, etc.
Many banks have evinced interest in contributing to the corpus and so far the fund has already received commitments aggregating
Rs. 450 crore from SIDBI, Punjab National Bank and Union Bank of India.
3.10.4  The RBI has informed that banks have been advised that their lending to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) for
the purpose of on-lending to the SSI sector will be reckoned within the ambit of priority sector lending. As announced in the Union
Budget 2000-01, the RBI has advised all the public sector banks to take necessary steps to accelerate their programme of SSI
branches to ensure that every district and SSI clusters within districts are served by at least one specialised SSI bank branch.
Further, banks have been permitted to categorise their general banking branches having 60% or more of their advances to the SSI
sector as specialised SSI branches in order to provide better service to this sector as a whole.
3.10.5  In the backdrop of implementation of the Dr. S.P. Gupta Committee’s recommendations for increasing the flow of credit to
the SSI sector by public sector banks, SIDBI has forwarded various suggestions/measures to the Ministry of SSI and Ministry of
Finance to upscale the credit flow to SSIs.  In the present context, it may be reiterated that:
With a view to providing expanded services to Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) through SIDBI’s own offices, the dynamics of
the changed environment require the Bank to provide integrated services to SMEs. An approval to this effect by the appropriate
authorities (GoI/ RBI) would expand SIDBI’s domain of services and, in turn, the flow of credit to SMEs. 

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
In view of the increased contribution of service sector to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), there is need to undertake an exercise/
survey of Small Scale Service (Industry related) and Business Enterprises (SSSBEs) that may be covered under the definition of
SSSBEs. An expanded definition of SSSBEs would facilitate increase in sectoral output and provide SIDBI with expanded business
opportunities.
The Hon’ble Union Finance Minister, in the Budget (2004-05) speech, while appreciating the contribution of the small scale sector
as the engine of growth, has acknowledged that small units must be given the space to grow into medium enterprises and all over
the world, policies are devised to meet such growth objectives.  In this context, it is suggested that the definition of SSIs be revised
upward in terms of investment in plant and machinery and a category of medium enterprises be also created and suitably defined in
general (other than SME Fund). As approved for SME Fund, SIDBI should be permitted to do lending to the small and medium
enterprises in the normal course of its business.
 
3.10.6   The RBI has informed that as per the decisions taken at the Standing Advisory Committee (SAC) meeting in June 2003, the
banks have been advised to fix self-set target for growth in advances to SSI sector over the previous year’s achievement and overall
trends in growth of Net Bank Credit. Further, in the SAC meeting held on 28
th December 2004, all banks have been advised to fix
self-set target on advances to the SSI sector for the year 2004-05, and intimate the same to the RBI.
3.10.7  SIDBI has been taking proactive steps to provide succor to the State Financial Corporations (SFCs).  Apart from granting
need based restructuring / relief packages, SFCs have been allowed to prepay their high cost bearing refinance.  This has resulted in
reduction in the cost of borrowing of SFCs.  At the initiative of the Government of India, SIDBI has restructured SFCs which are
willing to abide by certain norms enumerated in the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) executed by them along with the
respective State Governments with SIDBI.  So far, 9 SFCs in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and West Bengal have entered into the MoU with SIDBI and  3 more SFCs in the
States of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh are expected to execute MoU during 2004-05.  As per the conditions of the MoU,
SFCs have been extended moratorium of one year, reduction in interest on the entire refinance outstanding by 2% and a rebate of
2% on the future refinance assistance subject to timely and regular payment to SIDBI.  The State Governments concerned have
indicated their commitment to provide support to SFCs. The SFCs have expressed that the concessions given by SIDBI under MoU
have not only helped them to reduce their financial cost of borrowing but have also made them competitive under SME
dispensation. Many of the SFCs have also reoriented their approach and have started looking at newer ways to manage their
business operations.
3.10.8   The RBI has advised the banks that the following measures be taken to ensure adequate and timely credit flow to SSI sector:
To ensure that out of their total funds lent to SSI sector, at least 40% should be made available to units with investment in plant and
machinery up to Rs.5 lakh and 20% should be made available to units with investment in plant and machinery between Rs.5 and
Rs.25 lakh. Thus, 60% of the funds earmarked for SSI sector should go to units in the tiny sector (circular issued on 5th January,
1998).
To adopt the method of computation of working capital requirement of SSI units, on the basis of simplified method of minimum
20% of the projected annual turnover of the borrowing unit for limits up to Rs.5 crore (circular issued on 1st March, 1999).
To open at least one specialised SSI branch in each district and (permitted) to categorise the general banking branches having 60%
or more of their advances to SSI sector as specialised SSI branches in order to provide better service to the sector (circulars dated
3rd March, 2000 and 23rd May, 2002).
To consider increasing exemption limit for obtaining collateral security for all SSI borrowal accounts from Rs.  15 lakh to Rs. 25
lakh, based on good track record and financial position of the units (circular issued on 3
rd November, 2003).
To incorporate in their Annual Credit Plan, the credit requirement of 60 clusters identified by the Ministry of SSI, Government of
India for focused development of SSI (circular issued on 11
th September, 2003).
To fix self-set target for growth in advances to SSI sector over the previous year’s achievement and overall trends in growth of net
bank credit (based on the decision in the review meeting on implementation of action points of third meeting of Standing Advisory
Committee held on 2nd June, 2003).
The lending of Banks to NBFCs for the purpose of on-lending to the SSI sector will be reckoned within the ambit of priority sector
lending (circular issued on 3
rd November, 2003).
To enhance the composite loan limit from Rs.50 lakh to Rs. 1 crore  (circular issued on 26th October, 2004).
To incorporate the credit requirements of 78 clusters identified by the Ministry of SSI under Small Industry Cluster Development
Programme (SICDP) (circular issued on 15
th February, 2005). 
3.10.9   SIDBI had set up a Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises (TBSE) in collaboration with United Nations – Asian and Pacific
Centre for Transfer of Technology (UN-APCTT) in 1995 to help SMEs tap opportunities at the global level for acquisition of technology and
establish business collaborations. In the span of 9 years, TBSE has emerged as a bridge between technology providers and seeker enterprises.
In order to help SMEs face the challenges of new economic order, TBSE (in association with its co-promoters and associates) has taken
several initiatives and put in place an effective mechanism to address the technology and collaboration related needs of the sector. 
Recognizing the contribution of the TBSE, Government, while announcing the policy package for SSIs, has indicated that TBSE needs to be
strengthened so that it emerges as a strong and vibrant Technology Bank.  SIDBI is making all efforts to reinforce the Technology Bank to
facilitate technology transfer, project evaluation, risk management and low cost project consultancy etc. for SMEs. The process of
incorporation of Technology Bank for SMEs as public limited company has been initiated. The Registrar of Companies (Delhi and Haryana)
has advised the availability of the name “India SME Technology Services Ltd. (ISTSL)” for registration. The Memorandum of Article and
Article of Association of ISTSL have been drafted and forwarded to all stakeholders for their approval. Meanwhile, State Bank of India has

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
communicated the sanction for investing up to 15% of equity capital of ISTSL subject to maximum of Rs. 75 lakh.
3.10.10            The RBI has informed that Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) have priority sector lending target of 60% as compared to
40% of commercial banks.  This target of 60% includes credit to SSI units.
3.10.11            As on 31.12.2002, the 27 Public Sector Banks had issued Laghu Udyami Credit Cards (LUCC) to 67,399 SSI
accounts and the limits sanctioned was Rs. l004.38 crore and the amount outstanding was Rs. 427.55 crore. Indian Banks’
Association has informed that upon receipt of a letter from the Banking Division, Ministry of Finance, advising the IBA regarding
increasing / enhancing in the credit limit of LUCC from Rs. 2 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh for SSI borrowers who have a satisfactory track
record, the IBA wrote to all the Public Sector Member Banks informing them to take urgent steps to implement the directions of the
Government and also advise the steps taken by them for implementing the directions.
3.10.12            As per the Union Budget announcements, 5.85 lakh groups are to be credit linked during the period upto March 31,
2007 by all the banks/ financial institutions put together. The SIDBI Foundation for Micro Credit (SFMC) has conveyed its
commitment to the Government to provide assistance to 30,000 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) during FY 2005, 45,000 during FY 2006
and 50,000 during FY 2007 through the MFIs / NGOs under Micro Credit Scheme (MCS).   Till January, 2005, SFMC had
sanctioned aggregate assistance of Rs.409 crore benefiting over 14 lakh poor, mostly women.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.10.13            The Committee understands that RBI guidelines contained the potential for actual financial assistance to SSI units,
however, the Committee is of the view that the efforts of the banks in extending credit to the SSI sector would be considered a
success only when the percentage of net bank credit to SSI sector increases from the present status of 10.4 per cent to at least the
previous level of 17-18 per cent.
3.10.14            The Committee welcomes the initiative taken in regard to "India SME Technology Services Limited" and hopes that
the newly set up institute would provide integrated services to the SMEs.
Recommendation
3.11     Friendly tax regime for SSI
3.11.1  The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should take initiatives/ measures for SSI friendly tax regime and other fiscal
measure required to promote SSI at an accelerated pace keeping in view the on going liberalization and globalization process and
the need to protect the domestic SSI Sector. In order to promote the SSI sector, certain fiscal measures need to be taken to establish
a SSI-friendly tax regime. 
Extension of General SSI Excise Exemption to SSI units manufacturing branded goods in urban areas, as available in rural areas.
Increase in the excise exemption from Rs.1 crore to Rs.2 crore to new as well as existing SSI units in rural as well as urban areas.
To increase the turnover eligibility limit for availing the General SSI Excise Exemption from Rs.3 crore to Rs.5 crore.
Lower rates of excise duties on items having large presence of SSI units in their manufacturing.
Rationalisation of custom duties in cases involving raw material and finished products for the same product category.
Lower custom duties on import of raw material (basic raw material and intermediate goods) and higher duties on finished products.
Incentives to facilitate exports by the SSI units.
In order to induce SSI Sector to undertake technology upgradation, excise and customs duty relief / concession be provided to SSIs
on purchase of new plant and machinery for technology upgradation.
Incentives for ancillarisation so as to establish better linkages between the large and small industries.
once concession / new fiscal provision is announced, it should be maintained for at least three years in order to maintain continuity
and growth.(Para 37.5)
Action Taken
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Finance in September 2004, which has informed that to check misuse of SSI
exemption by multinationals, it was provided that the SSI exemption would not be available to units manufacturing branded goods.
However, an exception was made later, so as to promote industrialisation in rural areas. However, that Ministry has conveyed its
inability to extend the exemption to the urban areas. 
Ministry of Finance has mentioned that the number of SSI units paying central excise duty is about 37,000, which contribute only
about 2.57% of the total revenue from central excise duties.  SSI exemption, thus, adversely affects the tax-GDP ratio. Excise duty
being a tax at the manufacturing stage (the first stage), exemption from it also leads to non-accounting of production, which in turn
leads to non-payment of other taxes, such as income tax, sales tax, etc. and generation of black money. Such exemption also leads to
misuse of CENVAT credit by large duty-paying units against duty-paid documents for materials supplied to the exempted SSI
sector. It also results in breaking of the CENVAT chain. Central Government has proposed to implement State-level Value Added
Tax (VAT) from 1
st April 2005.  Grant of more exemptions would adversely affect the implementation of VAT. In view of the
above-mentioned facts, Ministry of Finance has informed that it would not be possible to accede to the suggestion.
The turnover eligibility limit for availing the General SSI Excise Exemption has been increased from Rs.3 crore to Rs.4 crore in the
Union Budget 2005-06.
Over the last few years, excise duty structure has been rationalized.  At present, 16% is the mean rate of excise duty. SSI units
already get a lower rate. Units having a turnover up to Rs. 1 crore are either fully exempt or pay a concessional duty of 60% of the
normal duty. Ministry of Finance is of the view that it would not be possible to have a separate rate for SSI units, as it would
completely distort the duty structure.
Ministry of Finance is of the view that lower rates of customs duty on raw materials for the SSI sector would necessarily involve
end-use conditions and is prone to misuse. Monitoring of such end-use conditions would result in avoidable increased interface
between the units and the tax collecting Department.

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
It would also require that such units are registered with the Excise Department and follow elaborate procedure, which would be
difficult for units having turnover less than Rs. 1 crore and availing of full exemption from excise duty. It would thus not be
desirable to lower the rates of customs duty on raw materials for SSI sector.
The customs duty rate, in general, is being reduced gradually taking in account the interests of both users and producers. It is also
difficult to define finished product, as finished product of one industry may be raw material of another industry. Ministry of Finance
has informed that Government will take care to ensure that for final consumption goods, duty rate are charged taking in account the
domestic angle.
3.11.8  The Income Tax Act provides a variety of fiscal incentives for promoting the industrial sector and facilitating exports, which
are also available to the small scale industries. The Act provides for a 100% deduction of export profits of 100% Export Oriented
Units (EOUs) engaged in the manufacture or production of any article, thing or computer software under section 10B and of units
engaged in the export of wood-based handicrafts under Section 10BA, upto assessment year 2009-10. In addition, a 10-year tax
benefit is provided under Section 10A of the Act to units in Special Economic Zones (SEZs).   
3.11.9  Lower rates of customs and excise duty on capital goods for SSI sector would necessarily involve end-use conditions and be
prone to misuse. Monitoring of such end-use conditions would result in avoidable increased interface between the units and the
Department. It would also require that such units are registered with the Excise Department and follow elaborate procedure, which
would be very difficult, particularly for units having turnover less than Rs. 1 crore and availing of full exemption from excise duty.
Thus, Ministry of Finance is of the view that it would not be desirable to extend such relief / concession to the SSI sector.
            Further, except for those SSI units which operate under full exemption, there is no need to prescribe a lower rate of excise
duty paid on such capital goods, as CENVAT credit of excise duty paid on such capital goods is in any case available under the
Cenvat Credit Rules 2004.
3.11.10 In order to establish better linkages between the large and small industries and provide incentive to large enterprises to sub-
contract and out-source their branded goods to the SSI units, the Ministry of SSI has again recommended to Ministry of Finance that
the SSI excise exemption should be restored to all SSI units manufacturing branded goods irrespective of their location.
3.11.11            Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), Ministry of Finance has informed that no major changes have been
made in the present SSI Excise Duty Exemption Scheme since 2000, i.e., for the last four years. However, it may sometimes be
necessary to change the duty rate on various considerations, like raising revenue. Further, the Central Board of Direct Taxes
(CBDT) has informed that the fiscal incentives provided for promoting the industrial sector are aimed at encouraging continuity and
stability of the tax regime so as to facilitate growth in the economy.
Further Recommendation
3.11.12    The Committee reiterates the need for undertaking initiatives/measures for SSI freindly tax regime and other fiscal
measure required to promote SSI at an accelerated rate keeping in view to not only to  protect the domestic SSI sector from the
onslaught of  on going liberalization and globalization process but also to give sufficient space to Small Scale Industries to grow
and thrive into the medium enterprises. 
Chapter - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF THE  MINISTRY OF
AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES    HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendation
 
4.0       Adoption of "Best Practices Code"
4.1       The Committee is of the view that there is a need for amendment in the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale and
Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act i.e. mandatory
provision requiring the large enterprises to show in the entries of their Balance sheets the amount due for payment to the SSI units
to enable SSI units/suppliers to get payments as agreed upon.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
come out with the requisite amendment in the said Act without further delay. (Para 29.2)
Action Taken
4.1.1
        Amendments to the Delayed Payments Act are under consideration of the Government.
4.1.2        Recommendation
(Para 30.2)
Action Taken
4.2       Progress in regard to enactment of Limited Partnership Act
4.2.1    The Committee is in agreement with the view of the Ministry of SSI that the SSI sector needs the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
Act, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of SSI should continue to pursue for legislation of the Limited Liability Partnership Act in the
interest of Small Scale Sector
4.2.2    The Government is pursuing the enactment of a suitable legislation to facilitate Limited Liability Partnership for the small
scale sector.
Recommendation
4.3       Purchase Preference for SSI
4.3.1    The Committee desires that the issue of Procurement Policy & Price Preference Policy for promotion of Small Entrepreneurs
should be incorporated in the proposed legislation for Small Enterprises Development.
Para 33.3)

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
Action Taken
4.3.2    The issue of procurement preference measure for small enterprises is proposed to be
 taken care of in the draft legislation concerning small enterprises.
Recommendation
4.4       Raising the limit of SSI
4.4.1    The Committee is in agreement with the recommendation of ERC and directs that the Government should consider for
raising the limit of SSI sector from existing Rs.1 crore to Rs.5 crore for all items keeping in view inflation rate and the requirement
for setting up small scale units.(Para 40.7)
Action Taken
4.4.2     The matter is under active consideration of the Government. 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
Service auditing of Organs under the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
The Committee is of the view that Government should undertake service auditing of the organs under the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries by the outside agencies and not by the DC (SSI) so that their delivery system can be improved for the betterment of the
Small Scale Industries in the real terms.  By the service auditing the Committee does not intend just the financial auditing, although
the same is indispensable, but the purpose is to improve the delivery system.( 3.1.3)
Necessary Funds at RE Stage
The Committee is perturbed to know that the Planning Commission has not yielded the RE stage the genuine requirement of the
Ministry of SSI in regard to providing additional plan allocation (Rs.415.12 crore) for Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme and against
this requirement only Rs.196.29 crore was provided in BE 2004-05.  Not only this, the other SSI promotional scheme viz Tool
Rooms, Intergraded Infrastructural development Scheme got scuttled as a result of reduced allocation.  The Committee expresses its
deepest concern.  On the one hand the Government is proposing for giving adequate space to SSI units to grow and thrive, which is 
appropriate move keeping in view the global trend for strengthening of Small Enterprises but the planning and budgetary process  in
India is not adequately pushing the SSI sector ahead.  SSI sector has the tremendous potential for employment generation and its
contribution to the national exchequer is also commendable.  So why not the SSI sector is being treated as the priority sector?  The
Committee is of the considered view that SSI sector needs the sympathetic consideration from all quarters for its accelerated
promotion and proliferation and to remain competitive in the liberalized and globalized economy.  Therefore, the Planning
Commission and the government approach towards SSI sector must be focused on the same wavelength with congruence and
consensus-aid-idem which is, in the Committee's view, is lacking at present.
           
(3.2.3)
Grants to National Small Industries Corporation for development of Small Scale Industries
            While the Committee is pleased to note that NSIC Board induct professional to imbibe the internal competency levels in the
organisation.  However, the Committee wishes that NSIC must leave its presence felt in the length and breadth of the country by
launching the awareness programme on SME sector which is a move the worldwide. 
(3.3.5)
            The Committee would like to know as to what follow-up action has been taken in regard to the following recommendations
contained in 153
rd Report:-
NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies.  This will enable NSIC to play an
effective role in marketing the products of the SSI sector; and
NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs in matters relating to allocation of steel and other raw materials.  At present, allocation
of steel is made to NSIC only in those States where SSIDCs do not exist.  (3.3.6)
Loan Limit under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
The committee is of the view that the Government should consider without further delay the enhancement of loan limit to Rs. one
crore under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.(3.4.3)
Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme
The Committee is of the considered view that to make the Small Scale Industries to grow into Medium Enterprises, it is essential to
make the Guarantee Fund Scheme a big success.  It is so because only with the concerted efforts made by the CGTSI through its
Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) in creating awareness of the scheme, the performance of SSI sector expected to pick up
further. Since there is absence of effective mechanism for assessing the impact of the success of the Credit Guarantee Scheme, the
Committee impresses upon the Ministry again to ensure the success of this scheme.(3.5.3)
Members Lending Institutions (MLIs)
The Committee is of the view that Government should implement the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme with all out efforts, otherwise,
half-heartedly approach would only deter in achieving  the objectives and targets of the Scheme.  The Credit Guarantee Scheme
intended to promote and proliferate the SSI  sector through Member Lending Institution (MLIs) needs to be given proper attention
and infusion of sufficient corpus money,  which has been projected to the tune of Rs.2500 crore by the Government.  But allocation
of fund on the shoe-string policy would prove loggerhead in making the scheme a success.
(3.6.3)
Credit Rating

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
The Committee observes that Credit Rating Agency is yet to start its functioning and it is the responsibility of the Ministry of SSI
and SIDBI to ensure its success.  The Committee would like to be informed of its progress periodically.      (3.7.4)
Sunrise industries in the SSI sector
The Committee would like to know the outcome of efforts made by the Ministry of SSI in regard to identification for promotion of
the sunrise industries in the SSI sector viz.  Information Technology (IT), Biotechnology, Pharmaceutical, Nano-technology.  The
Committee would further like to know the details of future outlook of these sunrise industries in Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Uttranchal, U.P., Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan - the states which need economic upgradation. 
(3.7.6)
Working Group on rehabilitation of Sick units
Credit flow to SSI Sector
The Committee understands that RBI guidelines contained the potential for actual financial assistance to SSI units, however, the
Committee is of the view that the efforts of the banks in extending credit to the SSI sector would be considered a success only when
the percentage of net bank credit to SSI sector increases from the present status of 10.4 per cent to at least the previous level of 17-
18 per cent.(3.9.13)
 
The Committee welcomes the initiative taken in regard to "India SME Technology Services Limited" and hopes that the newly set
up institute would provide integrated services to the SMEs.(3.9.14)
Friendly tax regime for SSI
The Committee reiterates the need for undertaking initiatives/measures for SSI freindly tax regime and other fiscal measure required
to promote SSI at an accelerated rate keeping in view to not only to  protect the domestic SSI sector from the onslaught of  on going
liberalization and globalization process but also to give sufficient space to Small Scale Industries to grow and thrive into the
medium enterprises.  (3.10.12)   
 
MINUTES
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minute of the Sub- Committee  Meeting on ATR
I
First Meeting
The Sub-Committee-IV for Action Taken Report met at 4.00 pm on Tuesday, the 3
rd May, 2005 in Room ‘E’, Basement,
PHA, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
1.         Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato          -                       Convenor
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.         Dr. Vijay Mallya
4.         Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
5.         Dr. K. Malaisamy
LOK SABHA
6.         Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
Secretariat
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2      At the outset, the Convenor  welcomed the Members of the sub-Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up the following Reports  for its consideration:-
 
161
st Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132nd Report on MoU
Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.
162
nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146th Report on Credit Flow
to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.
163
rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147th Report on Credit Flow
to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar.
164
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150th Report on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
165
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 151st  Report on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
166
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee’s 152nd Report on Demands
for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
th rd

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
167  Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee’s 153   Report on Demands
for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale  Industries.
 
4.The  Sub-Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted these Reports and decided to place these reports before the main committee
for consideration and adoption.
5.The  Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.
New Delhi       
3rd May, 2005.
  K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
XIV
Fourteenth Meeting
***
 
The Committee met at 5.00 pm on Tuesday, the 3rd May, 2005 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, PHA, New Delhi.
PRESENT
            Shri Santosh  Bagrodia -- Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
2.         Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.         Dr. K. Malaisamy
4.         Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
5.         Dr. Vijay Mallya
6.         Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
            LOK SABHA
8.         Shri Guharam Ajgalle
9.         Shri Kailash Baitha
10.       Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
11.       Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
12        Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
13.       Shri Rajnarayan
14.       Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
 
Secretariat
 
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
2      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up the following Reports  for its consideration:-
 
161
st Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 132nd Report on MoU
Performance in respect of Select Public Sector Undertakings.
162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 146th Report on Credit Flow
to SSI Sector in Maharashtra.
163
rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 147th Report on Credit Flow
to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahar.
164
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 150th Report on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
165
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations contained in the Committee’s 151st  Report on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
166
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee’s 152nd Report on Demands
for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
167
th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee’s 153rd  Report on Demands
for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale  Industries.
168
th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
169
th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).

167thReport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/167threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:51:30]
170th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
171st Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
4.The Committee decided to present these reports in the current session  After a brief discussion the Report were adopted.
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Shri  K. Malaisamy to present the Reports to the Rajya
Sabha.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel  and in his absence Shri Rajnarayan to lay the copies the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
6.
                  The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.
                                                           
New Delhi       
3rd May, 2005.
  K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 
                                   
 