PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
                                                                                             
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
ONE HUNDRED – THIRTIETH   REPORT 
  
ON 
  
CREDIT FLOW TO SSI SECTOR IN HIMACHAL PRADESH 
  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON., , 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON.,  2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI, 2003/AGRAHAYANA, 1924  (SAKA) 
  
  
           
C O N T E N T S 
  
                                                                                                                                           
1.            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                  
2.            COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE                                                 
2.            INTRODUCTION                                                                                                  
3.            REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                
4.            OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS                                                       OF THE 
COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE                                                                       
5.            MINUTES                                                                                                                 
                         
  
  
  
  
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE  
  
              1.            Dr. P.C. Alexander            —Chairman 
                        
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot 
4.      Dr. M.N. Das 
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey 
6.      Shri Faguni Ram 
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai 
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
Page 1 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi 
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee  
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20.  Shri K Francis George  
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
23.  Shri A.C. Jose 
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
26.  Shri Sunil Khan 
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
28.  Shri Manjay Lal 
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
30.  Shri A. Narendra 
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
35.  Shri P. Rajendran 
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu 
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh 
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan 
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
44.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary 
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary 
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
  
Page 2 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

SUB-COMMITTEE-II
MINISTRY OF  SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES OF THE PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
  
Prof. M.M. Agarwal             —            Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Dr. Faguni Ram 
3.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
LOK SABHA 
  
4.      Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
5.       Md. Anwarul Haque 
6.      Shri  Dayabhai V. Patel 
7.      Shri  P. Rajendran 
8.      Kunwar  Sarv Raj Singh 
9.      Shri Ramanand Singh 
10.  Shri Sunil Khan 
11.  Shri K.Malaisamy 
  
  
I N T R O D U C T I ON 
  
  
  
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having  
been authorised  by the Committee,  hereby present this One Hundred Thirtieth   Report on the ‘‘Credit 
Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of  Himachal Pradesh”. 
  
2.         The Committee   heard the oral evidence  of  representatives of SS I Associations and  leading 
banks in  Himachal Pradesh on 20th  and  21st  June, 2003. 
  
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  ..............., 2003 considered and adopted the Report.  
  
  
  
NEW DELHI; 
, 2003 
        DR.P.C.ALEXANDER
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry
Page 3 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

  
  
REPORT  
CHAPTER-I 
I.            BACKGROUND OF HIMACHAL PRADESH AS AN INVESTMENT            
DESTINATION 
1.1       The State of Himachal Pradesh represen ts the challenge for the po licy makers because of its
topography and geographical location.  The Committee felt that a diff erent approach would be required
to bring about the process of industrialization in a State like Himachal Prades h.  In this context the
Committee decided to undertake study visit to Shimla so  as to interact with th e representatives of the
State Government of Himachal Prad esh, representatives of various indus trial organizations in the State
and the facilitators in the form of banks who provide the ba sic catalytic factors in  the form of credit,
which is the lifeline of industry.  The Committee undertook its visit   from 19th to 22nd June,  2003. 
1.2       A brief   background of the uniqueness th at Himachal Pradesh  as a State offers is being
highlighted in the following paragraphs. 
1.3    Nestling in the lap of the magnificent Himalayas, the State of  Himachal Pradesh  comprises o f
diverse terrain ranging from plains , sub-mountain areas to higher range s, leading to varied climatic 
zones. This diversity has endowed the State with attractive resource  parameters and production factors
awaiting eco-friendly exploitation thr ough a spirit of enterprise, innovati ve abilities, energy and skills. 
The State has excellent potential fo r setting up industrial projects, wher e it has advantag es like clean
environment, cordial industrial relations,  availability of power and rapidly developing  
infrastructure. Due to its close proximity to the i ndustrialised belts and mark ets in the high per capita
income States like Punjab, Haryan a and Delhi, the State presents attractive and in some ways unique
investment opportunities for industries. 
1.4            Industrialisation is an index of economic pr ogress. Industrialisation in Himachal Pradesh is a
comparatively recent phenomenon. From  relatively backward and pre-dom inantly agricultural State at 
the time of attaining Stat ehood in '1971, it has steadily progresse d  establishing more than 170 medium
and large scale units covering a wide spectrum of industries and about 27000 small scale industrial units
involving a total investment of  Rs.2550 crores and providing direct  employment to 1.40 lakh persons.
The industrialization in the State has now achieved the take off stag e with well diversified base o f
industries ranging from traditional handicrafts and handlooms in cottag e, tiny and small scale sector to
high-tech textile units, te lecommunication equipment, sophisticated electronics gadgets, cement, paper, 
basic chemicals, drugs and pharm aceuticals, food proce ssing, engineering and hi gh quality, precision
tools, besides breweries, distilleries and mineral water units. 
1.5       Today the industrial sector is contribut ing nearly 10 percent to the State Domestic Product
Page 4 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

(SDP). The annual turnover of the industrial sect or is approximately Rs.4000 crores. The per capita
industrial investment of Himachal Pradesh is one of the highest in the country .The sector is consuming
about 60% of the total cons umption of electricity in the State a nd is contributing significantly to the
State exchequer in the form of taxes and levies and more than Rs.500 crores  towards Central Excise
duty.  The total export from the State has steadily grown and now amounts to over Rs.300 crores. 
1.6       The Committee found  that due to geographical factors the industrialization is concentrated in the
border  areas and gateways of Hima chal Pradesh ; Paonta Sahib- Kala  Amb- Parwanoo- IV Barotiwala-
baddi-Nalagarh.  Inspite of the best  efforts, other areas of  the State have been relatively unaffected by 
the process of industrial development. 
1.7       The Committee during the course of its inter action  felt that the existi ng infrastructure facilities
are inadequate to meet the require ment of new investment. Therefore,  it requires signi ficant effort to
improve the  infrastructure. Further lack of social infrastructure has led to the concept of absenteeism o f
proprietors as many of the promoter s of units in the border areas are living in the adjoining States, o r
even in Delhi. 
 1.8      The Committee also felt that non-Gove rnment organisations, wh ich are engaged in the
promotion of industries, will have to play a more significant role in the indus trialization of the State
keeping in mind the socio-economic  policies of the Government. Th eir objectives and functioning will
need to be re-oriented in this direction. The industrial units will have to play an increasing role in proper 
maintenance of the surroundings in  which they work, establishing common services and looking afte r
the social needs of the industrial workers. 
1.9       The Committee also saw that human res ource development f acilities particularly in vocational
and technical education for Him achal Pradesh are not adequate. In this regard both the State
 Government and the industr y will need to join hands for struct uring training  programmes. These will
have to be in relevant areas such as textile i ndustry. If need be, one could also consider setting up
“specialised " institutions in thes e areas if these will help in furt her employment and industrialization of
the State. 
2.0       The Committee observed that the entire Stat e is industrially backward except some development
on the periphery of the State. The State has been classified into two cate gories namely "industrially
developing areas" and "industrially  backward areas". The development blocks of Paonta Sahib and
Nahan in district Sirmour and Nalagarh, Dharampur  Solan in district Solan, excluding backward
panchayats as notified by the Planni ng Department of Government of  Himachal PradeshPradesh from
time to time fall in the categor y of "industrially developing areas".  The Committee was apprised that 
the rest of the State including back ward panchayats in the industria lly developing areas  are in the
category of "industrially backward areas". The Committee found out that there is a need to give an over-
riding incentives in industrially b ackward areas. A special package of  incentives is required for fruit,
vegetable,  maize based uni ts consuming locally ava ilable raw material. In ad dition, emphasis is also to
Page 5 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

be given to thrust areas including 100% EOU's and investment by NRIs, which have been identified and
classified as priority, sector. Relatively higher incentives and support are planned to the units in cottage,
tiny small sector particularly in i ndustrially backward areas and in prio rity sector. For the units in large 
and medium scale sector more emphasi s is laid for providing better infr astructure. In order to accelerate
and facilitate industrialization, clearances required for setting up of units in industrially developed  areas
shall be specially dealt on fast tr ack basis. The Committee also observ ed that Income Tax holiday and
that Central Transport Subsidy Sc heme, the two major central incenti ves have helped the growth o f
industries in the State.  The Commit tee also felt that the Government  of India should be approached to
extend these incentives. The Committee was informed  that it will be the endeavour of the State
Government to continue to request  and persuade the management of  companies to open/transfer thei r
registered offices within the State of Himachal Pradesh.  
2.1       On the basis of the experience that the Co mmittee has had during the course of  its various visits
and interaction  it has come to the conclusion that infrastructure is the most essential requirement fo r
entrepreneurs. The Committee felt th at  the promotion of the existi ng industrial corridors of Baddi,
Barotiwala, Nalagarh, Parwanoo, Solan, Shogi, Paont a Sahib, Kala Amb  etc. would be required and
more industrial areas need to be set up in future to meet the needs of industrialisation in different regions
of the State.  
2.2       The Committee observed that  special empha sis needs to be paid to the Baddi-Barotiwala region 
to develop it into a major industrial township in the State.   The role of the private sector in
infrastructure development and its maintenance needs to be emphasized.  Privatization of industrial areas
for creation of infrastructure including social in frastructure needs to be considered for rapid
industrialization.  
2.3       The Committee was also informed that the State is comm itted to exploiti ng its vast powe r
potential. Besides a number of am bitious schemes are already unde r implementation. Recognising the
importance of this sector for industry the Government has furt her taken note of  two important
requirements i.e. quality of power to sustain high technology industry and a power tariff structure which
is so planned that the entrepreneurs can foresee its impact in the competitive manufacture and marketing
of their products. 
2.4       The Committee observed that Himachal Pradesh due to its location and geo-climatic conditions 
has certain positive assets for certain industries. Th ese are based on considerat ions like available human
resource, natural resources, locally available raw ma terials, fauna and flora.  Agro-horticulture produce 
based industries, including food pro cessing and mineral water bottling c ould be some of the areas. The
Committee felt that  it should be  the endeavour of the State Gove rnment to encourage post harvest
technologies including setting up of cold storages and establishing of  cold chains. The State needs to
identify national and internationa l markets including adva nced technologies in food processing. Herbs
and aromatic based industries because of the geo-climatic zone provide a another unique opportunity for 
Page 6 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

the entrepreneur. Sericulture based activities also have a tremendous scope for further development. 
2.5       The Committee also f eels that Industries in high technology areas where there is a large value
addition with low volumes of raw materials involved, are particularly suited for the State and need to be
included in priority sector. These industries involve smaller trans portation and  volumes of both raw
materials and finished products, which can become a bottleneck in the mountains. With the advancement
of technology today, the Committee was appreciative of the fact that th e State is very fortunate to have
one of the best communication networks. 
2.6              The Committee was of the opinion that the importa nce of the cottage and tiny industrial sectors 
for Himachal Pradesh  needs to be emphasised. It holds the key to large scale employment and
generation of economic activities in  remote areas. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance the opportunities
of employment and income in such activities. The traditional skills and  cultural heritage associated with
production in this sector will need to be preserved. 
2.7              The Committee feels that industr ialisation in Himachal Prades h has been concentrated around 
few districts and a large area of the State rema ins unaffected by industr ialisation. The Committee
recommends that new areas be developed and the process of Industrialisation spread in a manner so as to
benefit the State as a whole. 
2.8              The Committee observed that huma n resource development facilities  particularly in vocational 
technical education are not adequa te in Himachal Pradesh. The Co mmittee recommends that the local
industry and State Government shoul d join hands to restructure trai ning programmes so as to provide
employment to the youth. 
2.9              The Committee observed that the entire State is industrially backward except some development
on the periphery of the State.  The Committee feels that  there is a need to give  over-riding incentives in 
industrially backward areas. A speci al package of incentives is requi red for fruit, vegetable and maize
based units consuming locally available raw material. In  addition, emphasis is also  to be given to thrust
areas including 100% EOU's. For the units in large and medium scale se ctor more emphasis is  required
to be laid for providing better in frastructure. In order to accelerate and facili tate industrialization,
clearances required for setting up of  units in industrially developed areas shall be specially dealt on fast
track basis. The Committee also observed that Inco me Tax holiday and that Central Transport Subsidy
Scheme, the two major cent ral incentives have helped the growth  of industries in the State. The
Committee also felt that the Government of India should be approached to extend these incentives. 
2.10          The Committee was  informed that the State is committed to exploiting its vast power potential. 
Besides a number of ambitious sc hemes are already under implemen tation. The Committee recognizes
the importance of this sector for industry and recommends that the State Government should take note of
two important requirements i.e. qua lity of power to sustain high te chnology industry and a power tarif f
structure which is  so planned  that theentrepreneurs can foresee its impact in the competitive
manufacture and marketing of their products.  
Page 7 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

2.11     The Committee also feels that Himachal Pradesh requires Industrie s in high technology areas
where there is a large value addition with low vol umes of raw materials involved. These industries
involve smaller transportation and  volumes of both raw materials a nd finished products.  With the
advancement of technology today, th e Committee was appreciative of th e fact that the State is very
fortunate to have one of the be st communication networks. The Co mmittee strongly recommends that
the State Government should take every step possible to attract such industries in the State. 
INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS: 
2.12     During the course of interaction with the State Government offi cials the Committee was
informed about the incentives and concessions to the industrial units subject to their eligibility as under:
- 
  
SALES TAX CONCESSIONS : 
2.13     Village Industries/Tiny units :  New village industrie s with fixed capital investment upto Rs.l 
lakhs shall be exempted from payment of sales tax for a period of 8 years in industrially backward areas
and in priority sector, a nd for a period of 5 years for units in i ndustrially developing areas. In respect o
f
other new village industries and tiny units, sales tax shall be leviable at a concessional rate of 25% of the
applicable rate on the sale of pr oducts upto Rs.60 lakhs per annum for a period of 8 years in industrially
backward areas and in priority sector; and up to sales turn over of Rs. 45 lakhs per annum for a period of
5 years in industrially developi ng areas. This concession will not be admissible to the produce o f
breweries/distilleries, non-fruit vege table based wineries and bottling   plants (both for Country Liquo r 
and Indian Made Foreign Liquor).  
POWER  CONCESSIONS  
2.14     The Committee was also in formed that  new indus trial unit(s) in prio rity sector shall be
exempted from payment of electricity duty for a period of 8 years in the industrially backward areas and
for 5 years in industrially developi ng areas. The existing unit(s) availi ng this incentive shall continue to
avail the same under the previous rules for the un expired period of its/their eligibility. 
INTEREST SUBSIDY 
2.15     The officials also apprised the Committee that subsi dy in the rate of interest on term loan taken
by tiny and SSI units from financial institution(s) shall be  given @ 4% subject to a ceiling of Rs.2.00
lakh per unit per year for pr iority sector units set up in industria lly backward areas for a period of 6
years provided that the unit pays a minimum of 8% interest after availing interest subsidy. In case rate of
interest after subsidy falls below 8%, the rate of subsidy shall be reduced accordingly. This concession
shall also be admissible on term lo an taken from financial institution for expansion/ diversification. The
subsidy shall be disbursed throug h the concerned financial instit ution. This subsidy shall not be
Page 8 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

admissible on defaulte d/rescheduled installment(s) and the period of default sh all be counted fo r
determining the period of eligibility. 
  
CAPITAL INVESTMENT SUBSIDY 
2.16.    The Committee was also info rmed that tiny units in  priority sector and coming into commercial
production after the appointed date in industrially backward  areas shall be given a capital investment
subsidy @ 10% of fixed cap ital investment subject to a ceiling of Rs.2.5 lakhs per unit. This subsidy
will be admissible on the creation of new assets only. The erstwhil e C.I.S. Manual shall govern the
sanction/ disbursement. 
SCHEME FOR SICK UNITS: 
2.17     The Committee was apprised th at the Department of Industries will provide an interest rebate o
f
4% on any additional loan involved in the reviva l proposal to be administered through financial
institution(s) during the nursing peri od as specified in the rehabilita tion plan. This reimbursement will
be made to the financial institution and subject to a ceiling of Rs.1.00  lakh spread over a period of three
years on a declaration that no penal interest has been charged from the 'unit in question during the period
for which the claims are made.  
2.18     The Committee strongly recommends con cessions to industry in the form of sales tax
concessions, power tariff, in terest subsidy and capital investment subsidy need to be continued over a
long term period. The Committee is of the opinion that once industrial growth takes place the State will
be able to generate revenue and cover up short term losses if any.  
INTERACTION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT 
2.19     The Committee sought to know  the reasons  for the big difference  between the minimum wages
of unskilled labour with those for skilled labour. 
            The representatives of State Governme nt replied that the department  does not agree that there is
a big difference  between the minimum wages of unskilled worker and those of skilled labour.  The State
Government of  Himachal Prades h has fixed minimum  wages  in  24 Scheduled Employments.  The
minimum wages are fixed by the Stat e Government  on the advice of  State  Minimum Wages  Advisory
Board, as per procedure  laid down under Section-5 of the Min imum wages Act, 1948.  The State 
Minimum Wages  Advisory Board represents empl oyers , who are in equa l number and independent
persons and exceeding one third  of the total num ber of members of the Board.  The Government
appoints one of such independent pe rson as Chairman as  per the c onstitution of the board laid down 
under Section 9  of the said Act. 
2.20     The Committee asked that  whether the st ringent labour laws are coming in the way of the
growth of the industrial  sector and what  steps  has been ta ken to make  labour law more or more
Page 9 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

simple.    
2.21     The representatives of th e State Government informed the Committee that the labour  laws 
prescribe the  barest  minimum stat utory benefits to the workers and the legal protection to the workers 
necessarily required for ensuring economic and social just ice to maintain the  dignity of labour .  In the
name of  industrial growth , the exploitation of weaker section of working class can not be allowed and  
if  the association of SSI submit  any proposal for any si mplification of the labour laws, this  shall be
considered by Labour and Employment Department  of the State Government. 
2.22     During the course of interaction the Committe e raised a query on the  shortage of power  and the
steps  taken to provide  the required power supply to Small Scale Industries.  
2.23     The Committee  was informed that  the De partment is placing adequate  funds with H.P. State 
Electricity Board (HPSEB) for installing transfor mers, laying transmissions lines exclusively fo r
supplying  a sufficient  power to   the SSI units .  The Department  has   placed an amount of ove r
Rs.10.00 crores to the Board for providing  and augmenting the power supply. 
 2.24    The Committee drew the   attention of the officials to the pr oblems being faced by Industries fo r
easy transit of goods from one place to another. 
 2.25    The representatives of the State Government informed that there were only 4 National High ways
till  1999 in the State. Now th ere are 8 National Highw ays with a length of about 1250 kms. The
Department is regularly providing adequate funds for the mainte nance and improvement of roads within
the Industrial and Estates to developing Agencies like H.P. State Industrial Development Corporation
and Industrial Area Development Ag encies.  An   amount  of Rs .400 lakhs been provided to State
Industrial Development Corporation for the upgradation of road infrastructure  for  exporting units in the
Baddi-Barotiwala region.  Government  of Indi a under its Transport Subs idy Scheme has been 
reimbursing the cost of transportation to and from factory  site to nearest  rail head to  the  extent of 75%
to further offset the locational disadvantages which the industry is facing in H.P. 
2.26     The Committee enquired into the reasons for the  uneven development of industrial clusters in
the State. The Committee was informed that the Small Scale Indus tries in Himachal Pradesh have
developed in almost all the districts of the Stat e where large industries could not come up due to
problem of transportation of  raw material and marketi ng of finished products.  In  certain areas  the
small scale industry is also working  as ancillary units for big  industries  in the  industrial   belts of the
Pradesh.  Small Scale  Industries  units working in local as well as   industrial areas have  provided
employment  opportunities  to the local residents in the State.   
2.27     The Committee was of the opinion that in the development of “Tiny”  “Small” “Ancillary”, 
Medium, and “Large” industries the ro le of power ava ilability is of paramount importance.  Without  
reliable and  uninterrupted power  supply, these units cannot surviv e. The Committee desired to know
what steps have been taken to pr ovide quality power at reasonable rates to the industrial units. The
Page 10 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

representatives of the  Himachal Pradesh Government informed that the following steps have been taken
in this regard:- 
(i)                  New Industrial Units in priority sector shall be exempted from payment of electricity duty
for a period of 8 years in the industrially backward  areas and for 5 years in industrially
developing areas.  Period of  this concessions will commence from the date o f
commencement of commercial production or from the date of notification of Department of
MPP and Power, whichever is la ter.  The existing units(s)  availing this incentive shall
continue to  avail the same under the previous rules for th e un-expired period of its/thei r
eligibility. 
(ii)                The existing eligibility  units availing pow er tariff freeze subject to their continuing
eligibility under the previously a pplicable rules shall continue to avail  the  concessions as
per those rules. 
(iii)               No electricity duty will be charged  from any industrial unit new or existing on the power
generated from its captive power generation set (s)/hydel plants (s). 
(iv)              The industrial units employing at  least  50 workers  may be permitted on case to case  
basis to build residential complexes for industr ial workers within the campus .  The rate o f
power tariff to such residentia l complexes both new and existi ng shall be as applicable to
domestic consumers. 
2.28     It was further brought to the notice of the  Committee that the electricity tariff for industrial units
in Himachal Pradesh  is the  lowest in the countr y.  The Industries are being  provided with reliable
power supply whereas in ot her parts of the  country  power cuts   are frequently imposed.   However,
certain peak load  hour re strictions have been impos ed on the industrial consum ers.   These restrictions
can be exempted for  any special r easons for  which the industrial cons umers have  to take   separate
sanction of the Board  with  certain conditions. 
2.29     The Committee also interacted with the  of ficials of Himachal Prades h State Electricity Board 
(HPSEB) and asked them to submit their comments. The representatives of HPSEB informed that there
is no power cut in Himachal Pradesh to provide  electricity to Small Scale Industries. 
2.30            However power restrictions are ap plied to industrial units duri ng peak load hours which can
be relaxed by the Board with certain conditions. 
2.31     As regards grievances of industrial cons umers, Board  has consti tuted Dispute Settlement
Committees and their grievances are redressed within  a  period of three months.  These Committees  are
functioning at Circle,  Zonal and Board level.  Ther e  is also provision to file appeal against the
judgements of any of the Committees to the next Higher Committee.  Th us, it will be seen that  HPSEB
is taking interest in setting the disputes of the industrial units promptly. 
  
Page 11 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

2.32     As regards other field prob lems.  The Board/field Officers ma ke frequent visits to industrial
areas so as to redress their problems at  site or through immediate follow  up action. 
2.33     The Committee during the course of its inter action felt that the late payment of dues to SSIs by
large   industries is one of the major reasons for si ckness of industries and de sired to know whether any
legislation will be mooted for stringent action. 
2.34     The State Government officials informed that the Central Government  has already enacted “The 
Interest on Delayed Payments to Sm all  Scale  and Ancillary Undertak ings Act, 1993”  and amended in 
1998.  Under section 7A of  the  Act  Industry Fa cilitation Council was not ified in the State on
11.12.98.   Two cases of delayed payments came before the Industry Facilitation Council.  One case has
been settled and the second case is st ill  pending.  Hence it is  evident that paymen t of dues of SSIs by
large industries is not  the major reason of the sickness of industry in Himachal Pradesh. 
2.35     The Committee desired to know about the incentives that had been given by the State
Government with the specific ai m of encouraging the SSI sector. The Committee was informed of the
following steps:-  
(a)    Sales tax exemption/concession/de ferment for 5/8 years in Indu strially Developing Areas and 
Industrially Backward Areas respectively; 
(b)   1% CST upto 31-03-2009; 
(c)    1% GST on raw material upto 31-03-2009; 
(d)   Exemption from payment of Electricity duty for 5/8 years; 
(e)    50% Subsidy on cost of preparation of feasibility reports; 
(f)     4% Interest Subsidy to tiny and small-scale units in priority sector; 
(g)    10% Capital Investment Subsidy in priority sector; 
(h)    Subsidized land/shed in industrial backward areas; 
(i)      Price preference for local units upto 15% to tiny/small scale industrial sector; 
(j)     Special package of incentives to Fruit-Vegetable and Maize based units in Backward Areas; and 
(k)   No tax in Tax Free Zone for a period of 10 years. 
2.36     The Committee is of the opinion that adequate funds be provided to the power sector in the State
so as to upgrade the power infrastructure. The Committee feels that roads are the arteries of a State and a
good road network will go a long way in bringing about prosperi ty. The Committee is appreciative o f
the efforts made in this regard and hopes that the State Government will continue and augment its wor k
in this area. 
2.37     Uneven industrial growth is a characteristi c of Himachal Pradesh. The Committee is of the
Page 12 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

opinion that State intervention is the only remedy to rectify this anomaly. Therefore,  Committee
recommends that steps be taken to  address this issue on a priority basis and new indus trial clusters be
developed in the State. 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INCENTIVES: 
2.38     The Central Government has announced a package of incentives to  industries in Himachal
Pradesh. The package was notified on 7.11.2003 by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion(DIPP). According to the package, new industrial units
and existing industrial uni ts on their substantial expansion as  defined, set up in Growth Centres,
Industrial Infrastructure Developm ent Centres (1IDCs), Industrial ES tates, Export Processing Zones,
Theme Parks (Food Processing Parks, Software Tec hnology Parks, etc.) and other areas are notified
from time to time by the Central Government, are entitled to:  
(a)    100% (hundred percent) outright excise duty exemption for a pe riod of 10 year from the date o f
commencement of commercial production. 
  
(b)   100% income tax exemption for initial period of five years and thereaft er 30% for companies
and 25% for other than companies for a further period of five years to  the entire States o f
Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh from the date of commencement  of commercial production.  
  
(c)    All New industries in the notifie d location would be eligible fo r capital investment subsidy @
15% of their investment in plant and machinery,  subject to a ceiling of Rs.30 lakh. The existing
units will also be entitled to this subsidy on their substantial expansion, as defined- 
(d)   Thrust Sector Industries are entitled to similar concessions as mentioned in para 3(a) and (b)
above in the entire State of Himachal Pradesh  without any area restrictions. 
(e)    Central Transport Subsidy up to 2007 on transportati on of raw material fr om the nearest Rail 
Head to factory site and for transportation of finished goods up to the 
      nearest Rail head. 
2.39     The Committee is of the opinion that the incentives granted by the Central Government are yet to
take off at the grou nd level and have not managed to translate into higher indus trial growth in the State.
The Committee though appreciative of  the incentives, recommends that a analysis be done on thei r
impact and necessary steps be taken to implement them at the ground level. 
SICKNESS IN INDUSTRIAL SECTOR: 
2.40     The Committee desired to  know whether any survey had been  done to assess sickness in SSI
sector. The Committee was in formed that no survey with regard to the total number of sick units in the
Page 13 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

State has yet been done. However, there are 372 units, which are sick and are in the portfolio of H.P.
Financial Corporation (HPFC) as on 31-01-2002. Out of 551 units finan ced by the H.P. State Industrial
Development Corporation, 95 units have  been identified as sick.  Be sides this, there are 683 SSI units,
which are sick as on- 30-09-2001 as  per the information gi ven by the Reserve Bank of India out of the 
units financed by the banks. These 683 sick units are financed by- 15 banks. 
2.41     The Committee  feels that a survey of the exte nt of industrial sickness with reference to the SSI
sector would enable the State Government to obtain valuable insights and to accordingly take remedial
measures. 
NASSCOM'S PROJECTIONS 
2.42     With a coordinated action plan by the G overnment and Industry, NA SSCOM has projected that
the IT software and services industr y in the State of Himachal Prades h grow at an accelerated pace to
achieve an annual revenue of Rs.20,000 crore (US$ 4.7 billion) by year 2009-10, which could be as 
much as 4-5% of the projected tur nover of US$ 100 billion of the Indian software and services industry
in that year.  
2.43     Out of the Rs.20,000 crore of projected reve nue from IT software and services industry fo r
Himachal Pradesh in 2009-10,  it is  expected that Rs.14,000 crore wi ll come from exports and Rs.6,000
crore from the domestic market. The break-up is projected as follows: 
2.44          The break-up of Domestic market of I.T. software and services is estimated as: 
( Rs. in crore) 
  
Exports from H.P . Pro jections 2009-10
IT Enabled Services Rs. 5,500 crore
Software Products Rs. 500 crore 
E-Business Rs.3,000 crore 
IT Services Rs. 5, 000 crore 
Domestic Market Projections 2009-10
IT Enabled Services  2,000  
Software Products 500  
E-Business 15,00  
IT Services  2, 000 c 
Page 14 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

2.45     It is quite evident from the above figures th at IT Enabled Services is a key area for development
of IT industry in Himachal Prades h. This is also likely to emerge  as an USP for the State. The
opportunities in the other IT related activities are also projected to be significant. 
2.46     All promotional and liberalized  policy instruments available to the IT Software and IT services  
shall be made available to the IT enabled Services including the Information Content Industry. 
2.47            Ministry of SSI in consultati on with the Small Industries  Development Bank of India
(SIDBI) has formulated a Credit  Guarantee Fund Scheme for Smal l Industries for Guaranteeing the
loans and advances upto Rs.25.00 la kh extended by the scheduled comm ercial Banks a nd the selected
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), without collateral a nd/or third party guarantee.  To operationalise the
guarantee scheme, the Government of India and SIDBI have set up a Credit Guarantee Fund Trust fo r
Small Industries (CGTSI). Banks in Himachal Pradesh also  become an  eligible institution for availing
of guarantee facility, by execu ting an undertaking on 16.2.2000. The bran ches have been advised to
cover the eligible borrowers under the said scheme. The cover available under the said scheme shall
enable the branches to market fresh advances to the SSI Sector . 
2.48     The Committee is of the opinion that se tting up of IT based industries can go a long way in
bringing industrial growth in the ar ea as IT based industries are not severely affected by infrastructure
limitations and the excellent communication and power infrastructure in the State can be put to optimum
use. The Committee however is not pleased with the steps taken by th e State Government in attracting
IT industries to the State. The Commi ttee feels that if the State Govern ment takes a active role the State
can become a success story in the IT sector and can develop as an  alternative after Bangalore and
Hyderabad in providing world class IT services. The Committee recommends that the State Government
should not delay further and pursue single-mindedly the agenda of attracting  IT based companies to the
State. 
  
CHAPTER-II 
(II)   INTERACTION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE INDUSTRY             
ORGANISATIONS 
  
3.0       The Committee held an intensive interac tive session with the various industrial organizations 
and asked them to present their vi ews on bringing about the process of  industrialization in the State.
Some of the organizations that were  present were:- 
1.      Kangra Region Udyog Association; 
2.      Himachal Pradesh Chamber of Commerce and Industry; 
3.      Laghu Udyog Bharat, Baddi, District  Solan; 
Page 15 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

4.      Parwanoo; Industries Association; 
5.      District Industries Association, Una 
6.      Udyog Vikas Sangh, Mehatpur, District  
7.      Tahliwal Industries Association, Una, District Una; 
8.      Baddi-Barotiwala-Nalagarh Industries Association; 
9.      Laghu Udyog Bharti, Solan, District Solan 
10.  M/Mehta; Bishan Das and Associates;  Fruit Processing Plant, Mahesh Nagar, Una; 
11.  M/s Puri Oil Mills Ltd. Sujanpur, District Kangra. 
12.  Mehatpur Industries  Association,  Mehatpur, Una 
  
3.1       On the basis of the inter action with the industrial  associations few significant   areas of concern
were noted by the Committee. These areas were stressed upon by the above organizations in one form or
another and the Committee felt that they need to be spelt out so as  some concrete action is taken to
hasten the process of developmen t of the Small and tiny Sector in  Himachal Pradesh. The important
areas of concern were highlighted as under:- 
3.2       The   industrial areas have  no proper facili ty of cellular  services of  BSNL  or any other cellula r
company, the   services  of Land Line Phone is al so very poor and  unpredic table .  The industrial 
organizations wanted the  BSNL  au thorities to provide to them  pr oper  Cellular and Land Line facility
which will be of great help to  the entrepreneurs. 
3.3       The Committee was of the opinion that th is sounds like a paradox as in one context Himachal
Pradesh is cited as a successful case study for  the impact of telecom reforms and in another context, the
industrial  associations are not ha ppy with the State of affairs. The Committee recommends that these
issues should be taken up with the telecom authorities like BSNL so that cheap, efficient and world class
telecom facility is made availabl e to all industrial zones in Himach al Pradesh and also BSNL should be
strengthened for strengthening telecommunication network. 
3.4       The RBI has clearly  Stated that, the  nationalized banks should not ask for additional/collateral
security for a loan upto  15 lakh.  But, the banks and  Corporations insist strongly for collateral security
in  addition even from the  tec hnically qualified but economically weaker entrepreneurs besides the first
or  second charge of the  concer n, which pose a great  difficulty to   genuine entrep reneurs who are
unable  to provide additional security as per their wishes. 
3.5       The Committee is distressed to note that the issue of collateral security has not been resolved and
Page 16 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

entrepreneurs are facing problems in getting loans from Banks. Th e Committee took up the issue with
the banks and was informed that collateral security was not insisted upon  
  
HIGHER FREIGHT CHARGES 
3.6       HP is a State where most of the small scale industries  exist which are dependent upon the truc k
union and other  transport companies which are charging exorbitant frei ght charges as compared to the
freight from the neighbouring States.  Therefore,  it  becomes hi ghly difficulty to compete with othe r
States.  This is  the reason Hima chal Pradesh Industry is not flouris hing. .  The Truck Unions operating
in the State of Himachal Pr adesh are charging double the amou nt on outgoing products/material
compared to the charges per truck on incoming material as such, this should be resolved. 
3.7       The Committee observed that truck unions were very powerful  in th e State and are holding the
entrepreneurs to ransom. The situatio n in the State was such that an entrepreneur cannot even transport
his own factory produced goods in his own transport. The Committee feels that the situation is a serious
reflection on the State Government and urgent reme dial action is required to  ensure that the truc k
transport unions  does not continue to hold the entire Stat e industries to ransom . Cheap and efficient
transport will make the products competitive and for this the Stat e Government should take steps to
facilitate the transport of goods. The State Government   may also review  the entry tax rates with a new
to reduce its  impact on freight  ch arges.  The Government  of India may also consider  exemption of 
export tax on the  goods produced in the  State. The Committee feels that lack of political will is a major
reason for this sorry State of affairs and hopes something concrete would be done to provide relief to the
entrepreneurs. 
  
  
COMPENSATION TO THE POLYTHENE BAGS UNITS  BASED ON RE-CYCLING 
3.8       The re -cycling of polythene bags were banne d by the Government w.e.f.  1.1.1999, but 
compensation whatsoever committed by the Government has not been paid to the affected units.  Thus,
they are under heavy liabilities .  Himachal Pradesh Governme nt may consider their cases
sympathetically, so that they may clear their   pending liabilities. 
3.9       The Committee is appreci ative of the fact that ecological conservation is an essential issue and
ban  on polythene bags would go a long way in  preserving the ecological balance of  the State.  
However, the Committee feels that the  SSI entrepreneurs who had set up polythene bag units need to be
compensated so that they can set up alternative means of livelihood.  The  State Government should
Page 17 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

make  the  necessary financial compensation in the interest of  the SSI sector in the State. 
3.10            Procedure for availing financial assistance should be made simple.   
3.11     The H.P .S.E.B is charging from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.50,000/- for new connection in industrial area 
and it takes five to seven months to get the connection as such, this problem should be solved
immediately. The electricity tariff should be brought down to enable  the Himachal Pradesh Industry to
compete in the market.  
ROAD TAX  
3.12     The State Government charges road tax @ Rs.5 to Rs.10 per quintal depending upon the distance
traveled in H. P. and the fruits and vegetables purchased. This road tax should be abolished  on  the
goods  purchased for processing.   Restrictions under Water and Air Pollution C ontrol Acts place  fruits
and vegetables processing industry on the level of highly polluting industr ies such as oil, chemicals etc.
The Fruits and Vegetables Industries  should be treated as eco- friendly industry which otherwise help in 
reducing the pollution which could have been caused by rotting/spoila ge of non marketable surplus
fruits and vegetables. 3.13     Thus oil producing units  have to pay interest on very higher rate to. the
Banks to run the business. The marg in of profits are already negligib le due to excessive overheads and
cut throat competition .  It is very difficult to run the business smoothly by making pa yment of interest
and excessive bank draft commissi ons.  The industry must be provide d relaxation considerably in ban
k
rate of interest and draft commission charges.  More over, telegraphic transfer of funds without charging
any commission must be provide d to enable the industry to make payment to the suppliers
expeditiously.  
SPECIAL INCENTIVES TO HILLY, BACKWARD AND DIFFICULT STATE 
3.14     As it is well known fact that North- Eastern States comprising Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur,
Nagaland, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim and others like Andaman and Nicobar islands,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Jammu and Kashmir Jammu and Kashmir are backward in
industrialization as compared to ot her States of plain ar ea due to its own locat ional disadvantage,  poor
infrastructure, remote area, far from the market for finished goods and raw materials. 
3.15     To keep the phase of i ndustrialization of hilly,  backward and difficult States, Government o f
India should give special incentives to  these States.  The Special incentiv es are like low rate of interest
on term loan as well as working capital loans, Central Investment Subsidy.  Tax holidays, low rate o f
excise and taxes and preference  in government purchases.  Alt hough some incentives are announced by
the Government of India, but it is restricted to some areas whereas it should be allowed for the whole
State.  Further it should not be re stricted to some specified class of  industries but should be allowed to
each industry and the State shoul d have power to clear the indus try on account of environmental
problems.  
3.16     The Committee is appreciati ve of the fact that hill States  are treated differently as far as
Page 18 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

providing tax concession and othe r incentives required for bringing about rapid indus trial growth.
However, the Committee feels that the concession need  to be provided for a longer span of time and
Government should review and analyse the impact  of these  concession on a regular basis so as
necessary positive catalytic modification can be made from time to time.  
TRANSPORT SUBSIDY 
3.17     The Central Transport S ubsidy Scheme was introduced in the year 1971.  Under this scheme
75% freight from nearest rail head incurred on import of raw material from out side the State and export
of finished goods outside the St ate is reimbursed by the Central Government through  the State
Government  The scheme is applicable to No rth-Eastern States comp rising Assam, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Tripura, Arunach al Pradesh, Mizoram, Sikkim and other States of Andaman and
Nicobar islands, Himachal PradeshPradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttaranchal. 
3.18.    As already mentioned above under the scheme 75%  cost of freight incurred from the nearest rail
head by the unit on raw material brought in and finished goods e xported out  of the State was
reimbursed by the Central Govern ment through  the State Govern ment  Upto 01.04.1995, the subsidy
was available to all the units.  However, vide notification No.II (1)95-DBA/11 dated 29 th September, 
1995 Government of India has extended the scheme up to March 2000 but restricted the subsidy to only
those units which have not completed first five year of production on the date of notification. 
3.19     With this notification a discrimination has b een made against old units.  The old units will bea r
the high costs as compared to the new unit which bear lower costs.  As a result  the old unit will be out
of  competition.  This will badly affect the industrialization of the St ate as the units encounter both the
natural disadvantage of hilly and remote locations. 
3.20     The market of finished goods for industries in the State is not available within the State and units
have to compete with the units located in the developed States which have better facilities and are nearer
the market.   Further the raw materi al is also not available in the vi cinity resulting in higher cost o f
production to the industries located within the State. 
3.21     The industries in the remote areas are set up only on the basis of in centives available to the
industries.  These help them to compete with the i ndustries located in developed States which are nearer
the Market.  With the discontinuance of incentives like  transport/freight subsidy  it will not be possible
for the industries to compete with industries located in other States.  At present Rs. 30 crores in fixed
investment and Rs. 50 crores in working capital are financed by State Financial Institutions and Banks. 
With the shut down of industr ies this finance will become a bad debt  and the State will have to bear the
loss. 
3.22     The Committee is concerned to note the a nomalies  in the implemen tation of the transport
subsidy scheme. The Committee impress upon the Government to  review the September, 1995
Notification so as to avoid discri mination between the  old units and the new units for allocation o f
Page 19 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

transport subsidy. Hill States by vi rtue of the difficult terrain require  higher inputs in te rms of transport
costs vis-à-vis the industries situated in the plains .  The Committee strongly   recommends that all
industrial units should be  considered eligible for transport subsidy benefits. 
  
 EXCISE DUTY 
3.23     At present the  SSI units are allowed a basic exemption of Rs.50 la kh i.e. upto first 50 lakhs
clearances there is no duty payable by such units.  But this exemption will be available if the turnover of
SSI unit does not exceed Rs.300 lakh.  This limit of  Rs. 300 lakh is very low keeping in view the
investment limit increased by the Government of India.  Further such type of limits restricts the SSI unit
to keep its activity within the pr escribed limit and create a barrier in the developm ent of the SSI sector. 
So it is suggested that there should be no such limit for the SSI sector and such limit should be abolished
which will help the uninterrupted growth of SSI s ector and will also increase the revenue of the
Government Further, despite the exemption granted by the special Package announced by Hon’ ble 
Prime Minister which was made  effective from 17 th January 2003,the Excise a nd custom department 
has not issued any notification for exemption so far. 
3.24     The Committee feels that a review  of the upper limit of  Rs.3.0 crores for extending Excise Duty
Concessions needs to be done away with.  Beside s that, the  Committee feels that putting up an uppe r
limit  would act as an disincentive for the gr owth of SSI units. The Committee also strongly
recommends that the Government should take up the matter regarding the issue of notification as per the
special Package announced by Hon’ble Prime Minister with the concerned authorities. 
REHABILITATION OF SICK SSI UNITS 
3.25     The Kohli Committee was of the view that   “ It is important to take m easures to arrest sickness 
at the incipient stage itself.  The RBI has issued  guidelines on inci pient sickness, its detection and
follow-up  action  required by banks.  RBI has also circulat ed a list of warning signals of incipient
sickness   among banks.  Some of the major warning signals of incipient sickness are:- 
(i)
            Continuous irregularities in cas h credit/overdraft accounts such  as inability to maintain 
stipulated margin on continuous  basis or drawings frequently  exceeding sanctioned limits,
periodical interest  debited remaining unrealized; 
(ii)          Outstanding balance in cash credit accounts remaining continuously at the maximum; 
(iii)         Failure to make timely payment  of installments of principal and interest  on term loans; 
(iv)        Downward trend in credit summations; 
(v)          Frequent return of cheques   or bills; 
(vi)        Steep decline in production figures; 
(vii)       Downward trend in sales and  fall in profits; 
(viii)     Larger and longer outstanding in bill accounts;
Page 20 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

(ix)        Failure to pay statutory liabilities; and 
(x)          Utilization of funds for purpose other than running the units 
  
3.26     The Committee opines that the recommendations  of the  Kohli Committ ee  should be   strictly
followed by managements of the SS I units financed by banks should in form the banks when they face
problems which could lead to sickness.   The bran ch officials should also keep a close watch on the
operations in the account.  The as set classification system introduced  in banks will be useful fo r
detecting advances, which are deteri orating in quality well in time.  When an advance slips into the
category of sub-standard, as  per RBI norms, the branch  should make full enquiry   into the financial  
health of the unit, its operations, et c. and take remedial actions.  Such  an action will facilitate   the
branch  to  know whether there are si gns of incipient sickness in the un it so that timely help can reach
the unit.  The progress of the unit also should be  kept under close watch, a nd additional finance may be
provided.  If warranted, so as to bring back the units to health track.  Besides, the branch level officials
should also keep a watch on the unit when any of the warning signals of  incipient sickness circulated by
RBI is noticed .  They should help the  unit in sorting out difficulties  which are  non-financial in nature 
and require assistance from outsi de agencies like Government  departments/undertakings, Electricity
Boards, etc. 
BANKING AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
3.27     At present financial ins titutions are charging 1% upfront  fee on the loan amount sanctioned to
the unit.  These are charged as com mitment charges so that the loan may be availed.  This is very high
and an unnecessary burden to the industry and increase s its cost of project.  This should be abolished
and if charge, it should be charged as security and should be refunded to the unit after completion of the
project.  Further there should be no upfront fee for SSI Sector.  For this purpose the definition of SSI
should be the same  as given by the Government of India. 
3.28     The Banks are charging processing fee on the lo an proposal to the tune of 0.25% of the Working
Capital Limit sanctioned. These are charged every time either  it is a fresh proposal o r
enhancement/renewal of the existing proposal.  Thes e are very high charges,  which are an unnecessary
burden on the industry.  The concept behind these charges are given that  the  bank involve the cost to
process the application for the loan proposal.  But   it is a pure comm ercial terms and bank charge the
interest if it provides the loan and to again it put the burden of proce ssing cost to the borrowers and  full
processing charges  are paid at the time of renewal of limits every ye ar whether it is enhanced or not. 
This is an unnecessary burden on the industry as the limit ha ve to be renewed every year.  Further if it
has to be charged then there should be some upper ceiling i.e. 0.25% of the limit sanctioned o r
Rs.10000/- whichever is low and these should be char ged on the enhanced amo unt of the limit and not
on the renewal. 
3.29     The industry which is having ISO/9000, ISO/14000, ISI or Agmark specification for thei r
Page 21 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

product or service should be given special             incentives such as: 
(i)            Discount of 2% on the normal rate of interest or should be P.L.R. 
(ii)          Margin money against term loan as well as wo rking capital facilities should be kept low to 
the 10% against 25% in normal course as in case of S.B.I. for ISI bearing products fo r
working capital, the margin is 10%. 
(iii)         Industry which have already ISI/Agmark/ISO 9000/ISO14000 should be allowed to supply 
the goods to the Government  di rectly and there should not be condition with the supply that
a pre-inspection of the factory will be done before the supply of the order.  The unit which 
have already quality assura nce mark should not be put in such a conditions which
unnecessary delay the supplies and subsequently delay in the payment. 
3.30     The Committee recommends  a review of th e upfront charges, processing fee, requirement o f
margin money etc. with a focus to provide   reli ef and impetus for the  growth of SSI units.  The
Committee understands that financ ial institutions,  banks  cannot  go against the basic tenets o f
commercial viability but still preferential treatment to the small scale entrepreneurs  needs to be
provided. 
 3.31    At present banks are asking for 25% margin  money  against loan and advances and ask for 1.33
current ratio which  means the  pr oject have to keep 33% . The Margin is very high  and it should  be
reduced to 20%.  
3.32     At present Financial Institutions ask for 40% to 50% as promoter c ontribution   in a project
which is very high especially for new entrepreneurs.  This  should be 20% to 25%  to encourage the new
entrepreneur to set up new industries and availability of  finance to new units. 
3.33     The banks and financial institutions are aski ng for collateral security  as a project for which
finance is sought for .  In such circumstances, the genuine entrepreneur s  are denied credit  for want o f
collateral security .  Therefore, requirement of collateral security should be dispensed  with. 
3.34     The Banks and Financial Institutions   take  a long time to clear a proposal for working capital as
well as term loans and it change all the scenario of the industry and effect  its future  planning badly. 
There should be some time limit for the sanction a nd clearance of proposal as  delay in assistance is
equal to denial of assistance .  While  processing and appraising the proposal Bank/Financial Institutions
should come back to Small Industry with all its queries at one meeting, after the scrutiny. 
3.35            Delayed   payment  is a major pr oblem confronted by SSIs.  Al though the  Government  has
enacted  a Delay and Payment Act and provide intere st for delayed payment and declaration in Balance
Sheet is also made mandatory,  this Act has yet to serve its purpose.  The SSI units  cannot afford to take
judicial  help as there are  appr ehensions  of losing business and af fecting the  relationship with the 
customers. To cope with these drawbacks following suggestions were made.  
Page 22 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

(a).        While assessing the working capital requirement of large unit, the bank/financial Institutions 
should separately assess the funds required by the unit to purch ase the material from SSI and
accordingly a limit should be earmarked for such payments.  
(b).       A provision should be made in  Company Law and Income Ta x Law that auditor should 
disclose the details of payments delayed to  SSI including quantum of delay and period o f
delay. Based on Such repor ts, a suitable action should be ta ken against the defaulter such as
disallowance of amount outstanding to SSI sector after a specified period and only allowed i f
payments are made before fili ng of returns as provided in Section 43-B Income Tax Act fo r 
other  liabilities Such as interest to Bank/ Financial  Institutions . 
(c).        Company should declare in its Annual  return  submitted to Registrar of  Companies  that all
the amount reported by the Auditor has been made before the submission of Annual Return.. 
CREDIT RATING AND INTEREST CHARGING: 
3.36     In the, recent scenario, the banks have linked its interest with cr edit rating. The assessment o f
credit rating is internal process of  the bank and it is not disclosed to  the borrower and rates are applied
directly linked to the credit rating.  When the borrower is effected th e process to  ascertain the credit
rating, the process should be disclosed to him so that  he may  be aware of  the area of weakness and
improve the same to get bett er credit rating and low rate of interest. It is also a natural justice that any
evidence against a person should be known to him, so that he may counter the same.  
OTHER MAJOR AREAS: 
(a).        Repayment of Term Liabilities during  the next  following year should  not be considered as
current liabilities  while calculating the current ratio. 
(b).       There should be venture capital fund by Governme nt of India which will perform the role o f 
a financier and fill the gap in the owner's fund in relation  to the quant um of equity required
to support the successful launching of a new business or the optimum scale of operation of an
exiting business.     
(c).        Small Industry should be allowed to enter in th e capital market with  lesser amount of issue
(Presently minimum is Rs.5.00  crore) should be allowed concession  in major formalities  to 
be   compiled with in relation to bigger issue such as appraisal of Project Report,
ascertaining  Credit Rating, appointment of Merchant Bankers etc. 
(d).       Banks should strictly follow the Nayak Committee  recommendations for sanction o f 
working capital facilities. 
3.38     The Committee is concerned to note the high  percentage of margin money and promoters
contribution  i.e. taken into a ccount  by the Banks for sanctioning loans. The Committee recommends
that both margin money and promoters contribution should be brought down to a maximum of 15% as is
Page 23 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

being done in case of housing loans etc. 
3.39     The Committee during the course of its   visi ts in different parts of the Country has come across
the same problem of  collateral security.  The Committee is distre ssed to note that  despite repeated
recommendations, RBI direc tives  and  promises made by Banks th e problem of  collateral security 
seems to be the major road blocks  in the growth of SSI units.  The Committee reiterates that banks
should  be more flexible in lendi ng loans and   not insist upon collater al security so as to encourage
entrepreneurship in the State of Himachal Pradesh.  
3.40     The Committee feels  that the time taken  to  clear loan proposals  is ve ry long and hence it  acts 
as a deterrent.  The Committee r ecommends that  faster clearance of loan proposals would help in
providing timely loans  to the entrepreneurs. 
3.41     The Committee is of the opinion that the  loan proposals are not  objectively assessed and the
entrepreneurs are subjected  to all kinds of queries and techni calities.  The Committee strongly
recommends that a simple time bound objective assessm ent  pattern  needs to be  evolved keeping in
view the requirements of the SSI units. 
3.42     The Committee has noted that payment  de lays breakdown the investment cycle of the small
scale entrepreneurs besides he is required to make necessary amendmen ts in his tax assessment.  The
Committee recommends that tax assessment be made  simpler and may also account for situation arising
out of delayed payment.   
3.43     The Committee is of the vi ew that large industries  are able to raise  huge capital from the stoc k
market  through public issues whereas SSI units are hampered  in this regard.  The Committee
recommends that Governme nt should endeavour to bring about a pr ocess  to facilitate the SSI units to
raise capital from the stock market and also th e minimum required limit of  Rs.5.0 crores may be done
away with in case of SSI units.  
  
3.44     The Committee is of the opinion that in today’s  world it is know ledge,  innovative ideas an
d 
vision which is going to  be the mainstay of  i ndustrial growth. The Committee feels that there may be
several entrepreneurs who w ould be constrained to put their ideas  into practice due to  lack of capital. 
The Committee recommends that Government should encourage flow of venture capital in this regard by
providing tax incentives, subsidy or allied benefits.   
  
LAND ALLOTMENT AND CLEARANCE  
3.45     The Associations informed that the land clearance for setting up of the industry takes a very long
time and is very cumbersome. 
3.46     The Committee recommends State Government  should assist entreprene urs to directly acquire
Page 24 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

the land. Thereafter no permission s hould be required and the Town and Country Planning Department
should only monitor compliance of State Policy regarding land use and other regulations.  
POWER 
3.47     The associations informed that the best  incentive Himachal Prad esh can provide to attract
industrialists is cheap and conti nuous power. The power rates should not  be compared with Punjab o r
Haryana but with  Jammu and Kashmi r and North  Eastern H ill States where power  tariff is far lower 
than Himachal Pradesh Pradesh. Himachal Prades h is producing only hydel po wer and average cost o f
production is far lower. This should be taken as an incentive  for bringing industry to Himachal Pradesh,
since power tariff is the part of die Industrial Deve lopment. It is  proposed that existing tariff should
continue till the year 2006 and then a policy for increase of tariff per ye ar be announced for the
subsequent period of 5 years.  This  will enable  the  existing industries to plan their future strategies and
will attract many more industrial houses/entrepreneurs. More industrie s will help to give employment
opportunities to the Himachal Pradesh workers in the private sector.  
3.48     The Committee recommends that the Stat e Government should  encourage setting up powe r
intensive  industries  so as to exploit the tremendous  hydel potential of the Stat e and to gain advantage
over other States. 
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE 
3.49     The State Government shoul d create an industry-fri endly environment at all  levels for which a 
single  Window Empowered Committe e should be set up at  State Level for Medium and  Large
Projects  and at District level fo r SSI and Tiny projects with effectiv e delegation of powers by the State
Government under the relevant pol lution, power, labour, town and count ry planning laws to facilitate
issue of clearances and sanctions in a time bound schedule. 
3.50     The Committee is of the opinion that desp ite repeated commitment  “single window clearance”
still remains a mirage.  The Commit tee feels that in the present  co mpetitive scenario States have to
provide  the best  possible facilities  to industrial entrepreneurs so as to  attract industry in the State.  The
Committee strongly recommends th at  “single window clearance” be made  a real concept in practice 
and not a  mere  jargon.   
DAIRY FARMING  SHOULD BE GIVEN STATUS OF INDUSTRY 
3.51     It is a well-known factor that  India is the largest mil k producer in the world. This is due to large 
number of cattle and not due to high productivity.  The productivity  per animal as compare to othe r
countries is very less. If dairy farm ing  will be provided a status of Industry, it will grow systematically
and a huge sum of funds will be i nvested in this sector. This  wi ll help  generation of substantial
employment not only at village level but at urban level.   This will also ensure  the latest techniques and
better breed of cattle, whic h will also be beneficial  to the village level and will improve the earning
power. Its reach will not remain an allied active  but will be a  commercial venture.  
Page 25 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

3.52     The Committee strongly  recommends that th e  status  of industry be granted to the Dairy
Industry as  this is  one area which can help bring both prosperity and employment in the rural areas. 
  
  
CHAPTER-III 
(III)            INTERACTION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF BANKS AND             FINANCIAL 
INSITITUTIONS. 
  
4.0       As part of its process of detailed examin ation into the issues concerning the development of the
SSI sector in Himachal Pradesh th e Committee felt that credit flow was the lifel ine of the Small Scale
Sector. In this context the Committee heard the re presentatives of the foll owing Banks and interacted
with them at length on th e various issues and probl ems being faced by the SSI  sector. The Committee
was of the considered  opinion that large industrial houses are ab le to raise cheap finance abroad from
international financial institutions but the SSI sector was completely dependent on the domestic
financial institutions. The Committee was concerned to note the poor off take of credit by the SSI sector.
In this context the representatives of the following Banks presented their viewpoints:  
1.       UCO Bank 
2.      Punjab National Bank 
3.      Oriental Bank of Commerce 
4.      State Bank of Patiala 
5.      State Bank of India 
6.      Corporation Bank 
7.      Punjab and Sind Bank 
8.      SIDBI 
9.      NSIC 
10.      Bank of India 
4.1       Without going into the statistical details of the performance of the various banks the salient
policy issues that cropped  up are as follows: - 
4.2       The banks gave details of their share in the lending to the SSI sector. The Committee felt that   
benchmark of 40% needs to be st rictly adhered to by all the banks . The Committee was also of the
opinion that the share to the tiny sector needs to be enhanced and banks need to be more flexible in their
approach. On the basis of the data submitted by the banks the Committee came to the conclusion that the
share of NPA for the SSI sector was far less than that of the large industr ies. The Committee was
concerned to note the low percentage of dedicated SSI branches in the State of Himachal Pradesh. 
Page 26 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

4.3       The Committee is of the opinion that Banks need to be more flexible with its approach of lending
to SSI units in Himachal Pradesh. The Committee feel s that in order to boost credit to the SSI secto r
specialized SSI branches need to be opened by all the banks.  
4.4       During the course of interaction one important area that was mentioned was that   the credit pick-
up  has been low in the past 2 years  due to ove rall  industrial  recessi on.  Recently the industry is
looking up and  thrust to  increase  deployment of  funds  in SSI sect or has  been undertaken.  The Ban k
are monitoring progress in flow of credit to SSI sector not only in  quantitative terms but qualitative
terms as well. It was  trusted that  with  the st eps initiated as above  and the positive recovery  o f
industrial growth as expected, the bank shall register further growth. The Committee desired to know the
steps taken by the banks to augment the flow of credit to the SSI s ector. The representatives of the
Banks informed that the following steps under the ove rall guidance of the Ministry of Finance and RBI
were taken by the banks:- 
IMPLEMENTATION OF NAYAK COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 
4.5       The Banks informed that the major recomm endations  of the committee have been implemented 
such as computation of working cap ital credit limits on the basis   of minimum 20%  of  projected
annual turnover to all SSI units requiring  aggregate    fund based working  capital limits upto Rs.5 crore
from  the banking system, standardization of loan applications, timely di sposal of applications,   nursing
of viable sick units, opening of  specialized SSI branches, imparti ng  training to staff working at
specialized branches, extending Single Window Scheme of SIDBI to meet the financial requirements of
SSI units. 
  
IMPLEMENTATION OF  SEVEN POINT  ACTION PLAN 
4.6       The Seven Point Action Plan announced by the Government for augmenting flow of credit    to
SSI sector is being monitored by th e Banks on  quarterly ba sis.  The important action points of the plan
are such as adequate delegation of powers, c onducting regular meetings with SSI entrepreneurs, 
sensitization of Bank managers to reorient them regarding working  of SSI sector, simplification o
f
procedural   formalities, time bound  action for setting up speciali zed  branches, extending composite
loans to SSI units,  conducting actual sample surveys of performing SSI accounts. 
4.7       The Committee  was informed by all the Ba nks that they are not charging collateral for loans
upto 5 lakhs. The Committee felt that  except the Punjab National Ba nk, other Banks were hesitant in
giving loans upto 25 lakhs without collateral.T he Committee was concer ned to note during the
interaction that the field functionaries of th e Banks were not having  better  liaison with
SIDBI/SFCs/SISI and  other developm ent agencies  engaged in promoti ng SSI units. This has led to a
situation where despite credit guarantee from SIDBI banks were hesitant to lend loans without collateral.
Different banks informed a variable rate of interest for le nding to SSI units.  The Committee was
Page 27 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

appreciative of the steps taken by the Banks to ensure that the SSI branches are equipped  with the State-
of-the  art  information technology  including  adequate infrastructural support. The Banks also informed 
that their   controlling offices ar e in constant  touch with the fi eld functionaries to  understand the
ground realities as also  the constraints faced by SS I Branches.   Field Functi onaries are motivated for  
healthy growth of SSI  Credit . The representatives of the Banks  also informed that technical
consultancy Cells for SSI are f unctioning at Cent ral Office as well as Re gional offices  The
representative of the UCO bank which was a lead bank informed that to encourage women entrepreneurs
to   avail loans under SSI sector, the Bank has decided that women beneficiaries may be allowed to avail
loans on liberal terms  such as relaxation in margin  money from 25%    to 20%   as well as 1% 
reduction in rate of interest for loans above Rs.2.00 lakh on a case to case basis. 
4.8       The Committee was further informed that  all the banks encourage fi nancing to SSI units, they
have become member of Credit   Guarantee Fund for Small Industr ies (CGFSI) which covers credit
facilities to SSI not exceeding Rs.25.00 lakh by way of Term Loan and/or  working capital   facility o r
composite loan to SSI including I.T. and software industries without any collateral security and/or third
party guarantee. 
4.9       Further the Banks  informed that they have  introduced Union Laghu Udhyami  Credit Card to 
simplify credit delivery  to small borrowers  including SSI uni tsavailing credit  limit upto Rs.2.00 lakh
subject to satisfactory  dealings with the banks for the last 3 year s  at PLR of the  bank avoiding
cumbersome procedural  aspects related to  review and renewals  making credit delivery simple and easy
In order to improve the  flow of credit to SSIs,  the Union Bank has started considering  exemption o f
collateral requirement for  loans from the existing level of Rs.5.00  lakh to Rs.25 lakh on the basis   o f
good track record and financial  posit ion of the units.  Optimum use of this relaxation is being made to
augment the flow of credit to SSI . The Banks also apprised the Co mmittee that the performance  unde r
SSI sector is regularly reviewed/monitored at all levels i.e. Regional/Zonal/Central Office and necessary
remedial measures are  taken to  boost lending under this important sector. The Banks also informed that
only l% interest  is charged in case of delayed payment.  
4.10     The representatives of Cent ral Bank of India  informed that their prime  lending rate is  11.25%
and no collateral security  upto Rs.25.00 lakhs.  The bank is displayi ng in all the branches  about  the
exemption of collateral security  up to Rs.25.00 lakhs  .  As far as delayed payment is concerned  a
separate wing in the zonal office is taking care of delays and are verifying the delayed from the time
schedule.   
4.11     The representatives of State Bank of India Stated  that the rate of interest is  9.6% for loans upto 
Rs.25.00 thousand ,   10.1% for loans between   Rs.25.00 thousand and Rs.2.00 lakhs, 11.6%  for Loans
above Rs.2.00 lakhs and 12.38%  upto Rs.25.00 lakhs.  The application of lo ans above Rs.25.00 lakhs 
are  tested on the basis of their  credit assessment .    No collater al security is asked upto Rs.5.00 lakh
but the cost of  insurance is added for loans  between  Rs.5.00 lakhs to 25.00 lakhs.   
Page 28 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

4.12     The representatives of Oriental Bank of Commerce informed  that no collateral security  is asked
upto Rs.25.00 lakhs.  They have largest  settlement  unde r  the OTS  scheme in the banking industry .   
They stressed upon  the requirement offinancial i nput for  SSIindustry, maintenance of high standards 
of technology ,   losses incurred due to delayed payments etc.  
4.13     The representatives of Punjab and Si nd Bank  Stated the  ba nk is encouraging small
entrepreneurs to come out with SSI units.  All the directions and guidelines that have been given to them
by the RBI on SSI are followed in toto by their bank.  Composite loans, working and terms loan  are
dealt through “single window system”.  
4.14     The representative of Punjab and Sind Ba nk informed that the viable loan proposals received
from  this  sector are considered  and sanctioned  as per Bank’s policy and RBI guidelines.  Collateral is 
not always insisted upon.  Other  para meters are also taken into account .  No  doubt if the collateral is 
offered , the proposal  b ecomes more sound as  already lot of f unds  of the banking Sector are blocked
under  NPAs  in this sector.  So to be on the safer side, sometimes Branches  ask for collateral  security. 
4.15     The Committee asked the banks as to what sp ecific steps have been taken to ensure collateral
free credit for SSI.  The steps taken by the Banks were as follows:- 
(a)          Branches have been instructed to display the limits upto which the collateral free  loans are
available and  other relevant information  relating to  fina ncing of SSI sector,.  We also
advise all branches to display enclosed charter  for SSI at  prominent places. 
(b)         No collateral security for a dvances upto Rs.5 lakh.  However, this can be extended upto
Rs.15 lakh in cases having good track record and sound financial position. 
  
4.16     The Committee feels that the issue of collateral free loans is a very critical input if SSI sector has
to grow and survive. The Committ ee feels that banks need to be more flexible and should try and
encourage entrepreneurship to the maximum extent possible. The Commit tee is of the opinion that the
ball is in the court of the Banks and they need to come forward in this area. 
4.17     The Committee  desired  to know  the pe rformance of the Banks under the Credit Guarantee
Scheme.  On the basis of  the information submitte d by the Banks the Committe e was distressed to note
that the performance of the banks under this scheme  was dismal.  Ba nks like Bank of India have not
received even a single application under the  scheme, indicating that the scheme has not been adequately
publicized.   In case of other banks  also the number of units  assist ed under the scheme  was also very
low scheme. The representatives of Punjab and Sind Bank apprised that bank is actively participating in
the scheme and sanctioned 10 cases und er the  scheme  without compla int.  Presently 11 Branches are
working in the State.  Moreover, SSI loans below  Rs.5 lakh are not eligible   for coverage under the
Guarantee  Fund Scheme at present. During the c ourse of interaction, the Committee asked about the
amount of loan disbursed under Guarantee Fund Scheme by the P unjab and Sind  bank and was
Page 29 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

informed that the Bank has disbursed Rs.18.62  lakh under this scheme. 
4.18     On the Committee’s query to the number of applic ations received under this scheme, the ban k 
informed that   10 applications have been recei ved by then or branches under this scheme,  but none
from H.P. 
4.19     The Committee strongly recommends that ba nks should take active steps to popularize the credit
guarantee scheme so as  the local  industry can take advantage.  The performance of the  banks needs to
be monitored so as credit flow under the scheme  improves for betterment   of the industry. The
Committee is of the opinion that th e credit guarantee scheme is ha rdly being utilized in Himachal
Pradesh and strongly recommends that steps to impr ove the performance under this scheme be taken on
an immediate basis. 
4.20     The Committee inquired into the role of banks towards promotion of   the tiny sector.  The
Committee was informed by most of  the Banks that the general rate of PLR for loans  under  Rs.10
lakhs  was 11.5% P.A. which is relatively   high for  tiny sector. However most of the banks do not have
any separate scheme to cater to th is vital sector. Banks like Punjab  and Sind Bank have disbursed loans
to mere 106 sectors in this area. The performance of other Banks is not even worth mentioning. 
4.21     The Committee strongly recommends that the ti ny sector should be given  loans at soft rate o f
interest compared to the large indus tries and banks should devise ways  to provide loans catering to the
specific requirement of this crucial sector. 
4.22     The Committee desired to know about the scheme for publicizing the various loans schemes. 
The Committee was informed by  all the banks th at their schemes are widely publicized through 
newspaper, television, pamphlets et c.   The Committee was also a pprised  that these schemes are
prominently displayed at all the branches.  However the Committee strongly rais ed  the issue that the
special schemes for SSI sectors are not widely advertised despite claims by all the banks/  It is wrong  to
say that the Schemes for SSI sectors are widely advertised.  
4.23     The Committee recommends  that innovative  ways should be  devised to make these schemes
popular as the entrepreneurs are largely unaware of th ese schemes.  Almost all the schemes prepared by
the Bank for this sector as well as RBI guidelines should be given  weightage and adequate  publicity, so
that the Bank’s exposure to this sector may increase. 
4.24     The Committee asked the ba nks that the SSI association  have  Stated that evaluation of thei r
cases is not done  properly, to which the representativ es of  the banks replied that  they have technical
and industrial consultancy cell manned by technical of ficer with engineering background for this
purpose.  The banks also informed that they have tested and sound principles of evaluating  the project.  
The banks have technical officers who  are conversant with appraisal of Industrial  advances.  Moreover,
the Bank’s staff tr aining colleges conduct traini ng programmes to sensitize the staff about industrial
advances and the appraisal technique s  for quick disposal of loan  proposals and efforts are made to
Page 30 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

depute  the staff in the specialized SSI branches  who have adequate  knowledge and experience o f
financing  SSIs. In addition to that periodic meets are organized by the  zonal offices with SSI borrowers
to know their problems and it is ensured that the problems if any, are solved  on the spot. 
4.25     The Committee is of the opinion that the trust fa ctor between the entrepreneurs and the banks
need to be bridged.  The Committee recommends that obj ective criteria be  used to evaluate projects .
The Committee feels that  evalua tion is not done objectivel y in cases where loan is asked for without
collateral security. The Committee strongly recommends that in case of technically sound and
economically viable projects banks should be more flexible towards le nding without collateral so as to
develop a culture of entrepreneurship in the State. 
4.26     The Committee was informed that in the cases of one time  settlement the Banks are not ready to
lend further  to the same entrepre neurs,  as per the Bank’s policy, in  case of one tim e settlement, the 
party/guarantors are  not accommodated  in future. 
4.27     The Committee recommends that in  banks  should keep a open approach and should not shut its
doors in case of entrepreneurs whose accounts have  turned NPAs on account of circumstances which
were beyond their control 
4.28     The Committee was concerned  about tr ansparency in accepting credit rating. The Banks
informed that they  have a transparent credit rating system under which the rate of interest is fixed as per
risk weightage.  The Banks are also taking steps to  educate   the borrowers about  our credit  rating
system so that  they can bring necessary improvement in their f unctioning  to improve their rating
benefit from the same. During the interaction the Committee wanted to know if the banks were giving
loan at plus or minus of PLR as  per RBI directions.  The Banks in formed that there is no specific
guidelines of RBI asking Banks to lend SSI units  below PLR interest. 
4.29     The Committee recommends that  SSI advances  should  have lower inte rest rate in comparison 
to general categories advances and  banks should also  consider further rationalizing of  the rate o f
interest structure for SSI advances to put a  cap of PLR +2%  as maximum  rate of interest.   
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
The Committee feels that industrialization in Himachal Pradesh has be en concentrated around
few districts and a large area of  the State remains unaffected by industrialization. The Committee
strongly recommends that new areas be developed a nd the process of industrialization spread in a
manner so as to benefit the State as a whole. 
(Para: 2.7)
The Committee observed that human resource development facilities  particularly in vocational
Page 31 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

and technical education are not adequate in Himachal Pr adesh. The Committee recommends that
the local industry and State Government should join hands to restructure training programmes so as to
provide employment to the youth. 
(Para: 2.8)
The Committee observed that the en tire State is industrially back ward except some development
on the periphery of the State.  The Co mmittee  feels that there is a need  to give over-riding incentives in 
industrially backward areas. A speci al package of incentives is requi red for fruit, vegetable and maize
based units consuming locally available raw material. In  addition, emphasis is also  to be given to thrust
areas including 100% EOU's. For the units in large and medium scale se ctor more emphasis is  required
to be laid for providing better in frastructure. In order to accelerate and facili tate industrialization,
clearances required for setting up of units in industrially developed  areas shall be specially dealt on fast
track basis. The Committee also observed that Inco me Tax holiday and that Central Transport Subsidy
Scheme, the two major cent ral incentives have helped the growth  of industries in the State. The
Committee also felt that the Government of India should be approached to extend these incentives. 
(Para: 2.9)
  
The Committee was informed that the State is committed to expl oiting its vast power potential.
Besides a number of ambitious sc hemes are already under implemen tation. The Committee recognizes
the importance of this sector for industry and recommends that the State Government should take note of
two important requirements i.e quality of power to sustain high technology industry and a power tarif f
structure which is  so planned so  that theentrepreneurs can fores ee its impact in the competitive
manufacture and marketing of their products.  
(Para: 2.10)
The Committee also feels that  Himachal Pradesh requires I ndustries in high technology areas
where there is a large value addition with low vol umes of raw materials involved. These industries
involve smaller transportation and  volumes of bot h raw materials and finished products. With the
advancement of technology today, th e Committee was appreciative of th e fact that the State is very
fortunate to have one of the be st communication networks. The Co mmittee strongly recommends that
the State Government should take every step possible to attract such industries in the State. 
(Para: 2.11)
The Committee strongly recommends concessions  to industry in the form of sales tax
concessions, power tariff, in terest subsidy and capital investment subsidy need to be continued over a
long term period. The Committee is of the opinion that once industrial growth takes place the State will
be able to generate revenue and cover up short term losses if any.  
(Para: 2.18)
Page 32 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

The Committee is of the opinion that adequate funds  be provided to the power sector in the State
so as to upgrade the power infrastructure. The Committee feels that roads are the arteries of a State and a
good road network will go a long way in bringing about prosperi ty. The Committee is appreciative o f
the efforts made in this regard and hopes that the State Government will continue and augment its wor k
in this area. 
(Para: 2.36)
Uneven industrial growth is a characteristic of Himachal Prad esh. The Committee is of the
opinion that State intervention is  the only remedy to rectify this  anomaly. The Committee strongly
recommends that steps be taken to  address this issue on a priority basis and new indus trial clusters be
developed in the State. 
(Para: 2.37)
The Committee is of the opinion that the incentives granted by the Central Government are yet to
take off at the grou nd level and have not managed to translate into higher indus trial growth in the State.
The Committee though appreciative of  the incentives, strongly recomme nds that a analysis be done on
their impact and necessary steps be taken to implement them at the ground level. 
(Para: 2.39)
The Committee feels that a survey of the extent of industrial sickness wi th reference to the SSI
sector would enable the State Government to obtain valuable insights and to accordingly take remedial
measures. 
(Para: 2.41)
The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of IT based industries can go a long way in
bringing industrial growth in the ar ea as IT based industries are not severely affected by infrastructure
limitations and the excellent communication and power infrastructure in the State can be put to optimum
use. The Committee however is not pleased with the steps taken by th e State Government in attracting
IT industries to the State. The Commi ttee feels that if the State Govern ment takes a active role the State
can become a success story in the IT sector and can develop as an  alternative after Bangalore and
Hyderabad in providing world class IT services. The Committee strongly recommends that the State
Government should not dela y further and pursue sing le-mindedly the agenda of attracti ng IT based 
companies to the State. 
(Para: 2.48)
The Committee was of the opinion th at this sounds like a para dox as in one context Himachal
Pradesh is cited as a successful case study for  the impact of telecom reforms and in another context, the
industrial  associations are not ha ppy with the State of affairs. The Committee recommends that these
issues should be taken up with the telecom authorities like BSNL so that cheap, efficient and world class
Page 33 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

telecom facility is made availa ble to all industrial zones in Himachal Pradesh and also BSNL
should be strengthened for strengthening telecommunication network. 
 (Para: 3.3)
The Committee is distressed to note that the issue of collateral security has not been resolved and
entrepreneurs are facing problems in getting loans from Banks. Th e Committee took up the issue with
the banks and was informed that collateral security was not insisted upon. 
(Para: 3.5)
The Committee observed that truc k unions were very powerful in the State and very holding the
entrepreneurs to ransom. The situation in the State was such that any entrepreneur cannot even transport
his own factory produced goods in his own transport. The Committee feels that the situation is a serious
reflection on the State Government and urgent reme dial action is required to  ensure that the truc k
transport unions  does not continue to hold the entire Stat e industries to ransom . Cheap and efficient
transport will make the products competitive and for this the Stat e Government should take steps to
facilitate the transport of goods. The State Government may also review the  entry tax rates  with a view
to reduce its  impact on  freight charges.  The Government of Indi a may also consider exemption o f
export last on the goods produced in the state.   The Committee feels that lack of political will is a major
reason for this sorry State of affairs and hopes something concrete would be done to provide relief to the
entrepreneurs. 
(Para: 3.7)
  
The Committee is appreciative of  the fact that ecological conser vation is an essential issue and
ban  on polythene bags would go a long way in  preserving the ecological balance of  the State.  
However, the Committee feels that the  SSI entrepreneurs who had set up polythene bag units need to be
compensated so that they can set up alternative means of livelihood.  The  State Government should
make  the  necessary financial compensation in the interest of  the SSI sector in the State. 
(Para: 3.9)
The Committee is appreciative of the fact that  hill States are treated differently as far as
providing tax concession and othe r incentives required for bringing about rapid indus trial growth.
However, the Committee feels that the concession need  to be provided for a longer span of time and
Government should review and analyse the impact  of these  concession on a regular basis so as
necessary positive catalytic modification can be made from time to time.  
(Para: 3.16)
Page 34 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

The Committee is concer ned to note the anomalies  in th e implementation of the transport
subsidy scheme. The Committee  impress upon the Government to review  the September, 1995
Notification so as to avoid  disc rimination  between the  old units and the new units for allocation o f
transport subsidy. Hill States by vi rtue of the difficult terrain require  higher inputs in te rms of transport
costs vis-à-vis the industries situated in the plains .  The Committee strongly   recommends that all
industrial units should be  considered eligible for transport subsidy benefits. 
 (Para: 3.22)
            The Committee feels that a review  of the upper limit of  Rs.3.0 crores for extending Excise Duty
Concessions needs to be done away with.  Beside s that, the  Committee feels that putting up an uppe r
limit  would act as an disincentive for the gr owth of SSI units. The Committee also strongly
recommends that the Government should take up the matter regarding the issue of notification as per the
special Package announced by Hon’ble Prime Minister with the concerned authorities. 
(Para: 3.24)
            The Committee  recommends that a institute on the terms of BIFR should be set up for SSI
sector with specific powers for revival of   sick  SSI units.  
(Para: 3.27)
            The Committee recommends  a review  of the upfront charges, processing fee, requirement o f
margin money etc. with a focus to provide   relief  and impetus for growth of SSI units.  The Committee
understands that financial institutions,  banks  cannot go against the basi c tenets of commercial viability
but still preferential treatment to the small scale entrepreneurs  needs to be provided. 
(Para: 3.30)
            The Committee is concerned to not e the high  percentage of margin money and promoters
contribution  taken into account  by the Banks fo r sanctioning loans. The Committee recommends that
both margin money and promoters contribution should be brought dow n to a maximum of 15% as is
being done in case of housing loans etc. 
(Para: 3.38)
            The Committee during the course its  visits in different parts of the  Country has come across the
same problems of  collateral secu rity.  The Committee is distressed  to note that  despite repeated
recommendations, RBI direc tives  and  promises made by Banks th e problem of  collateral security 
seems to be the major road blocks  in the growth of SSI units.  The Committee reiterates that banks
should  be more flexible in lendi ng loans and   not insist upon collater al security so as to encourage
entrepreneurship in the State of Himachal Pradesh.  
(Para: 3.39)
  
Page 35 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

            The Committee feels  that the time take n  to clear loan proposals  is  very long and hence it  acts 
as a deterrent.  The Committee r ecommends that  faster clearance of loan proposals would help in
providing timely loans  to the entrepreneurs. 
(Para: 3.40)
  
            The Committee is of the opinion that  loan proposals ar e not  objectively assessed and the
entrepreneurs are subjected  to all kinds of queries and techni calities.  The Committee strongly
recommends that a simple time bound objective assessm ent  pattern  needs to be  evolved keeping in
view the requirements of the SSI units. 
(Para: 3.41)
            The Committee has noted that paym ent  delays breakdown the inve stment cycle of the small
scale entrepreneurs besides he is required to make necessary amendmen ts in his tax assessment.  The
Committee recommends that tax assessment be made  simpler and may also account for situation arising
out of delayed payment.   
(Para: 3.42)
            The Committee is of the view that la rge industries  are able to ra ise  huge capital from the stoc
k
market  through public issues whereas SSI units are hampered  in this regard.  The Committee
recommends that Governme nt should endeavour to bring about a pr ocess  to facilitate the SSI units to
raise capital from the stock market and also th e minimum required limit of  Rs.5.0 crores may be done
away with in case of SSI units.  
(Para: 3.43)
  
            The Committee is of the opinion th at in today’s  world it is  knowledge,  innovative ideas an
d 
vision which is going to  be the mainstay of  i ndustrial growth. The Committee feels that there may be
several entrepreneurs who w ould be constrained to put their ideas  into practice due to  lack of capital. 
The Committee recommends that Government should encourage flow of venture capital in this regard by
providing tax incentives, subsidy or allied benefits.   
(Para: 3.44)
             The Committee recommends State Gove rnment  should assist entrep reneurs to directly acquire
the land. Thereafter no permission s hould be required and the Town and Country Planning Department
should only monitor compliance of State  Policy regarding land use and other regulations.  
(Para: 3.46)
            The Committee recommends that the State Government should  encourage setting up powe r
Page 36 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

intensive  industries  so as to exploit the tremendous  hydel potential of the Stat e and to gain advantage
over other States. 
(Para: 3.48)
            The Committee is of the opinion th at despite repeated commitme nt  “single window clearance”
still remains a mirage.  The Commit tee feels that in the present  co mpetitive scenario States have to
provide  the best  possible facilities  to industrial entrepreneurs so as to  attract industry in the State.  The
Committee strongly recommends th at  “single window clearance” be made  a real concept in practice 
and not a  mere  jargon.   
(Para: 3.50)
  
            The Committee strongly  recommends th at the  status  of indust ry be granted to the Dairy
Industry as  this is  one area which can help bring both prosperity and employment in the rural areas. 
(Para: 3.52)
  
            The Committee is of the opinion that Banks need to be more flexible with its approach of lending
to SSI units in Himachal Pradesh. The Committee feel s that in order to boost credit to the SSI secto
r
specialized SSI branches need to be opened by all the banks.  
(Para: 4.3)
            The Committee feels that the issue of collateral free loans is a very critical input if SSI sector has
to grow and survive. The Committ ee feels that banks need to be more flexible and should try and
encourage entrepreneurship to the maximum extent possible. The Commit tee is of the opinion that the
ball is in the court of the Banks and they need to come forward in this area. 
(Para: 4.16)
The Committee strongly recommends that banks should take active steps to popularize the credit
guarantee scheme so as  the local  industry can take advantage.  The performance of the  banks needs to
be monitored so as credit flow under the scheme  improves for betterment   of the industry. The
Committee is of the opinion that th e credit guarantee scheme is ha rdly being utilized in Himachal
Pradesh and strongly recommends that steps to impr ove the performance under this scheme be taken on
an immediate basis. 
(Para: 4.19)
The Committee strongly recommends that the tiny sector should be given  loans at soft rate o f
interest compared to the large indus tries and banks should devise ways  to provide loans catering to the
specific requirement of this crucial sector. 
Page 37 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

The Committee recommends that innovative  ways should be de vised to make these schemes
popular as the entrepreneurs are largely unaware of th ese schemes.  Almost all the schemes prepared by 
the Bank for this sector as well as RBI guidelines should be given  weightage and adequate  publicity, so
that the Bank’s exposure to this sector may increase. 
(Para: 4.23)
  
The Committee is of the opinion that the trust factor between the entr epreneurs and the banks
need to be bridged.  The Committee recommends that obj ective criteria be  used to evaluate projects .
The Committee feels that that evaluation is not done objectively in cases where loan is asked for without
collateral security. The Committee strongly recommends that in case of technically sound and
economically viable projects banks should be more flexible towards le nding without collateral so as to
develop a culture of entrepreneurship in the State. 
(Para: 4.25)
The Committee recommends that banks should ke ep a open approach and should not shut its
doors in case of entrepreneurs whose accounts have  turned NPAs on account of circumstances which
were beyond their control 
(Para: 4.27)
The Committee recommends that  SSI advances should  have lowe r interest rate in comparison 
to general categories advances and  banks should al so considering further rati onalizing of  the rate o f
interest structure for SSI advances to put a  cap of PLR +2%  as maximum  rate of interest.   
(Para: 4.29)
MINUTES 
XIV 
  
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
            The Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 p.m. on 
Thursday, the 18th December, 2003 in Commit tee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  
  
PRESENT 
     Dr. P.C. Alexander                   -- Chairman 
  
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
3.                  Shri Faguni Ram 
Page 38 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

4.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
5.                  Shri KhanGhufran Zahidi 
6.                  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
                    LOK SABHA 
  
7.                  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
8.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
9.                  Shri K. Francis George 
10.              Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.              Shri A.C. Jose 
12.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13.              Shri Sunil Khan 
14.              Shri Manjay Lal 
15.              Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.              Shri P. Rajendran 
17.              Smt. D.M. Vijayakumari 
18.              Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the members of the Committee and recalled the wor k
transacted by the Committee during the year 2003.  The Committee also took note of the wor k
transacted by the four Sub-Committees. 
  
3.         The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration:- 
  
130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries) 
  
4.         The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, i f
required.  After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted. 
  
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. A ggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi,
members Rajya Sasbha, to present th e Reports to the Rajya Sabha.  It also authorized Smt. Jayashree
Banerjee and in his absence Shri  A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lo k
Sabha on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003. 
  
  
6.                                 *                                    *                                              * 
  
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
Page 39 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm

             
  
  
  
  
                         
***relates to other matters. 
  
Page 40 of 40130th Report of Committee on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/130threport.htm