 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka Era)                                                    
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT 
ON 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the 327th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26)  
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
330 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iii) - (viii) 
4.  REPORT 1-42 
 CHAPTER–I: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBS ERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 2-14 
 
CHAPTER–II: THE RECOMMENDATION S/ OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO P URSUE 
FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
15-25 
 
CHAPTER–III: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NO T 
ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
26-42 
5.  MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING  43-44 

(i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f.  26th September, 2024) 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva (Chairman) 
2. Shri  Golla Baburao 
3. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
4. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
5. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
9. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
10. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Afzal Ansari 
12. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
13. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
14. Shrimati Veena Devi 
15. Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
16. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
17. Shri Subbarayan K. 
18. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
19. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
20. Km. Sudha R. 
21. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
22.  Shri Rakesh Rathor 
23. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
24. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
25. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
26. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
27. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
29. Shri E. Tukaram 
30. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
31. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K. S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Deepak Rathee, Senior Secretariat Assistant 

(ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby prese nt this 330th Report 
on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/o bservations contained in 
the 327 th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
2. The 327th Report of the Committee was present ed to the Parliament on the 24 th 
March, 2025. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises furnished the Action 
Taken Replies on the 7th July, 2025. 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 7th August, 2025 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
Tiruchi Siva 
New Delhi                Chairman 
7th August, 2025                                                               Department -related Parliamentary 
Sravana 16, 1947 (Saka Era)                                             Standing Committee on Industry 
 
  

(iii) 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AIFs Alternate Investment Funds 
API Application Programming Interface 
BE Budget Estimate 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
ETB Existing to Bank 
FY Financial Year 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
MCC Moral Code of Conduct 
MEP Monthly Expenditure Plan 
MGIRI Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural  Industrialisation 
MLIs Member Lending Institutions 
MSE Micro and Small Enterprises 
MSME Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Limited 
NHPC National Hydro Power Corporation 
ni-MSME National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NPAs Non-Performing Assets 

(iv) 
 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation 
NSSH National Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Hub 
NTB New to Bank 
OBCs Other Backward Classes 
ONDC Open Network for Digital Commerce 
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
PPP Public Procurement Policy 
PSB Public Sector Bank 
QEP Quarterly Expenditure Plan 
RE Revised Estimate 
SCs Scheduled Castes 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SMA Special Mention Account 
SRI Fund of 
Funds Self Reliant Initiative Fund of Funds 
STs Scheduled Tribes 
TReDS Trade Receivables Discounting System 
IC International Cooperation 
ARI Agro and Rural Industry 
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of  Traditional  
Industries 
ASPIRE A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural Industry, and 
Entrepreneurship 
MMDA Modified Market Development Assistance 
ISEC Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate 

(v) 
 
GVY Gramodyog Vikas Yojana 
KGVY Khadi Gramodyog Vikas Yojana 
ZED Zero Defect Zero Effect 
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises 
NBFCs Non-Banking Financial Companies 
MCC Model Code of Conduct 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
GECL Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line 
SPRS Single Point Registration Scheme 
ESDP Entrepreneurship and Skill Development Programme 
MSE-CDP Micro and Small Enterprises-Cluster Development 
Programme 
RAMP Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance 
ODR Online Dispute Resolution 
SIP Strategic Investment Plan 
SPIC Studies, Publicity, and International Cooperation 
TCSP Technology Centre Systems Programme 
TCs Technology Centres 
ECs Extension Centres 
SRI Fund Self Reliant India Fund 
ONDC Open Network for Digital Commerce 
MDA Market Development Assistance 
                   

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry 
on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Three Hundred and Twenty Seventh 
Report on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medi um 
Enterprises.  
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations/observations as contained in the 327 th Report. 
These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. 
 
Para: 20, 25, 27, 42, 46, 47, 55, 66, 67, 68, 71, 94, 95, 101, 124, 129, 140  
(Total 17) 
 
Chapter-II  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
 
 Para: 24, 29, 30, 41, 62, 76, 77, 80, 84, 85, 86, 98, 104, 120, 137 
 (Total 15) 
 
Chapter-III The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry. 
 
  Para: 8, 19, 26, 32, 56, 57, 91, 108, 109, 114, 115, 117, 132, 133  
(Total  14) 
 
Chapter-IV The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited.  
   (Nil) 
  
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Minis try and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given in 
the succeeding pages.  
--- 

2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Recommendation/observation 
 
1. The Committee appreciates the new initiative to issue customized credit cards with a ₹5 lakh 
limit for micro enterprises. It recommends that the Ministry expedite the distribution of these 
cards, focusing on micro enterprises th at are not entirely digitized. Financial literacy 
programs should also be provided to help these businesses effectively utilize the cards, 
improving access to working capital and financial services. 
(Para No. 20) 
 Action Taken Replies  
Department of Financ ial Services (DFS) has informed that the recommendations of the 
Committee have been noted and will be taken up for suitable action during the implementation 
of the customized credit cards. 
 OVERALL BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS & ISSUES 
 Recommendation/observation 
 
2. With regard to QEP targets set for the Financial Year 2025 -26, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry apply lessons learned from the previous year by implementing a clear 
Quarterly and Monthly Expenditure Plan to ensure efficient fund utilization. Additionally, the 
Ministry should focus on strengthening initiative planning, execution, and budget absorption 
capacity to guarantee that allocated funds are utilized effectively, driving tangible outcomes in 
MSME initiatives. 
(Para No. 25) 
 Action Taken Replies  
For the financial year 2025 -26, the monthly and quarterly expenditure plans (MEP & QEP has 
been chalked out for effective utilisation of fund in a uniform manner throughout the Financial 
Year, which is tabulated as under : 
Quarter Month Total MEP Cumulative 
Total 
Total % w.r.t 
BE 

3 
 
Qtr 1 Apr -25 1544.54 1544.54 6.67 
May -25 1544.54 3089.08 13.33 
Jun -25 1544.54 4633.62 20.00 
Qtr 2 Jul -25 1930.68 6564.29 28.33 
Aug -25 1930.68 8494.97 36.67 
Sep -25 1930.68 10425.65 45.00 
Qtr 3 Oct -25 1930.68 12356.32 53.33 
Nov -25 1930.68 14287.00 61.67 
Dec -25 1930.68 16217.68 70.00 
Qtr 4 Jan -26 2316.84 18534.52 80.00 
Feb -26 2316.81 20851.34 90.00 
Mar -26 2316.81 23168.15 100.00 
  Total  23168.15 23168.15 100.00 
 
The monthly and quarterly expenditure target has been set for all the schemes of the Ministry 
and will be monitored on continuous basis for effective utilisation of fund and taking corrective 
action, well in advance, in order to achieve tangible outcomes. 
 
Recommendation/observation 
 
3. The Committee acknowledges that most schemes are demand -driven, but it recommends that 
the Ministry set clear, predefined targets for these schemes. It recommends utilizing 
behavioural science tools to nudge, encourage, and motivate organizati ons, leading to better 
stakeholder outcomes. 
(Para No. 27) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry has set monthly and quarterly expenditure target in respect of all the schemes. 
Recommendations of the Committee have further been noted for compliance. 
SCHEME WISE ANAYLSIS 
Recommendation/observation 

4 
 
4.  The Committee is of the view that given the significant increase in guarantee approvals, 
particularly in the manufacturing sector, it is recommended that CGTMSE focus on continuing 
to strengthen and incentivize the manufacturing sector through enhanced guarantee coverage 
and tailored support. This could include providing additional benefits or financial incentives for 
MSEs in manufacturing, which could help boost industrial output and employment, particularly 
in key sectors driving economic growth. 
(Para No. 42) 
Action Taken Replies  
CGTMSE provides credit guarantee for the credit facilities up to ₹10 crore extended by its MLIs 
to new as well as existing MSEs without collateral security and third -party guarantee f or the 
activities mentioned in the MSMED Act, 2006. 
 CGTMSE provides credit guarantee at liberal terms for MSEs engaged in manufacturing and 
having ZED (Zero Defect Zero Effect) certification i.e concession in fee @ 10% and higher 
guarantee coverage of 85%, thereby facilitating MSEs to become world-class manufacturers. 
Under Credit Guarantee Scheme of the Ministry of MSME, guarantee cover has been increased 
to Rs 10 Crore from Rs 5 Crore w.e.f. 1.04.2025. Further, DFS has launched a Scheme for MSEs 
in manufacturing. 
Recommendation/observation  
5. The Committee acknowledges the remarkable progress made under the PM Vishwakarma 
Scheme, with 2.66 crore applications received and over 27.49 lakh beneficiaries registered 
within just 16 months, already exceeding th e 5 -year target. However, it urges the Ministry to 
build on this success by further expanding the scheme's outreach, ensuring the timely and 
efficient disbursement of loans, and strengthening the marketing and digital support provided to 
artisans. 
(Para No. 46) 
6. The Committee also appreciates the allocation of ₹5,100 crore for FY 2025 -26 to PM 
Vishwakarma Scheme and recommends that the Ministry focus on optimizing the utilization of 
these funds to maximize the scheme’s impact and further benefit artisans. 
(Para No. 47) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry acknowledges the Hon'ble Committee's appreciation of the progress made under 
the PM Vishwakarma Scheme. Efforts are underway to further expand the scheme's outreach 

5 
 
through targeted IEC campaigns at the g rassroots level, focused attention on trades with low 
enrolment, and timely disbursement of loans in coordination with lending institutions and the 
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance. Additionally, steps are being taken to 
strengthen digital onboarding, enable e -commerce integration, and enhance marketing linkages 
for registered beneficiaries, in collaboration with States and UTs. The Ministry is also ensuring 
doorstep delivery of modern toolkits to all the PM Vishwakarma beneficiaries th rough an e -
voucher-based redemption system via India Post. Efforts are currently underway to ramp up 
toolkit supplies to meet the growing demand. The Ministry remains committed to the optimal 
utilization of allocated funds to maximize the scheme’s impact a nd ensure sustained benefits for 
traditional artisans and craftspeople. 
Recommendation/observation 
7. The Committee commends the success of PMEGP in fostering self -employment and micro -
enterprises, creating over 9.87 lakh businesses. The Committee also rec ommends scaling up the 
program, focusing on rural and Aspirational Districts, while expanding support for women, SCs, 
and STs. 
(Para No.55) 
Action Taken Replies  
1. Under PMEGP, SC/ST, Women and beneficiaries belonging to Aspirational Districts are 
covered under Special category which are eligible for higher subsidy upto 35% of the project 
cost and lower own contribution as compared to General category beneficiaries. Additionally 
own contribution of Special Category Beneficiaries it is only 5% of project co st whereas it is 
10% for General Category. 
2. While conducting awareness programmes, webinars, workshops, etc., more emphasis is given 
to rural, backward, under -served areas and Aspirational districts particularly for SC/ST, women 
beneficiaries. 80% of micro enterprises under PMEGP are established in rural areas. In FY 2024-
25 more than 70% of the beneficiaries assisted under PMEGP are SC/ST & Women. 
Recommendation/observation 
8.  The Committee appreciates a steady increase in the budgetary allocation for KGVY, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to continue optimizing the utilization of funds. The Ministry 
should closely monitor the progress of the schemes, especially in areas such as awareness 
building, skill enhancement, and infrastructure support, to ensure that the full potential of these 
allocations is realized for sustainable growth in the Khadi and village industries. 
(Para No.66) 
Action Taken Replies  

6 
 
The Ministry through KVIC has instituted regular review mechanisms, to closely track the fund 
utilisation, implementation and progress of KGVY schemes. 
Regular review meetings are conducted through video conferencing by the Ministry to monitor 
scheme activities, address bottlenecks and ensure timely implementation. Periodic field visits are 
also undertaken by officials of the Ministry and KVIC to assess on-ground outcomes, beneficiary 
reach, and quality of infrastructure and training interventions. 
In alignment with the Committee's emphasis on awareness building, skill enhancement and 
infrastructure support, KVIC has undertaken the following key initiatives: 
 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between KVIC and Prasar Bharati to 
enhance brand "Khadi India" visibility through national television and radio platforms, 
aiming to broaden outreach among youth and urban consumers. 
 Multi-channel publicity campaigns have been launched through outdoor media (buses, 
metros, trains, airports) and electronic media (radio, television) to raise awareness about 
Khadi and Village Industries schemes and products. 
 Awareness programmes were organized in 17 border villages under the Vibrant Villages 
Programme (VVP) in Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and 
Ladakh to sensitize communities about KVI schemes. 
 Infrastructure of departmental training centres is being upgraded through NBCC to enhance 
the scale and quality of skill development initiatives. 
 Professional Training Associates and Local Skill Trainers have been engaged across various 
sectors such as Agro -based, Mineral -based and Service industries for specialized training 
programmes. 
 The Centre of Excellence for Khadi (CoEK) has launched a Capacity Building Training 
Program for over 370 personnel from Khadi Institutions, focusing on product development, 
production techniques and marketing skills. 
 Additionally, the Knowledge Portal for Khadi has been developed to provide a one -stop 
digital resource for skill development, design innovation, and knowledge dissemination to 
artisans and Khadi institutions. 
 The Honey processing plant at CBRTI, P une, has been refurbished and now honey 
processing plant has production capacity of 450-500 kg of honey per shift of 8 hours. 
 Central Sliver Plants (CSP), Kuttur and CSP, Chitradurga have been refurbished leading to 
an increase in production capacity by 47 % and 27% respectively. CSP, Hajipur, is currently 
under refurbishmentto ensure quality and cost-effective sliver production. 

7 
 
 Raw material supply has been strengthened through the establishment of Marino Wool Bank 
at Bikaner and Cocoon Banks at Patna and Ranchi to cater to the needs of Khadi institutions 
in Rajasthan, Bihar, and Jharkhand. 
 As part reaching out to underserved areas, A Centre for Rural Enterprise Acceleration 
through Technology (CREATE) has been established at Leh to promote local productivi ty, 
improve product quality, and strengthen livelihood opportunities for traditional artisans in 
border regions. 
 Similarly, an Eri -Silk Khadi Production -cum-Training Centre has been set up at Bomdila 
(GRL Monastery, Buddhist Culture Preservation Society) i n the Northeastern Region to 
promote traditional Khadi varieties and integrate skill development with enterprise creation. 
The Ministry remains committed to ensuring effective and outcome -oriented utilization of funds 
under KGVY through continuous monitori ng, targeted interventions, and strengthening support 
systems across the Khadi and Village Industries sector. 
Recommendation/observation 
9.  The Committee appreciates the increased allocations for the Khadi Vikas Yojana (KVY) in the 
upcoming financial year. Given the positive trajectory of the scheme, the Ministry is encouraged 
to continue this momentum and ensure full utilization of allocated funds. Furthermore, it is 
recommended that efforts be made to enhance outreach and support for Khadi artisans, 
especially in rural areas, through targeted marketing and technology adoption initiatives. 
(Para No. 67) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry is committed to ensuring optimal utilization of funds to sustain and further 
strengthen the positive momentum in the Kha di sector.  In line with the Committee’s 
recommendation to enhance outreach and support for Khadi artisans, especially in rural areas, 
the following initiatives have been undertaken: 
 To strengthen brand outreach and artisan support, KVIC is leveraging strategic partnerships 
and expanded media by collaborating with Prasar Bharati for promoting “Khadi India” brand 
across national broadcasting channels, creating a strong association between Khadi and 
national identity, thereby reinforcing Khadi’s identity among both rural and urban audiences. 
This coupled with diversified marketing campaign through outdoor and electronic media 
ensures localized and mass outreach. Through these initiatives, the Ministry aims not only to  
promote awareness but also to create s teady demand pipelines, directly benefiting rural 
artisans by expanding their consumer base. 

8 
 
  KVIC, in collaboration with the National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), has 
established the Centre of Excellence for Khadi (CoEK), which provides Khadi i nstitutions 
with access to contemporary designs, visual merchandising strategies, and new product 
development via a digital platform.This Knowledge Portal for Khadi has been developed as 
an e-learning and design resource hub to build capabilities of artisa ns and Khadi institutions 
for catering the urban youth. 
 E-market linkages have been strengthened through dedicated online platforms such as 
khadiindia.gov.in and integration with the Government e -Marketplace (GeM), enabling 
Khadi institutions and artisans to tap into digital sales channels. 
 Participation in major exhibitions such as the India International Trade Fair (IITF) and 
organization of Khadi -focused exhibitions at national and regional levels to provide rural 
Khadi artisans with market access opportunities. 
 
 
Recommendation/observation 
10. The Committee acknowledges the upward trend in the allocations for Gramodyog Vikas 
Yojana (GVY) in FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26. This increase is a positive sign for the promotion 
of village industries and the modernization of traditional sectors. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry focus on expanding skill development programs and modernizing infrastructure to 
ensure the competitiveness of village industries in global markets, particularly in agro -based 
and wellness industries, to maximize the impact. 
(Para No. 68) 
Action Taken Replies  
KVIC, through its departmental training centres spread across the country, is actively engaged in 
conducting specialized training programmes to create a skilled and employable workforce in the 
village industries sector. 
Professional Training Associates and Local Skill Trainers have been engaged to deliver high -
quality, market relevant training to rural beneficiaries and entrepreneurs with special emphasis 
on agro -based industries (such as food processing) and wellness industries (such as cosmetics 
and natural health products). 
Further, new skill verticals such as Air conditioner repairing, mobile repairing, sewing machine 
operator and popcorn making have also been introduced to b roaden the opportunities for rural 
entrepreneurs under GVY.  

9 
 
In order to support such initiatives, KVIC is strengthening its departmental training centers by 
upgrading infrastructure through the National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) to 
accommodate modern skill requirements for enhance quality of skill development programs. 
Recommendation/observation 
11.  The Committee appreciates the effective utilization of allocated funds in SRI Fund of Funds 
in the last three years. The Committee recommends that the Ministry continue to focus on 
enhancing the fund's reach and impact by ensuring the full utilization of the proposed ₹700 crore 
allocations for FY 2025-26. The Ministry should ensure timely and efficient deployment of funds 
to maximize the scheme's benefits for the MSME sector. 
(Para No. 71) 
Action Taken Replies  
To utilize the allocated funds under SRI Fund, Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) based approach 
is being followed. Therefore, as per the previous trend of utilization of funds, allocated fund  
under SRI Fund of Rs. 700 crore for the current FY is expected to be  utilized timely. Further, for 
efficient deployment of fund, several outreach programme are being planned in the FY -2025-26 
and effective utilization of   funds   Investment Manager –SVL ha s been requested to facilitate 
timely demands from Daughter Funds. 
Recommendation/observation 
12.  The Committee notes that for FY 2024 -25, the Ministry has maximized the utilization of 
allocations at the RE stage in Coir Vikas Yojana. Similarly, it recomm ends that for FY 2025 -26, 
the allocated amount of Rs. 104.39 crore be utilized optimally and efficiently. If required, the 
Ministry should request an enhanced allocation at the RE stage, considering the scheme’s 
significance in supporting employment, particularly for women artisans in rural areas 
(Para No. 94) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry welcomes the Committee’s recommendation and will work towards the optimal 
and efficient utilization of grants allocated for the FY 2025 -26. The Ministry may request for 
enhanced allocation, if required, at the RE stage. 
Recommendation/observation 
13. The Committee further observes that the coir industry, being traditional, holds substantial 
potential for skill development. To drive growth and expand into non -traditional areas, the 
Ministry should prioritize regular training and skill development programs, including those 

10 
 
focused on technological innovations, to enhance the capabilities of artisans and foster overall 
development in the coir sector. 
(Para No. 95) 
Action Taken Replies  
The ‘Skill Upgradation & Mahila Coir Yojana’ is one of the major sub components of the ‘Coir 
Vikas Yojana’ scheme through which the Coir Board is implementing various skill development 
activities across the country. In addition to the  regular training programmes like training in value 
added products, spinning under Mahila Coir Yojana, Certificate course &    Diploma course in 
Coir Technology, various promotional programmes like Entrepreneur Development Programme 
(EDP), Awareness programme, Seminars, Workshops, Exposure tours etc. are conducted by Coir 
Board to create awareness among the stakeholders on technological innovations, schemes and 
services available, options for credit facilities etc in Coir Industry.  
The recommendation of the Committee to focus on the expansion of activities to non traditional 
areas are acknowledged. However, in order to expand the industry into non -traditional areas the 
Coir Board are being equipped with stronger statutory support to meet emerging challenges and 
opportunities and accordingly, provisions of the Coir Industry Act are proposed to be 
amended/modified vis-à-vis the present requirements that have evolved under the influence of 
globalization, liberalization, privatization and also technological advan cements, and changing 
consumer preferences.  
Recommendation/observation 
14. The Committee observes variations in the BE and AE of the Scheme over the past two years.  
Given the underutilization of funds in FY 2024 -25 and the BE of ₹65 crore for FY 2025 -26, 
Committee recommends to focus on timely fund disbursement, enhanced outreach to MSMEs, 
and targeted capacity -building initiatives to improve fund utilization and align with actual 
absorption capacity. 
(Para No. 101) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Procurement a nd Marketing Support (PMS) Scheme plays a vital role in enhancing market 
access for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs). In the financial year 2024 –25, total expenditure 
under the PMS Head stands at ₹61.69 crore out of the allocated budget of ₹64.80 crores showing 
approximately 95% of the budget utilization. The Budget Estimate (BE) for FY 2025–26 remains 
unchanged at ₹65 crore, with the flexibility to utilize additional funds from the 'PMS -RAMP 
Head' as required. During FY 2024-25, ₹30.62 crore out of ₹31.59 crore has been spent under the 
PMS-RAMP Head, reflecting a utilization rate of 96.96%. 

11 
 
The Committee’s recommendations—to prioritize timely fund disbursement, enhance outreach to 
MSMEs, and implement targeted capacity -building initiatives to improve fund  utilization and 
align with actual absorption capacity—have been duly noted for compliance. To enhance market 
access for MSEs, the Ministry will undertake the following steps: 
1. Strengthening E-Market Linkages: 
 MSEs are being actively onboarded onto the Government e- Marketplace (GeM)         
to increase their participation in public procurement. 
 Collaboration with the MSME Global Mart, an e -commerce platform operated   
by NSIC, is underway to improve digital market access for MSEs. 
2. Support for Domestic Trade Fairs: 
 
 Financial assistance is being extended to MSEs to participate in domestic trade 
fairs, exhibitions, and buyer-seller meets, thereby enhancing their visibility and 
market outreach. 
3. Capacity Building: 
 Organizing workshops and seminars to help MSEs improve branding, packaging, 
and marketing strategies. 
 Promoting the adoption of barcoding and e-commerce platform.  
While the PMS Scheme allocation remains at ₹65 crore, the Ministry is committed to leveraging 
digital platforms, facilitating participation in trade fairs, and conducting capacity -building 
initiatives to strengthen market access for MSEs. Regular monitoring of fund utilization ensures 
efficient resource allocation and effective market support. 
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee. The Ministry executes 
various plans for timely fund disbursement enhance outreach to MSMEs and targeted capacity - 
building initiatives. 
Proposals under various schemes are being processed on time bound are processed. Minis try is 
implementing various scheme through the own establishments, institutions, training institutions, 
technology centres, Central and State agencies including various other implementing agencies. 
They are taken into onboard to execute and implement schem es/projects for outreach and 
capacity-building programme. 
 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES - BUDGETING AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES 
Recommendation/observation 
15.  The Khadi sector has demonstrated steady growth in production and sales, with 
encouraging projections for 2024 -25. It is recommended that the Ministry continue to support 
this growth by ensuring supply of quality raw materials, enhancing marketing strategi es, and 

12 
 
expanding Khadi's reach through diverse sales channels. Furthermore, 49 additional funds may 
be considered at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage to accelerate the sector's growth. 
(Para No.124) 
Action Taken Replies  
To maintain this trajectory of sust ained growth in production and sales, with positive projections 
for the financial year 2024 –25 and in order to provide strategic support, including the assured 
supply of high -quality raw materials, the enhancement of marketing initiatives, etc. following 
initiatives have been taken by KVIC: 
 Central Sliver Plants (CSP), Kuttur and CSP, Chitradurga have been refurbished leading to 
an increase in production capacity by 47% and 27% respectively. CSP, Hajipur, is currently 
under refurbishment. 
 To further strengt hen raw material supply, KVIC has established a Marino Wool Bank at 
Bikaner, Rajasthan, and Cocoon Banks at Patna and Ranchi to cater to the needs of Khadi 
institutions in Rajasthan, Bihar, and Jharkhand. 
 KVIC has undertaken focused efforts to modernize an d strengthen marketing infrastructure. 
In collaboration with Centre of Excellence for Khadi (CoEK), KVIC has launched a project 
for renovation and brand upgradation of Khadi Gramodyog Bhavans (KGBs), aimed at 
improving the visual appeal, customer experience, and overall branding of Khadi outlets.This 
initiative focuses on modernizing the retail experience by improving store layouts, enhancing 
visual merchandising, upgrading signage, and revamping interiors to appeal to younger and 
urban consumers. 
 Complementing these physical improvements, KVIC has launched a structured Capacity 
Building Training Program for sales staff to build competencies in customer engagement, 
product knowledge, visual merchandising, and digital marketing techniques, thereby 
professionalizing the marketing and sales interface at Khadi outlets. 
 To expand Khadi’s reach across domestic and international markets, KVIC has secured 
Trademark Registration for "Khadi" in 15 countries and registration of the Khadi Logo in 
around 35 countries. Thi s has strengthened brand protection and laid the groundwork for 
Khadi's international marketing efforts. 
 Domestically, marketing linkages have been enhanced through participation in national trade 
fairs such as the Indian International Trade Fair (IITF), r ollout of festive promotional 
campaigns, introduction of gift coupons and establishment of stronger digital sales platforms, 
including the e -Market linkage through the MSME GeM portal and the dedicated 
khadiindia.gov.in e-commerce portal. 
Recommendation/observation 

13 
 
16.  The Committee acknowledges the efforts of the Coir Board in supporting production, export 
promotion, and research. Women's continued involvement in fibre extraction and spinning is 
also a positive development. However, considering the slight  decline in the production of coir 
and coir products in the current year (2024 -25), it is recommended that MSME provide 
additional support to the Coir Board to enhance technological innovation, improve production 
efficiency, and explore new export markets.  Further investment in value addition and product 
diversification could lead to significant growth in domestic and international markets. 
(Para No. 129) 
Action Taken Replies  
During the year 2024 –25, coir fibre production reached 801,300 metric tonnes, reflecting a 
0.62% increaseas compared to 796,300 metric tonnes produced in 2023 –24.  Hence there has 
been a rise in coir fibre production during the year 2024-25.   
The Ministry  fully endorses the Committee’s recommendation for additional support towards 
enhancing technological innovation, improving production efficiency, and exploring new export 
markets. It is understood that intensifying the value addition and product diversifi cation would 
be vital for not only expanding the domestic market of coir -based products butalso for capturing 
emerging opportunities in international markets. In compliance with the Committee’s 
recommendations, Coir Board through its two research institutes (CCRI and CICT is focusing on 
the strategic areas of technological innovationand product diversification.The Research & 
Development Activities of the Board concentrate in the following areas. 
1.      Modernization of Production Processes 
2.      Development of Machinery &Equipments 
3.      Product Development & Diversifications 
4.      Development of Environment Friendly Technologies 
5.      Technology transfer, Incubation, Testing & Service facilities 
The Coir Board is implementing the Human Resource Dev elopment (HRD) training for coir 
workers/ artisans which plays a key role in strengthening the coir sector by upgrading the skills 
of workers and artisans, particularly women and the rural areas. The training also supports 
traditional skills while fosterin g innovation, aligning with national initiatives like Skill India, 
Make in India, and Atmanirbhar Bharat to drive rural industrial growth and inclusive 
development. Coir Board had provided HRD training to around 500 coir workers each during the 
last three years and it is proposed that the participation of coir workers/artisans in HRD training 
may be enhanced to 800 during the FY 2025-26. 

14 
 
The Coir Board plays a pivotal role in promoting Indian coir products in the global market, with 
a focus on empowering sm all-scale exporters and expanding the export potential of this eco -
friendly natural fiber. Key activities include registering coir exporters, facilitating MSMEs' 
participation in international exhibitions, providing assistance under the International 
Cooperation Scheme, and presenting Coir Industry Awards to recognize excellence. Through 
these initiatives, the Board encourages small -scale exporters to enter global markets while 
emphasizing coir's unique qualities as a sustainable alternative to synthetic ma terials. By 
exploring new markets and strengthening India's presence in existing ones, the Board aims to 
enhance the global share of Indian coir products and propagate the message of coir as a versatile, 
eco-friendly fiber. 
Recommendation/observation  
17. The Committee observes that there has been a notable increase in the success rate of wage 
and self -employment among trainees over the past years. To sustain and enhance the 
effectiveness of the scheme, it is recommended that the Ministry may increase its s upport for 
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. The Ministry may also consider strengthening 
collaboration with industry partners to increase the employment outcomes for trainees in future 
programs. 
(Para No. 140) 
Action Taken Replies  
The recommendations  of the Committee have been noted. Under ATI Scheme, post training 
follow-up of the trainees are done for at least 6 months by the training institute. The institutes 
have been requested to follow up the old cases i.e. trainees trained under ATI scheme duri ng last 
three years for wage/self-employment. 
 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER – II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS & ISSUES  
Recommendation/observation 
1.   On Budget Utilization  
(i) The Committee recommends that the Ministry prioritize the optimal utilization of the 
allocated ₹23,168.15 crore by focusing on high -impact schemes, particularly those 
supporting technological upgra dation, market access, and employment generation. To 
address the ₹2,439.08 crore shortfall, the Ministry may seek additional funds at the Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage or explore alternative funding sources, such as public -private 
partnerships (PPP) and col laborations with financial institutions, to ensure the 
uninterrupted implementation of critical programs.  
(ii) The Committee observes with concern that there is a significant gap between the Revised 
Estimate and actual expenditure, and a clear under achie vement in the QEP, with only 
41.74% of the allocated budget utilized as of January 20, 2025. This shortfall is attributed to 
challenges posed by the Model Code of Conduct during the general elections. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must adopt a  more flexible and efficient planning 
approach to mitigate such disruptions in the future. Additionally, it should explore methods 
to accelerate fund utilization in the remaining months of the fiscal year to minimize any 
long-term impact on program outcomes. 
(Para No. 24) 
Action Taken Replies  
(i) The Ministry have consistently been very close to utilizing hundred percent of fund allocated 
under various schemes. The Ministry will make earnest efforts to maintain the pace. High Impact 
schemes such as Micro Small Enterprise -Cluster Development Programme (MSE -CDP), 
Technology Centre System Programme and TRs/TIs have been provisioned with increased fund 
allocation during 2025-26. However, if required, additional fund will be sought at RE stage.   
Ministry of MS ME is also planning to raise fund through alternative funding sources such as 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Model in “Establishment of New Technology 
Centres/Extension centres”. 
(ii) Apart from enforcement  of Model code of Conduct, the main reason of lo w expenditure is 
attributed to non-utilisation of funds under GECL scheme by Department of Financial Services, 

16 
 
as a result of which, entire fund amounting to ₹ 9812.93 Cr (44.33% of BE), allocated for FY 
2024-25, under GECL was to be surrendered to Ministr y of Finance. It may be appreciated that 
excluding the fund provisioned under GECL Scheme, the Ministry has incurred 98.92% 
expenditure w.r.t RE 2024-25 in respect of the substantive schemes administered by it. 
Ministry has adopted various micro -management to accelerate expenditure which includes 
monthly and quarterly expenditure review and corrective action planning.  
Recommendation/observation 
2.  The Ministry should establish a structured timeline for the approval and launch of schemes to 
ensure timely o perationalization and prevent delays, as seen with the MSME Champions and 
MSME Innovative Schemes. Allocating funds to functional heads at the start of the fiscal year 
will reduce re-appropriations and streamline project implementation. To tackle underutil ization 
due to insufficient proposals, the Ministry should enhance efforts to engage potential proposers, 
especially for demand -driven schemes like PMEGP, ESDP, and the Infrastructure Development 
Programme, through more targeted awareness campaigns, worksh ops, webinars, and 
networking events. A robust monitoring system may also be implemented to track proposal 
submissions, ensuring timely follow-ups and support. 
(Para No. 29) 
Action Taken Replies  
1.  Sufficient allocation has been made under the schemes like PMEGP, ESDP, CDP, TR&TI 
etc. in BE 2025 -26 itself for smooth implementation of programmes and projects. Funds 
utilization under these schemes has been almost 100 percent. Funds utilization unde r PMEGP in 
the last four years, i.e. from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2024 -25 is 100% and sufficient 
proposals/applications are being received from the prospective entrepreneurs.  
2. To further enhance uptake of PMEGP scheme, following steps are being undertaken: 
i. Awareness camps, workshops and exhibitions are being organized for creating 
awareness about the scheme among the prospective entrepreneurs including in 
backward and under -performing areas, Aspirational districts, North Eastern Region, 
etc.  
ii. Webinars are or ganized on various activities for setting up of micro -enterprises on 
every Sunday for the awareness of youth and prospective entrepreneurs.  
iii. Publicity of PMEGP scheme through print and electronic media. 
iv. Acceptance of PMEGP applications in offline mode from prospective beneficiaries in 
11 regional languages since January 2024. 

17 
 
3.  An online portal for tracking the complete process from application till adjustment of Margin 
Money subsidy into the beneficiary's loan account is operational. A new portal is unde r 
development with enhanced features and functionality for improved user experience and 
effective monitoring. 
Recommendation/observation 
3.  The Ministry should prioritize the prompt deployment of capital funds, particularly for the 
SRI Fund of Fund & PMEG P and other credit schemes by collaborating with daughter funds to 
mobilize resources quickly and establishing follow -up mechanisms for fund deployment. To 
improve utilization of infrastructure -related funds, the sanctioning process may be expedited, 
and p roject proposals should be regularly solicited. An effective real -time monitoring system 
should track fund utilization, enabling quick identification of underutilization and corrective 
actions. Periodic reviews of fund allocation will ensure alignment with  actual needs. Ministry 
may focus more towards strengthening coordination with implementing agencies and 
introducing flexibility in fund reallocation will help optimize resource usage, reduce savings, 
and address delays. Additionally, enhancing the Ministr y's financial management and 
forecasting capacity may improve fund allocation and utilization.   
(Para No. 30) 
Action Taken Replies  
PMEGP  
1. Funds utilization under PMEGP in the last four years, i.e. from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2024-25 is 
100% and sufficient proposals/applications are being received from the prospective 
entrepreneurs. Since there is excess of PMEGP applications, a proposal for seeking enhancement 
in budget outlay has been sent to Department of Expenditure for meeting Margin Money claims 
in FY 2025-26.     
2. State level Bankers Committee meetings, State and District Level Monitoring Committee 
meetings, Zonal review meetings, Bankers review meetings and Ministry level review meetings 
are organized periodically to review the scheme’s performance and its effective monitoring and 
implementation at the ground level.  
3. An online portal for tracking the complete process from application till adjustment of Margin 
Money subsidy into the beneficiary's loan account is operational. A new portal is under 
development with enhanced features and functionality for improved user experience and 
effective monitoring. 
 SRI Fund 

18 
 
SRI Fund is an AIF Category II Fund which is leveraged to the extent of Rs.50,000 crore (Rs. 
10,000 crore from Government of India (GoI) an d Rs. 40,000 crore through Private 
Equity/Venture Capital funds (Daughter Funds). 
The 'Self Reliant India (SRI) Fund employs a 'Fund -of-Fund investment strategy wherein the 
Funds are invested in SEBI registered, Category I and Category II Alternative Inves tment Funds 
("Daughter Funds"), - which in turn invest in MSMEs (called the investee or portfolio 
companies). The investment in MSMEs have to be made by Daughter Funds as per the stipulated 
guidelines framed [keeping in view the SEBI operating guidelines f or Alternative Investment 
Funds (AIFs)] subject to the condition that Daughter Funds are required to invest in MSMEs 
(Investee Company). Till March 2025, sixty three (63) Daughter Funds have been empanelled 
with SRI Fund and they have assisted 577 MSMEs by  way of investment Rs. 10,979 crore in  
these MSMEs with SRI contribution of Rs. 1,269 crore based on the demand raised by them. 
Funds are being in the MSMEs in the time bond manner as per the SEBI and Scheme guidelines. 
To utilize the allocated funds under SRI Fund, Monthly Expenditure Plan based approach is 
being followed. As per the previous trend of utilization of funds, under SRI Fund, Rs. 700 crore 
is the allocation in the current FY and is expected to be fully utilized. 
Recommendation/observation 
4.  The Committee appreciates that while the digital initiatives, such as API integrations with 13 
major banks, have led to a significant rise in guarantee approvals, the committee recommends 
that the scheme can further streamline and simplify the user ex perience. CGTMSE should 
continue improving its digital interface to make the application process more user -friendly and 
ensure full end -to-end integration with all lending institutions, thereby reducing application 
processing time and enhancing overall efficiency. 
(Para No. 41) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Credit Guarantee Scheme implemented by CGTMSE does not stipulate any conditions with 
regard to sanction, disbursement, follow-up recovery, etc. It is as per the extant guidelines of the 
respective Member Lending Institutions (MLIs). CGTMSE provides guarantee coverage to its 
MLIs for extending credit facilities to Micro and Small Enterprises. 
 Further, the guarantee approval and issuance process at CGTMSE end is fully automated, 
without any manual intervention. The approvals are system-driven, thereby enhancing and 
easing the process of guarantee coverage for the MLIs. 
The matter is being taken up with CGTMSE so that it continues to make the application process 
more user-friendly and ensure full end-to-end integration. 

19 
 
Recommendation/observation 
5.  The Committee appreciates that the actual expenditure in FY 2023 -24 was quite close to the 
budget estimate (₹1319.41 crore against ₹1320.77 crore) in RAMP, indicating efficient fund 
utilisation. However, for FY 2024 -25, the revised estimate (₹750 crore) was significantly lower 
than the budget estimate (₹1170 crore), with actual spending recorded at ₹504.48 crore. The 
Committee suggests that the remaining allocation should be utilised within the specified p eriod 
inconsonance with the Financial Rules. As Rs. 1500 crore has been proposed under this scheme 
for the FY2025 -26, the Committee hopes that the focus be shifted towards ensuring timely and 
complete utilisation of funds so that the RAMP scheme can achieve its objectives. 
(Para No.62) 
Action Taken Replies  
The fund flow pattern adopted by RAMP changed from the CNA system to the Treasury Single 
Account System (TSA system) in September 2024. Due to this change, mapping of accounts of 
State Nodal agencies was  freshly done, fresh sanction orders were issued. This delay resulted in 
reduction of BE. The Budget Estimate of Rs 1500 Cr for FY 25 -26 will be fully utilized. States 
and Implementing Agencies have been asked to make timely utilization of the funds. 
Recommendation/observation 
6.  The Committee observes the previous years' under -utilization of allocated funds, in TCSP, 
and it is recommended that the Ministry of MSME focus on timely execution of contracts and 
procurement processes to ensure optimal util ization of the ₹400 crore budget for FY 2024 -25. 
The Ministry should streamline processes, set clear timelines, and closely monitor progress to 
avoid delays and ensure full fund utilization, maximizing the impact of the Technology Centre 
Systems Programme. 
(Para No.76) 
Action Taken Replies  
Under the Scheme-TCSP, an amount of Rs.  350 crore was allocated in BE 2024 -25, which was 
reduced to Rs. 161.31 crore at RE stage. Out of this, Rs 161.06 crore was utilized during the FY 
2024-25 which comes to 99.84% of R E.  For procurement of Goods under TCSP, the 
procurement process is at various stage of evaluation. Out of which, two contracts have been 
awarded. To expedite the procurement process regular review meetings are being conducted for 
timely completion of procurement and utilization of allocated budget during FY 2025-26 
Recommendation/observation  

20 
 
7. The Committee notes that the Revised Estimate (RE) for the establishment of new Technology 
Centres/Extension Centres has been significantly reduced over the last three years, although the 
full utilization of the RE is appreciated. The Committee recommends the adoption of more 
effective budgeting methods to minimize changes at the RE stage. It is hoped that this year's 
allocation of ₹591 crore will be fully utilized , ensuring proper budgeting for the successful 
implementation of the scheme. 
(Para No. 77) 
Action Taken Replies  
In FY 2025-26, the Budget allocation for the scheme is Rs. 591 crore, and it is expected that this 
amount shall be fully utilized to cover the anticipated costs associated with the construction of 
Technology Centres and procurement of machine for New Extension Centres under the scheme. 
Recommendation/observation 
8.  The Committee observed that the BE allocation of ₹400 crore for FY 2024 -25 was revised to 
₹300 crore, with actual expenditure at ₹136.38 crore (45.5% of RE) in MSECDP. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to create a plan for optimal fund utilisation and ensure the 
remaining 54.5% of the RE is effectively used in compliance with Finan cial Rules for the rest of 
FY 2024-25. Further, given the higher funds allocated for FY 2025 -26, the Ministry needs to be 
equipped with a viable implementation year-plan and avoid expenditure push in the year end. 
(Para No. 80) 
Action Taken Replies  
The BE allocation of ₹ 400 crore for FY 2024 -25 was revised to ₹ 293.04 crore and the actual 
expenditure was ₹ 290.12 crore (99% of RE) in MSE -CDP. The majority of the expenditure was 
incurred in the last quarter of FY 2024 -25 due to change of fund flow procedur e from CNA to 
TSA (hybrid) model. For the FY 2025 -26, the Ministry has prepared Monthly Expenditure plan 
to avoid expenditure push in the year end. However, it is submitted that the scheme is demand 
driven and the request for the release of fund is raised by concerned State / UT government from 
time to time. 
Recommendation/observation 
9.  The Committee notes a significant discrepancy between the Budget Estimates (BE) and actual 
expenditure for SFURTI, with a drastic shortfall in the last three years, partic ularly in 2024-25, 
where actual expenditure was only 0.01% of the RE. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry strengthen the monitoring and implementation framework for SFURTI to improve fund 
utilization. If expenditure continues to fall short of BE, the Ministry may adjust future allocations 

21 
 
to better align with actual needs and execution capacity, ensuring that resources are effectively 
targeted and fully utilized to maximize the scheme’s impact. 
(Para No. 84) 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry acknowl edges the concern raised by the Hon’ble Committee regarding the gap 
between Budget Estimates and actual expenditure in recent years. The underutilization observed 
in FY 2024 -25 was primarily on account of operational changes in the fund flow mechanism 
under Government of India’s financial directives —specifically, the transition from dedicated 
project accounts to the Treasury Single Account (TSA) system. This change necessitated 
retrieval and redeposit of unutilized funds into the Consolidated Fund of India,  impacting 
disbursal timelines temporarily. 
Further, the restriction applied by the Department of Expenditure to incur expenditure under 
SFURTI scheme up to 31.07.2024 from the budget allocated for FY 2024-25 has also contributed 
to reduced expenditure in the FY 2024-25. The expenditure shortfall of BE 2024 -2025 has been 
adjusted in the budget allocation for FY 2025-26. 
Nevertheless, the Ministry has proactively initiated several measures to strengthen the 
monitoring and implementation framework of the sche me through regular reviews with Nodal 
Agencies and Implementing Agencies and extended support for better on-ground execution. 
The Ministry ensure efficient and timely fund utilization and is closely monitoring the 
expenditure and future allocations to meet requirements of the clusters. 
Recommendation/observation  
10.  The Committee appreciates the allocation of ₹362.00 crore for the SFURTI Scheme for FY 
2025-26 and recommends that the Ministry ensure optimal utilization of these funds for 
employment generation and the benefit of artisans. 
(Para No. 85) 
Action Taken Replies  
The allocation reflects the Government’s continued commitment to revitalizing traditional 
industries and empowering artisans across the country, especially in rural and marginalized 
communities. 
The Ministry is actively pursuing approval for continuation of the scheme for FY 2021 –22 to 
2025–26. This will help in meeting the pending liabilities and in completing the partially funded 
clusters for greater employment generation and economic empowerment of artisans. 

22 
 
The Ministry is fully committed to realizing the objectives of the SFURTI scheme and will 
continue to take all necessary measures to ensure effective implementation, timely delivery of 
outcomes, and maximum benefit to artisans. 
Recommendation/observation   
11. The Committee acknowledges out of the 513 approved clusters, only 376 have become 
operational so far. The Committee recommends that the Ministry expedite the process of setting 
up the remaining clusters and ensure that all approved clusters become functional particularly 
in disadvantaged sections of society within the stipulated timeframe. This will further benefit 
artisans and strengthen the impact of the scheme. 
(Para No. 86) 
Action Taken Replies  
Out of the 513 clusters a pproved under SFURTI, 376 have become functional and the remaining 
137 clusters are under various stages of implementation. The functionalisation of clusters 
involves complex tendering processes such as the construction of the CFCs, procurement of 
Plants and Machineries (P&M), receiving approvals from State Governments concerning issues 
such as electricity connection, land clearances, pollution clearances, etc. Due to involvement of 
complex processes and multiple stakeholders the utilisation of funds could not happen as per the 
expected pace.  
The Ministry would like to respectfully bring to the Committee’s attention that the revised fund 
flow mechanism, effective from 1 st April, 2022 (Model-2), mandated all Sub -Agencies (SAs) at 
all levels under SFURTI to r eturn the entire unspent amount lying in their dedicated account to 
Central Nodal Account of Central Nodal Agency (CNA), before further release of funds by the 
Ministry. This transition from the existing model to the newly introduced model affected the 
timely utilization of funds. Further, vide Department of Expenditure’s O.M. dated 05.02.2024, 
SFURTI scheme was migrated from Model -2 (Commercial Bank) of fund flow to Model -1A 
(Hybrid) (RBI) model. This shift required many pre -requisites to be completed like  opening of 
TSA (Treasury Single Account) in RBI by KVIC (the CNA), depositing of unutilized balances 
from all SAs to Consolidated Fund of India etc. 
Additionally, the restriction applied by the Department of Expenditure to incur expenditure up to 
31.07.2024, created interim constraints in addressing the committed liabilities of the remaining 
clusters. 
Despite these challenges, the Ministry is taking proactive steps to expedite the implementation 
process and make the remaining clusters functional. 
Recommendation/observation 

23 
 
12.  The Committee notes the steady increase in the budget allocations for the Entrepreneurship 
and Skill Development Programme (ESDP), reflecting the importance of promoting self -
employment and entrepreneurship, particularly among marginalized groups. However, to ensure 
that the scheme's full potential is realized, the Ministry is recommended to focus on improving 
the utilization of allocated funds, especially in the later years of the scheme. 
(Para No. 98) 
Action Taken Replies  
The B.E wrt ESDP for the year 2024 -25 is 99.00 cr. however the R.E is 74.32 cr. the actual 
expenditure as per the E Samiksha report received from Budget Division is 73.79 cr., Further the 
Total numbers of Programme Conducted is 12,479 and the Total number of Beneficiaries is 
5,66,410 Till 31.03.2025. As per the ESDP MIS Portal. 
These Training components are implemented. with the help of MSME -DFOS, premier institutes 
such as IIMs/IITs/ICAR/CSIRINIT/Administrative Training Institutes (ATls), post harvesting 
and Food Processing institutes, Engineering Institutes, etc. that help entrepreneurs by providing 
high end advance training in the domain of e -commerce, BPO, Soft Ware, Biotech, Modern 
Agricultural & Animal Husbandry and processing, Drug Discovery, Genomics, Tech. acquisition 
from premier lab like BARCICSIR/DRDO, etc. 
Recommendation/observation 
13.  The Committee notes the variation in RE and AE for the Financial Year 2024 -25. 
Accordingly, it is recommended that a mid -year review process be implemented for the MSME 
Champion Schemes to improve the effective utilisation of the allocated budget and to identify and 
address the reasons for the significant underutilisation (AE of Rs 25.5 Cr versus BE of Rs 54.72 
Cr). This review may focus on streamlining implement ation, enhancing outreach to MSMEs, and 
ensuring that funds are used efficiently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry demand 
more funds at the RE stage as innovation and manufacturing techniques are critical for the 
MSME sector to remain competitive. 
(Para No. 104) 
Action Taken Replies  
The R.E. of MSME Champions Scheme for FY 2024 -25 was ₹ 54.72 Cr. Actual expenditure till 
31.03.2025 was ₹ 51.54 Cr. However, an amount of Rs. 258.40 cr. from RAMP Scheme was also 
incurred on various activities under C hampion Scheme. Thus, under this scheme, a total of Rs. 
309.94 Cr was incurred.   The scheme is being monitored on regular basis for effective utilization 
of fund. Requirement of more fund, if any, will be projected at RE stage.  
TARGETED SCHEMES / PROGRAMMES FOR THE NORTH-EASTERN 

24 
 
REGION, WOMEN, AND SPECIALLY-ABLED PERSONS PERSONS 
Recommendation/observation  
14.  The Committee notes the decline in differently -abled beneficiaries under the PMEGP 
scheme, particularly in 2024 -25. It recommends that the Ministr y of MSME enhance outreach 
and awareness about PMEGP and related schemes, simplify the application process, and 
provide additional incentives to boost beneficiary numbers and encourage entrepreneurship 
among differently-abled individuals. 
(Para No. 120) 
Action Taken Replies  
The initiatives taken under the scheme to increase awareness and participation of differently –
abled beneficiaries across the country are the following:  
(i) Beneficiaries under Special Category are provided with higher subsidy of 25% 
and 35% of the project cost in urban and rural respectively as compared to 15% 
and 25 % of the project cost for General Category beneficiaries. 
(ii) Own contribution of beneficiaries belonging to Special Category is 5% of the 
project cost as against to own contribution of 10% under General category. 
(iii) Awareness programme are organized with a focus on special category. 
(iv) Conduct of two -days free online Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
(EDP) for prospective entrepreneurs.  
 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES - BUDGETING AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES 
Recommendation/observation  
15. The Committee acknowledges MGIRI’s vital role in promoting rural industrialization and 
advancing the KVI and to sustain and scale the achievements, it recommends that the Ministry of 
MSME may increase budgetary support to MGIRI, especially for R&D, technology development, 
and capacity building. The decrease in funds for 2024 -25 highlights the need for adequate 
financial resources to support MGIRI's mission and drive further growth in rural industries. 
(Para No.137) 
Action Taken Replies  
To recognize MGIRI’s critical role in promoting rural entrepreneurship, village industries, and 
Gandhian principles of self -reliant rural economies, the Ministry has already taken proactive 
steps to enhance its capabilities. 
The Ministry has progressively increased budgetary support to MGIRI. The Revised Estimate 
(RE) for FY 2024 –25 was enhanced to ₹16.39 crore from ₹12.75 crore in FY 2023 –24. 

25 
 
Additionally, the Budget Estimate (BE) for FY 2025 –26 has been proposed at ₹19.90 cr ore, 
reflecting the Ministry’s commitment to expanding MGIRI’s impact. Further, a major project 
titled "Repositioning MGIRI as a Centre of Excellence (CoE) for Rural Industrialization" with a 
total outlay of ₹78.83 crore has been sanctioned. The project ai ms to strengthen MGIRI’s 
operational framework across innovation, enterprise development, skill -building, market 
linkages, and knowledge advocacy, while preserving its historical legacy and supporting rural 
industrialization aligned with Gandhian principles.  
Further,MOU’s have been signed by MGIRI with the following institutions for collaboration in 
R&D, technology development and dissemination, and capacity buildingareas in the rural 
industrialization sector. 
 Khadi and village Industries Commission (KVIC), Mumbai 
 Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Nagpur 
 Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology (VNIT), Nagpur 
 Govigyan Anusandhan Kendra, Deolapar, Nagpur (MS) 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
CHAPTER – III  
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Recommendation/observation  
1. The Committee notes that despite efforts to implement sub -quotas within the Public 
Procurement Policy (PPP) for women and SC/ST -owned MSEs, significant gaps  remain in 
achieving the quotas, with some regions reporting as low as 70% fulfillment. 
(i) In light of the success of the NHPC, the Committee recommends the MSME 
Ministry to take immediate and decisive action to eliminate barriers preventing 
the fulfillment o f sub-quotas. The Ministry must prioritize the implementation of 
targeted measures to ensure full compliance and equitable distribution without 
delay.  
(ii)  Additionally, it is suggested that the Ministry consider including Other Backward 
Classes (OBC)-owned MSEs within the overall PPP quotas, which could enhance 
their participation and further strengthen the policy's inclusivity and 
effectiveness. 
(Para No. 8) 
Action Taken Replies  
(i) This Ministry is constantly monitoring the progress under the Policy and en gages with NSSH 
and Women Cell (within the Ministry), DPE and GeM regularly, for ensuring progress and 
achievement of targets and sub-targets under the Policy. 
Some of the recent initiatives to facilitate procurement from MSEs including SC/ STs and 
Women Entrepreneurs are given below: 
 
 DO letters were issued by Secretary (MSME) during the FY 2024 -25 to all CPSEs 
individually, requesting to ensure compliance with the targets and sub -targets as well as 
regular updating of data on the Portal. 
 AS & DC (MSME) c haired a Meeting with top 20 procuring CPSEs on 15th May, 2025  
to discuss the issues of Compliance and Reporting Gap w.r.t. PPP for MSEs Order, 2012. 
CPSEs were asked to develop Action Plan and step up efforts  to ensure achievement of 
targets. In continuat ion, subsequently, a meeting with 30 big CPSEs was conducted by 
NSSH Division under Chairpersonship of JS (SME) ON 21st May, 2025 for the same. 

27 
 
 CPSEs have been requested to conduct more focused VDPs to increase their Vendor 
registration. 
 Revision of list o f 358 items, reserved for procurement from MSEs, is in final stages. 17 
service categories have also been recommended for inclusion in Draft list of 470 items 
with the objective of increasing procurement from Women and SC/ST MSEs. 
 After regular follow-up, separate filters for identifying SC/ST and women entrepreneurs 
have been provided on GeM Portal. 
 The database of MSE vendors along -with their social category, for all major product 
categories and services is available (with open access) for the procuring e ntities on 
MSME Sambandh portal. 
 Yashasvini- mass campaigns were organized by the Ministry of MSME for women 
entrepreneurs in Tier II & III cities. 
 Access to field offices of National SC -ST Hub has been facilitated for identifying and 
reaching out to SC/ST MSE Vendors. 
 The Ministry of MSME has introduced a Special Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
(SCLCSS) under National SC -ST Hub Scheme to promote setting up of new enterprises 
by aspiring entrepreneurs and capacity building of existing MSEs for enhanced  
participation of SC/ST entrepreneurs in the public procurement. All the SC -ST owned 
MSEs engaged in manufacturing as well as services sector are eligible for 25% subsidy 
under SCLCSS component of National SC/ST Hub for procurement of Plant and 
Machinery and equipment through institutional credit. 
 Integration process of Sambandh portal and GeM portal has been initiated to address 
concerns regarding mismatch of procurement data on GeM and Sambandh portals. 
 All requests for creation of user ID and Password on  MSME Sambandh portal are being 
taken up on priority. 
 Special Vendor Development Programs/ Buyer -Seller Meets are being conducted by 
Departments/ CPSEs for SC/STs and women owned MSEs. As per data on Sambandh 
portal, total 4310 General category VDPs were attended by 2,41,920 Enterprises 
and 1,059 SC/ST VDPs benefiting 13,245 Enterprises were conducted in FY 2024-25. 
 Vendor Development Programs under the Procurement & Marketing Support Scheme 
(PMSS) were also conducted by this Ministry. Under this, total 32 VDPs were conducted 
in FY 2024-25 benefiting 4,495 beneficiaries. 
 Since 2019-20, the absolute value of procurement from Micro and Small Enterprises has 
seen only an increasing trend. As a result of these initiatives, total procurement from 
MSEs for the financial year 2024 -25 is 35.04%, widely surpassing the actual target of 
25%. The procurement for women has crossed 2 % for the first time (2.19 %). 
(ii) The Public Procurement Policy for MSEs Order, 2012 is driven from Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMED) Act, 1961. Under amended Public Procurement Policy for 
MSEs, Order 2012, a minimum 25 per cent share out of the total annual procurement are to be 
made from MSEs. Out of 25% target , a sub -target of 4% of annual procurement from MSEs is 
earmarked f or procurement from MSEs owned by Scheduled Caste (SC) / Scheduled Tribe 

28 
 
(ST) entrepreneurs and 3% of annual procurement from MSEs is earmarked for procurement 
from MSEs owned by women entrepreneurs. As against the mandatory  target of 25% the total 
procurement from MSEs in FY 2024-25 has been 34.91% which includes all the categories. 
 
  Further Recommendation/observation 
The Committee, while appreciating the Ministry’s sustained efforts and the increase in 
overall procurement from MSEs, notes with concern that the mandated sub -targets for 
SC/ST and women -owned MSEs remain underachieved in several regions. Furthermore, 
the Committee observes that no concrete action has been initiated on its earlier suggestion 
to consider the inclusion of OBC -owned MSEs withi n the Public Procurement Policy 
(PPP). In this regard, the Ministry may explore legal and policy options to incorporate 
OBC-owned MSEs either through amendment of existing provisions or by introducing a 
dedicated sub -component. CPSEs may be incentivized fo r achieving social procurement 
targets, while instances of non -compliance should attract appropriate corrective measures, 
including mandatory reporting and review. 
To strengthen implementation and ensure equitable participation, the Committee 
recommends th at the Ministry publish CPSE -wise procurement data disaggregated by 
social category on a quarterly basis. Independent compliance audits should be 
commissioned to assess adherence to social procurement targets and identify systemic gaps. 
All CPSEs may be di rected to prepare time -bound procurement plans for each target 
group with measurable milestones. The integration of GeM and Sambandh portals must be 
expedited, with provision for real -time dashboards, automated alerts, and seamless data 
reconciliation. Add itionally, special vendor development drives and targeted outreach 
initiatives must be undertaken in low -performing states and districts to enhance 
onboarding of SC/ST, women, and OBC -owned MSEs and promote regionally balanced 
procurement outcomes. 
 
 
Recommendation/observation  
2.  The Committee notes that, as of December 31, 2024, out of the 5.77 crore total MSMEs, 5.69 
crore are micro, 7.3 lakhs are small, and 69,000 are medium. Despite this, the new revised 
investment and turnover limits could potentiall y undermine the purpose of MSMEs by elevating 
micro-enterprises beyond their original scope. It is recommended that the Government revise the 
definition of Micro, Small, and Medium enterprises and create a new category –nano with the 
lowest financial crite ria around ₹10 lakhs. This would ensure that businesses with a turnover 
above ₹2.5 crore do not deviate from the core purpose of MSMEs —driving employment 
generation and supporting smaller enterprises. 
(Para No. 19) 
Action Taken Replies  

29 
 
The majority of the  MSMEs fall in the category of Micro Enterprises. Through the revised 
definition of MSMEs which came into effect on 01.04.2025, an attempt has been made to 
incorporate the dynamic changes within the MSME ecosystem. Further, the Ministry has made 
special efforts to provide support to Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) which were about 2.7 
crore as on 31st March, 2025. These IMEs are almost 45% of the total MSMEs and do not have a 
turnover of more than Rs. 40 Lakhs. They have been made eligible for Priority Se ctor Lending 
and marketing support of the Ministry. 
Further, Special Provision for the Informal Micro Enterprises (IMEs) under Credit Guarantee 
Scheme was launched on 14.02.2024 having guarantee covers credit facilities up to Rs. 20 lakh 
with 85% coverage, with no primary security required. 
Further Recommendation/observation 
While the revised MSME definition effective from 1 st April 2025 reflects the Ministry’s 
intent to accommodate dynamic market conditions, the Committee remains concerned that 
the expanded thresholds, particularly for micro enterprises, may dilute the policy focus on 
truly small and employment -intensive units . The Ministry’s reply acknowledges that 45 
percent of MSMEs are Informal Micro Enterprises with turnover below ₹40 lakh and 
highlights recent efforts such as Priority Sector Lending eligibility and the launch of a 
dedicated Credit Guarantee Scheme with 85  percent coverage and no collateral 
requirement. However, the Committee notes that these measures, while commendable, do 
not yet constitute a formal classification or targeted scheme architecture for the smallest 
units. 
Accordingly, the Committee reiterate s its recommendation that the Ministry explore the 
creation of a distinct Nano Enterprises category within the Udyam registration framework, 
defined by investment below ₹10 lakh and turnover under ₹40 lakh. This category should 
be institutionalized in sche me design, budget planning, and performance monitoring to 
ensure focused support for micro -level entrepreneurs, particularly women, artisans, and 
rural self-employed individuals. Tailored instruments such as simplified compliance norms, 
differentiated credit scoring models, and targeted fiscal incentives should be developed to 
meet the unique needs of these units. This will ensure that genuine grassroots enterprises 
are not crowded out by relatively larger micro units nearing the ₹2.5 crore threshold and 
that the original intent of MSME policy, fostering inclusive and employment -rich 
entrepreneurship, is preserved. 
 
OVERALL BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS & ISSUES  
Recommendation/observation 
3. The Committee notes that 96.9% of the Ministry's budget allocation is allocated to revenue 
expenditure, with only 3.1% earmarked for capital expenditure. To drive substantial growth and 
achieve encouraging outcomes, the Ministry should prioritize increasing capital expenditure, as 
this will give an impetus to infrastructure and developmental initiatives. 

30 
 
(Para No. 26) 
Action Taken Replies  
Most of the schemes of the Ministry are demand driven and are in Revenue Section of the Grant. 
However, funds amounting to ₹1997.21 cr. have been allocated in FY 2025 -26 for creation of 
capital assets/ infrastructure set up including machineries, equipment under various schemes.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
While the Committee notes the Ministry’s allocation of ₹1,997.21 crore towards capital 
assets in FY 2025–26, it remains concerned that capital expenditure continues to constitute 
only a small fraction of the overall budget. Given the critical role of infrastructure in 
enhancing productivity and competitiveness across MSME clusters, this imbalance may 
constrain long-term outcomes. Schemes such as SFURTI, MSE -CDP, and PMEGP depend 
on timely creation of Common Facility Centres, testing laboratories, and industrial 
workspaces. Persistent underutilization of capital outlay risks weakening the foundational 
support needed for MSME growth. 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry conduct a scheme -wise capital 
expenditure audit to identify bottlenecks in fund deployment, project readiness, and asset 
utilization. Based on these findings, a medium -term capital investment str ategy should be 
developed with annual infrastructure targets across cluster development, skilling centres, 
and technology hubs. This strategy should be embedded within the Ministry’s outcome 
budgeting framework to ensure alignment with scheme objectives, t imely execution, and 
measurable impact. Greater emphasis on capital investment will help unlock scale 
efficiencies and strengthen the institutional ecosystem for MSMEs. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
4. The Committee appreciates Ministry’s efforts to support  MSMEs through various initiatives, 
including the Credit Guarantee Schemes, TReDS on boarding, establishing 50 food irradiation 
units and 100 NABL -accredited food testing labs, expansion of SIDBI branches, etc. To further 
strengthen these initiatives, Gove rnment must implement the announcements made a soon as 
possible specifically: 
(i) To strengthen the Credit Guarantee Scheme for MSMEs in Special Mention Accounts 
(CGS-MSMA), it is recommended to integrate an automated monitoring system within the 
dashboard. This system should flag potential MSME accounts at risk of entering the SMA 
stage well in advance, allowing for timely intervention. The mechanism should include 
backward and forward linkages to track financial stress indicators, ensure proactive 
support, and facilitate real-time reporting to relevant stakeholders. 

31 
 
(ii) It is recommended that the establishment of 50 food irradiation units and 100 NABL -
accredited food testing labs must be approved as soon as possible to ensure timely 
financial support, strengthen food safety infrastructure, and enhance MSME participation 
in the food processing sector. 
(Para No. 32) 
Action Taken Replies  
(i)  As informed by DFS, in order to  improve the quality of assets of MSMEs and curtail SMAs, 
many proactive measures and strong monitoring practices are adapted by banks like 
implementing robust mechanisms (early warning alerts) to identify early signs of fi nancial 
distress in MSMEs, such as declining cash flows, irregular transactions, or delayed payments 
using digital technology. Early Warning Signal (EWS) is used as a tool for flagging potential 
MSME accounts at risk of entering SMA stage well in advance. Apart from the above, regular 
monitoring of stress in accounts due to financial reasons and non -financial reasons viz. delay in 
submission of stock statements, non -renewal of credit facilities on due date, non -achievement of 
Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations (DCCO) on due date, etc. is also being done 
by banks. 
(ii)    The recommendation of the DRPSC regarding establishment of 50  food irradiation units 
and 100 NABL -accredited food testing labs to ensure timely financial support, strengthen food 
safety infrastructure, and enhance MSME participation in the food processing sector labs, is one 
of the Budget Announcement made in the FY 2024 -25. For implementation of the said Budget 
Announcement, MoFPI is the lead Ministry and Ministry of MSME is provi ding support to the 
Lead Ministry i.e MoFPI for early and effective implementation. This Ministry recently had also 
requested to MoFPI to implement the Budget Announcement at the earliest.  
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
The Committee appreciates the measures adopted by banks, including Early Warning 
Signals (EWS), to detect financial distress in MSME accounts. However, it reiterates that a 
centralised, Ministry-monitored digital dashboard should be developed and integrated with 
CGTMSE and banking syst ems to enable real -time tracking of MSME accounts 
approaching Special Mention Account (SMA) status. This system should incorporate 
backward and forward linkages to monitor credit behaviour, flag early distress indicators, 
and generate automated alerts for both MSMEs and lending institutions. The Committee 
further recommends that the dashboard include structured reporting protocols to ensure 
timely intervention, transparency, and accountability in the resolution process. 
Regarding the establishment of 50 food irradiation units and 100 NABL -accredited food 
testing labs, the Committee acknowledges that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(MoFPI) is the lead agency. However, given the strategic importance of this initi ative for 
MSME participation in the food processing value chain, the Committee recommends that 

32 
 
the Ministry of MSME constitute a joint implementation task force with MoFPI. This task 
force should include representatives from state -level MSME and food proce ssing 
departments to facilitate coordinated planning, expedite fund deployment, and ensure that 
MSMEs, especially in rural and underserved regions, benefit from enhanced food safety 
infrastructure and market access. 
 
 
SCHEME WISE ANAYLSIS  
Recommendation/observation  
5. The Committee appreciates the successful implementation of the PMEGP, noting its steady 
allocation and expenditure in recent years. To enhance supporting microenterprises, the 
Ministry is encouraged to increase the 2025-26 allocation to meet growing demand, especially in 
underserved areas. Additionally, the Ministry should streamline fund disbursement processes to 
sustain employment and entrepreneurship growth momentum. 
(Para No. 56) 
6.  The Committee acknowledges the steady progress in supporting a significant number of micro 
units and generating employment in PMEGP. However, the decline in margin money disbursed 
and the number of micro -units assisted in 2024-25 raises concerns. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry, in collaboration wit h the RBI, establish a uniform and streamlined 
interest/margin rate for MSMEs across all banks. Furthermore, the Ministry should focus on 
increasing allocations and enhancing outreach efforts to ensure the scheme reaches its full 
potential. 
(Para No. 57) 
Action Taken Replies  
1. PMEGP Scheme was approved for continuation over the 15th Finance Commission Cycle i.e. 
from FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26 with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 13,554.42 Cr. Since the scheme 
exceeded its targets for three financial years i.e. 2 021-22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 there was a 
budgetary deficit for 2024 -25 and 2025-26. Department of expenditure has been approached for 
enhancement of budget outlay for FY 2025-26. 
2.  To support more number of entrepreneurs, priority is being given to low cost projects and 
projects from underserved areas. 
3.  Department of Financial Services (DFS) is being requested to consider the recommendation, 
i.e. “establish a uniform and streamlined interest/margin rate for MSMEs across all banks, in 
consultation with RBI” and give necessary directions to banks in this regard. 

33 
 
Further Recommendation/observation 
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s efforts to prioritize low -cost projects and 
underserved areas under PMEGP, and its engagement with the Department of 
Expenditure for budget enhancement. To further safeguard the scheme’s employment and 
entrepreneurship outcomes, the Committee recommends that the Ministry introduce a 
dynamic demand -based allocation mechanism within PMEGP. This mechanism should 
allow for in tra-year reallocation of funds based on regional uptake, proposal quality, and 
saturation levels, ensuring that high -performing districts and aspirational regions are not 
constrained by static ceilings. Additionally, the Ministry may consider piloting a pr e-
sanction digital verification system to reduce delays in fund disbursement and improve 
transparency in beneficiary selection. 
With respect to credit terms, the Committee notes the Ministry’s outreach to DFS and RBI 
regarding interest and margin rate harm onization. To complement this effort, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry develop a model PMEGP loan product in 
consultation with SIDBI and leading public sector banks. This product should feature 
standardised terms, simplified documentation, and op tional credit -linked insurance to 
reduce risk for first -time entrepreneurs. The Committee also suggests that the Ministry 
establish a feedback loop with beneficiaries to track post -disbursement challenges and use 
this data to refine scheme guidelines and b ank coordination protocols. These measures will 
enhance credit absorption, reduce dropout rates, and improve long -term sustainability of 
PMEGP-supported enterprises. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
7.  The Committee appreciates that the financial allocations being generally aligned with actual 
expenditure and it notes that there is consistent shortfall in meeting annual targets under the 
NSSH scheme (85 -67% achievement in the last three years), it recommends that the Ministry 
should revise outreach strategies such as targeted awareness campaigns, expanding regional 
offices, and providing more accessible channels for SC/ST entrepreneurs to engage with the 
scheme, which will help increase participation and achieve targets. 
(Para No. 91) 
Action Taken Replies  
The National SC-ST Hub (NSSH) Scheme is a demand driven Scheme. The total budget outlay 
for the 15th FC (i.e. FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025 -26) was initially made Rs. 438 crore, which has 
been increased to Rs 588Cr by the EFC on 07.01.2025. The Year -wise budget al location and 
fund released are as under:  
Year BE/RE Actual 
2021-22 120.00 101.87 

34 
 
2022-23 135.00 135.00 
2023-24 100.00 100.00 
2024-25 99.92 99.92 
2025-26  
(As on 15.6.2025) 
151.21 - 
To enhance the outreach amongst the targeted beneficiaries, various outreach programs/activities 
like organizing Awareness Programs, Special Vendor Development Program (SVDP) for SC/ST 
MSES, NSSH Conclaves/Mega Event e -Tendering Workshops etc. are organize d across the 
country. Social media platforms are being leveraged through NSSH accounts on Facebook, 
Twitter, You Tube for last mile impact. In FY 2024 -25, 114 awareness programmes, 112 SVDP 
and 65 e -tendering workshops have been organized. In addition, NSS H Conclave at Moga, 
Punjab was also organized. Many more awareness programmes and SVDPs in SC/ST dominant 
areas are proposed for FY2025-26.  
Further Recommendation/observation  
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s efforts to expand outreach under the NSSH 
Scheme through awareness programmes, Special Vendor Development Programs, e -
tendering workshops, and social media engagement. However, it remains concerned that 
despite these activities, the consistent underachievement of annual targets ranging from 6 7 
to 85 percent suggests a gap between outreach efforts and actual conversion into enterprise 
creation or procurement participation by SC and ST entrepreneurs. 
To address this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry commission an independent 
evaluation of the regional effectiveness and beneficiary impact of current outreach formats, 
with a focus on identifying bottlenecks in awareness to enrolment conversion. Based on 
these findings, the Ministry should consider establishing dedicated facilitation units  in SC 
and ST dominant clusters to provide end to end handholding support including Udyam 
registration, tender onboarding, and credit linkage. A unified digital portal should be 
developed to consolidate NSSH services, track applications, and enable grievance redressal. 
The Committee also recommends introducing performance linked incentives for 
implementing agencies based on measurable outcomes such as new enterprise registrations, 
procurement linkages, and credit approvals. Finally, deeper collaboration wit h local self 
governments, district industries centres, and SC and ST welfare departments should be 
institutionalized to map potential beneficiaries and deliver region specific interventions. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
8.  The Committee notes the significant underutilization in FY 2024 -25, with the actual 
expenditure being considerably lower than the revised estimate it recommends that the Ministry 
focus on optimizing the utilization of allocated funds for the SPIC scheme in FY 2025 -26. The 
proposed Budget Estimate for FY 2025 -26 should be used efficiently to maximize the scheme's 
impact, particularly in enhancing MSME exports and international cooperation. 

35 
 
(Para No. 108) 
Action Taken Replies  
In this regard, it is hereby mentioned that SPIC is an u mbrella Scheme having four sub - 
Schemes, namely National Award and National Board for MSME, International Cooperation 
(IC), Survey Studies and Policy Research (SS&PR), Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC). The inputs of budget allocation and util izations for the FY 2024 -25 of all four sub -
schemes are given below: 
S.No Scheme BE  RE Actual 
Utilization 
1 International Cooperation 16.00 Cr 20.49 Cr 20.02 Cr 
2 IEC 7.00 Cr 6.94 Cr 6.30 Cr 
3 MSME Awards 2.00 Cr 0.00 0.00 
4 SS & PR 2.00 Cr 0.25 Cr 0.2310 Cr 
As can be seen from the table, the IC Scheme has utilized almost 100%. Therefore, under -
utilization of funds does not arise. During the FY 2024 -25, a total of 128 claims of 33 Industry 
Associations / Government Organizations for participation in  International Trade Fairs / 
Exhibitions and International Conferences were settled. A total of 528 MSMEs were facilitated 
for participation in International Trade Fairs / Exhibitions. Further, under Capacity Building for 
First Time Exporters (CBFTE) component of IC Scheme, 72 MSMEs were assisted. 
 In the current financial year (2025 –26), the division has already received several proposals for 
studies and surveys, and the processing of these proposals has commenced. The division is, 
therefore, actively enga ged in ensuring optimal utilization of the allocated funds during FY 
2025-26, with efforts focused on timely execution and adherence to procedural requirements. 
Further Recommendation/observation  
The Committee notes that while the International Cooperatio n component of the SPIC 
scheme achieved near full utilization in FY 2024 –25, other sub -schemes such as MSME 
Awards and Survey Studies and Policy Research showed significant underutilization. This 
uneven performance indicates gaps in planning, proposal read iness, and execution 
timelines within specific components of the scheme. 
To address this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry strengthen internal 
coordination and advance planning for the MSME Awards and Survey Studies and Policy 
Research components . Dedicated timelines for proposal solicitation, appraisal, and fund 
disbursement should be established at the beginning of the financial year. The Committee 
further recommends that quarterly monitoring protocols be institutionalized to track 
progress, flag delays, and ensure corrective action. Streamlining procedural workflows and 
enhancing outreach to eligible stakeholders will help improve fund absorption and ensure 
that the full potential of SPIC allocations is realized during FY 2025–26. 

36 
 
Recommendation/observation  
9.  The Committee also recommends the enhancement in the utilization of allocated funds under 
the International Cooperation (IC) Scheme, particularly for the year 2025 -26. While there has 
been a good level of participation in international ex hibitions and conferences, the actual 
expenditure in 2024 -25 (₹10.82 crore) was significantly lower than the revised estimate of ₹18 
crore, indicating underutilization. The Ministry should focus on increasing MSME engagement 
in global markets, ensuring tim ely execution of activities, and streamlining the reimbursement 
processes. 
(Para No. 109) 
Action Taken Replies  
It is mentioned that in current FY 2025 -26, reimbursement claims amounting Rs.2.24 Cr 
facilitating 52 MSMEs for their participation in International Trade Fairs / Exhibitions have been 
settled till 20.05.2025. Further, the Ministry has signed MoU with Ayushexcil (Export Promotion 
Council) on 24.04.2025 as one of the implementing agency for CBFTE component, thus, 
increasing the total number of Implementing Agencies under the CBFTE to 21. 
Further Recommendation/observation  
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s efforts in settling reimbursement claims and 
expanding the number of implementing agencies under the International Cooperation 
Scheme, including the recent partnership with Ayushexcil. However, persistent 
underutilization of funds in previous years suggests that structural improvements are 
needed to fully realize the scheme’s potential in promoting MSME global engagement. 
To strengthen implementation, the Committee recommends that the Ministry identify high-
potential MSME sectors with export readiness and develop a calendar of priority 
international trade events with pre -allocated budgets. A digitized reimbursement system 
with fixed processing timelines should be introduced to minimize delays and improve 
transparency. The Committee also recommends launching structured pre -departure 
orientation programmes for participating MSMEs to enhance their market preparedness 
and negotiation capacity. Furthermore, deeper collaboration with Indian embassies, trade 
missions, and global industry bodies should be institutionalized to facilitate targeted 
business matchmaking, sector -specific networking, and sustained market access for 
MSMEs. The se measures will help translate participation into tangible export outcomes 
and improve fund utilization under the scheme. 
TARGETED SCHEMES / PROGRAMMES FOR THE NORTH-EASTERN 
REGION, WOMEN, AND SPECIALLY-ABLED PERSONS 
 Recommendation/observation  
10.  The Committee notes the underutilisation of allocated funds in the North Eastern Region 
(NER) in multiple financial years, particularly in 2024 -25, and consistent underperformance in 

37 
 
expenditure across various schemes. It recommends that the Ministry of MSME a dopt a 
proactive approach to improve fund utilization in the North Eastern Region (NER), This may 
include strengthening monitoring and evaluation frameworks with quarterly reviews, ensuring 
timely fund release to avoid delays, and providing additional supp ort to local stakeholders for 
better project implementation. Furthermore, targeted awareness campaigns should be conducted 
to enhance awareness of available schemes and processes, particularly in regions with low 
participation, to foster greater engagement and effective utilization of allocated funds. 
(Para No.114) 
Action Taken Replies  
The ministry utilised more than 100% of funds in the North Eastern Region (NER) in various 
Financial Years. Due to non utilisation of entire funds (Rs. 9812.93.Cr) (44.33% of BE, 2024-25) 
under GECL, the expenditure/ utilisation of funds allocated for NER has adversely affected in 
FY 2024-25. 
However, Ministry agrees with the recommendation of Hon’ble Committee. Ministry is taking 
proactive approach to improve 100% utilisation of funds earmarked for NER continuously.  
Further Recommendation/observation  
While the Ministry has indicated proactive efforts to improve fund utilization in the North 
Eastern Region, the Committee remains concerned about the adverse impact of 
underutilization under the Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line component in FY 2024 –25. 
To address this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry conduct a detailed scheme -
wise and state -wise analysis to identify operational, administrative, and financial 
bottlenecks affecting fund absorption, particularly under credit -linked and infrastructure-
intensive schemes. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry establish a dedicated coordination 
platform involving state governments, district -level MSME offices, a nd financial 
institutions to streamline approvals, accelerate project execution, and improve last -mile 
delivery. This platform should facilitate regular review meetings, track implementation 
progress, and ensure that future allocations under GECL and other  MSME schemes are 
calibrated to the absorptive capacity and readiness of each state in the region. 
Strengthening institutional linkages and tailoring interventions to local conditions will help 
unlock the full potential of MSME development in the North Eastern Region. 
Recommendation/observation  
11. The Committee observes a decline in the number of micro enterprises supported under the 
PMEGP scheme and significant disparities in production, sales, and employment across NER 
states. To boost entrepreneurship and create sustainable micro enterprises, it recommends that 
the Ministry of MSME focus on boosting entrepreneurship and micro enterprise growth in the 

38 
 
North Eastern Region (NER) by targeting underperforming states with specialized support, 
training, and mentorship. 
(Para No.115) 
Action Taken Replies  
Steps being taken to support more enterprises in North Eastern Region under the scheme include 
the following : 
(i) Beneficiaries belonging to North Eastern Region (NER) are covered under Special 
category which are provided with the Margin Money Subsidy of 35 % in rural areas 
and 25% in urban areas and 25% in urban areas as against 25% in rural areas and 15% 
in urban areas in case of General category beneficiaries. 
(ii) Own contribution of beneficiaries belonging to NER is 5% of the project cost as 
against to own contribution of 10 under General category. 
(iii) 2nd loan tranche of upto ₹ 1 crore is being provided for upgradation and expansion of 
well-performing existing PMEGP/MUDRA units with subsidy of 20% for NER and 
hilly areas as against 15% in other areas. 
(iv) There is no  ceiling on the number of projects financed under transport activities in 
NER as against the 10% ceiling on number of projects in other areas. 
(v) Industries related to Animal Husbandry like dairy, poultry, acquaculture, insects (bees, 
sericulture,etc). have been allowed under the scheme  
(vi) Awareness programme with a focus on beneficiaries from North-Eastern Region. 
(vii) As a special case, piggery, a major source of livelihood in NER, is allowed in NER 
states.  
Further Recommendation/observation 
The Committee notes th at while PMEGP provides enhanced financial incentives and 
sectoral flexibilities for beneficiaries in the North Eastern Region, several states including 
Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, and Mizoram continue to show a declining trend in the 
number of assisted mi cro-enterprises. This indicates that existing provisions are not 
yielding uniform results across the region and that structural and operational challenges 
may be limiting uptake and impact. 
To address this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry develo p a state -specific 
implementation framework for PMEGP in the North Eastern Region. This framework 
should include quarterly performance benchmarks, localized outreach strategies, and 
capacity-building partnerships tailored to tribal communities, youth, and women 
entrepreneurs. Institutions such as the Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship in Guwahati 
and KVIC field offices should be mobilized to deliver targeted training and mentorship. 
The Committee further recommends the creation of a digital monitoring das hboard to 
track proposal quality, approval timelines, and fund disbursement across states. This will 

39 
 
enable data -driven decision -making, early identification of gaps, and timely corrective 
action to improve scheme absorption and employment outcomes in the region. 
 
Recommendation/observation  
12. The Committee observes a significant decrease in the number of women beneficiaries under 
the PMEGP scheme, with only 11,415 women entrepreneurs assisted in 2024 -25 (up to 
December), marking a nearly 69% reduction compared to the previous year. To reverse this 
decline, it recommends that the Ministry of MSME launch targeted outreach and awareness 
campaigns, particularly in areas with low participation, to encourage more women to take 
advantage of the scheme’s benefits. 
(Para No. 117) 
Action Taken Replies  
The proportion of women beneficiaries to total number of beneficiaries assisted under the 
Scheme in FY 2024 -25 is 39.23%.  The decline in number of women beneficiaries assisted (in 
absolute terms) in FY 2024 -25 is d ue to reduced budget allocation under the scheme from Rs. 
3093.87 crore in FY 2023-24 to Rs. 2202 crore in FY 2024-25.   
2. The initiatives taken under the Scheme to increase awareness and participation of women 
beneficiaries across the country are the following:   
i. Beneficiaries under Special Category including women are provided with higher 
subsidy of 25% and 35% of the project cost in urban and rural areas respectively as 
compared to 15% and 25% of the project cost for General Category beneficiaries. 
ii. Own contribution of beneficiaries belonging to Special Category including women 
is 5% of the project cost as against to own contribution of 10% under General 
category. 
iii. Awareness programmes in all the States/UTs including backward and under -
performing areas, As pirational districts, North Eastern Region with a focus on 
special category beneficiaries. 
Conduct of two -days free online Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) for 
prospective entrepreneurs. 
Further Recommendation/observation 
In addition to targeted outreach and awareness campaigns to enhance women’s 
participation under PMEGP, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of MSME, in 
collaboration with the Khadi and Village Industries Commission, develop region -specific 
promotion strategies that focus on traditional crafts, weaving, handloom, bamboo -based 

40 
 
activities, and other culturally rooted enterprises. Special emphasis should be placed on the 
North Eastern Region, where a significant number of women are engaged in heritage-based 
livelihoods that hold both economic and cultural value. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry identify clusters of traditional skill -
based industries and extend tailored support through skill development programmes, 
simplified access to fin ance, handholding assistance, and improved marketing linkages. To 
institutionalize this effort, the Ministry may consider introducing a dedicated sub -scheme 
or component within PMEGP to promote women -led micro -enterprises in the North 
Eastern states. This initiative should prioritise enterprises that preserve indigenous 
knowledge and contribute to sustainable community-based economic development. 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES - BUDGETING AND OTHER RELATED ISSUES 
Recommendation/observation  
13.  The Committee recommends  that the Ministry allocate additional resources to expand the 
credit support facilities, which have shown a steady rise, from ₹7,221 crore in 2022 -23 to a 
projected ₹9,450 crore in 2024-25. This growth underscores the increasing demand for financial 
assistance among MSMEs. Moreover, given the growth in the number of trainees (from 61,090 in 
2022-23 to a projected 79,200 in 2024 -25), the committee urges the Ministry to further invest in 
skill development programs, ensuring that MSMEs are equipped with the n ecessary technical 
expertise to thrive in the evolving market. 
(Para No. 132) 
Action Taken Replies  
NSIC provides short term credit support for raw material procurement by making the payment to 
suppliers under Raw Material Assistance scheme against Bank Guarantee. To meet the credit 
requirements of MSME units, NSIC has entered into Memorandum of Understa nding with 
Nationalized and Private Sector Banks. Through syndication with these banks, NSIC arranges for 
credit support (fund or non -fund-based limits) from banks. Credit support provided by NSIC to 
MSMEs during last three years are as under:                                            
 (Rs. Crore) 
 FY 2022-23 
 
FY 2023-24 
 
FY 2024-25 
 
Credit support by 
NSIC 
 
7221 
 
8227.59 
 
8527 
 

41 
 
Further, NSIC Technical Services Centers are presently offering Job oriented skill development 
trainings in various disciplines as per requirement of industries. In FY2024 -25, 79295 trainees 
were trained in these technical centres. Further, NSIC with support under Assistant to Training 
Centre of the Ministry is working on a proposal to set up a Technology Centre at Peenya 
Industrial Estate, Bengalure to provide hi -tech training for skill development, material testing 
and advanced labs in a wide range of modern areas by the industries. 
Further Recommendation/observation 
While the Committee notes the steady expansion of NSIC’s credit support from ₹7,221 
crore in FY 2022–23 to ₹8,527 crore in FY 2024 –25, and the scale of skill training reaching 
nearly 79,295 trainees, it remains concerned about the absence of a structured mechanism 
to evaluate the effectiveness of credit deployment and the employment outcomes of skilling 
initiatives. To address this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry establish a credit 
utilization and impact tracking framework under NSIC’s syndication model. This 
framework should capture key indicators such as l oan conversion rates, repayment 
performance, sector -wise credit distribution, and the extent to which credit support 
contributes to enterprise growth and formalization. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry expedite the establishment of the 
proposed Technology Centre at Peenya Industrial Estate and develop a roadmap to 
replicate similar advanced training hubs in other high -density industrial clusters. These 
centres should be designed to deliver industry -aligned curricula, incorporate digital an d 
sustainable technologies, and offer placement -linked skilling modules. Integration with 
local MSME networks and sector -specific associations will help ensure that training is 
demand-driven and leads to measurable improvements in productivity, innovation,  and 
employment generation. 
Recommendation/observation  
14. The Committee observes a decline in new member registrations under the Single Point 
Registration Scheme (SPRS), despite an overall increase in units served. To address this, it 
recommends that the  Ministry intensify efforts to encourage MSMEs, particularly in high -
potential sectors, to register under the SPRS. Additionally, given the projected rise in agency 
sales to ₹4,500 crore in 2024 -25, the Ministry may enhance market access for MSME products,  
ensuring a robust and expanding customer base. 
(Para No.133) 
 
Action Taken Replies  
NSIC operates Single Point Registration Scheme (SPRS) for Government purchase to build the 
capacities of MSE for participation in Government tenders and contribute in Government Public 
Procurement processes. The units registered under Single Point Registration Scheme of NSIC are 
eligible to get the benefits under Public Procurement Policy for Micro & Small Enterprises 

42 
 
(MSE) Order, 2012. 14140 units were served under SPRS during FY 2024 -25. The decline in the 
new member registration under SPRS Scheme is due to the non -recognition of the SPRS 
Certificate at GEM Portal. Rigorously follow -up is being made by NSIC with GEM in this 
regard. 
Further Recommendation/observation     
 
While the Committee acknowledges NSIC’s efforts to expand SPRS coverage and the 
servicing of 14,140 units in FY 2024 –25, it remains concerned that the non -recognition of 
SPRS certificates on the Government e -Marketplace portal is limiting new registrations 
and weakening the operational link between registration and procurement benefit s. This 
disconnect risks discouraging MSMEs from formalizing and participating in public 
procurement, thereby undermining the objectives of the Public Procurement Policy for 
Micro and Small Enterprises. 
To address this, the Committee recommends that the Mi nistry, in coordination with NSIC 
and the Ministry of Commerce, establish a technical integration protocol to enable 
seamless recognition of SPRS credentials on the GeM portal. This should include 
automated verification, real -time data exchange, and alignm ent of eligibility criteria. The 
Committee further recommends launching a joint outreach and onboarding campaign 
targeting MSMEs in high -growth sectors such as manufacturing, clean energy, and digital 
services. This campaign should clarify the benefits of SPRS registration, simplify the 
application process, and promote participation in government tenders. These measures will 
help restore trust in the scheme and ensure that procurement -linked incentives are 
effectively delivered to eligible enterprises. 
--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 43  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
Eleventh Meeting  
  
 The Committee met at 3.00 pm on Wednesday, 07 thAugust 2025, in Committee 
Chairman’s Chamber i.e Room No. 316, Third Floor, Block –B, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva    -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
6. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
7. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
8. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Afzal Ansari 
10. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
11. Shrimati Veena Devi 
12. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
13. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
14. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
15. Km. Sudha R. 
16. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
17. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
18. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
19. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
20. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
21. Shri E. Tukaram 
22. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
23. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
SECRETARIAT 
      1. Niangkhannem Guite, Director 
      2.  Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 

44 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry welcomed the Members of the Committee to its eleventh meeting. 
2. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft reports: 
(i) 329th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 326 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2025–26) pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
(ii) 330th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 327 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2025 –26) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises. 
 
3. Following a detailed discussion, the both the Reports was unanimously adopted. 
 
4. The Committee then decided to table the above Reports in both the Houses of Parliament 
on Friday, the 08 th August, 2025. It was decided that the Reports may be presented in the Rajya 
Sabha by the Chairman and, in his absence, by Shrimati Seema Dwivedi and in her absence, by 
Shri S andosh Kumar P. Likewise, the Committee decided that in Lok Sabha, Shri Konda 
Vishweshwar Reddy will table the reports and his absence, Shri Afzal Ansari, MP, would lay the 
reports. 
5. *      *     * 
6.  *      *     * 
The Committee adjourned at 4.00 pm. 
 
New Delhi                                                              NIANGKHANNEM GUITE 
7th August, 2025                                                                    DIRECTOR 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________ 
*Not related to the subject 
 