177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVENTH   REPORT
ON
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
 
(MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON DECEMBER 13, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON DECEMBER 13,  2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2005 / AGRAHAYANA , 1927  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                  
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                  
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
4.GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE AIM,
OBJECTIVES AND PROVISIONS OF THE BILL   
5.KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 (AS INTRODUCED)
                                                                      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia        -     Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
2.
      Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
3.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal  
4.      Shri Surendra Lath     
5.      Shri Suresh Bhardwaj 
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya
9.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan                   
10.  Vacant
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha                 
13.  Shri Rajnarayan                                  
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
15.  Shri Bapu Hari Chaure           
16.  Shri Subhash Sureshchandra Deshmukh          
17.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
18.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria                     
19.  Smt. Susmita Bauri                             
20.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato       
21.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe            
22.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel         
23.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna       
24.  Shri Gurjeet Singh Rana
25.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
26.  Smt. Rubab Sayeda   
27.  Shri Manvendra Singh            
28.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
29.  Shri Suraj Singh                     
30.  Shri Girdhari Yadav   
31.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi      
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorized
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Seventy Seventh Report of
the Committee on the Khadi and Village Industries Commission  (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  
2.
                         The Khadi and Village Industries Commission (Amendment)  Bill 2005 was introduced  in  the Lok Sabha on
the 22nd  August, 2005  and was referred to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry by the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6 th September, 2005 under Rule 270 (b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in the Council of States for  examination and report thereon , if possible, on or before 21 st November, 2005. 
However, on request being made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman on 21 st November, 2005 granted
the Committee the extension of time till the First day of the last week of the Budget  Session 2006 of the Parliament, for
presentation of the Report on the aforesaid Bill. 
3.                         The Committee held six sittings in all spreading over twenty hours on the Bill. A Press Communique dated the
15th September, 2005,  was issued inviting the views/suggestions/opinion of the general public,  individuals, organisations,
experts, institutions, etc. interested in the subject matter of the Bill. 
4.                         In its meeting held on the 19 th September, 2005, the Committee heard the presentation of the Secretary,
Ministry of ARI, Government of India on the Bill and held preliminary discussion thereon. The Committee decided to hear
the views of all State Governments, KVI Entrepreneurs, self-help groups and major industry associations on the provisions
of the Bill.
5.
                         The Committee in its meetings held on 27th October, 2005, 7th November, 2005, 8th December, 2005, interacted
with the representatives of State Governments,  select NGOs & SHGs
6.                         In response to the Press Communique, one hundred and four written memoranda were received, out of which
sixty memoranda  were found to be relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.
7.                         The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on 9th December, 2005.
8.                         The observations and recommendations of the Committee have been incorporated at appropriate places in the
Report.
9.                          I would like to acknowledge with thanks the valuable contributions made by the witnesses who deposed before

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
it and the senior officers of the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries and Ministry of Law and Justice which facilitated the
Committee in formulating its views on the various provisions of the Bill.
10.                     The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its sitting held on 12th  December, 2005.
 
New Delhi;
December 12, 2005     
Santosh Bagrodia
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry
 
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
Background
1.1       One of the declarations in the National Common Minimum Programme of the Government is that the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission (KVIC) will be revamped.
1.2.      Against the background of the steep decline in employment in the khadi sector and nearly stagnant sales of khadi
products over the past few years, it  became necessary to revamp the KVIC through organizational restructuring and
measures to introduce modern management practices, in order to make khadi and village industry products competitive in
the globalised economy while continuing to generate non-farm employment opportunities in the rural areas.
1.3       With these objectives, the Government dissolved the Commission in October 2004 and constituted a ten-member
Expert Committee in December 2004 to recommend suitable measures for its revamping, after reviewing the structure,
functioning and performance of the KVIC in the existing Act.  The Expert Committee submitted its report in April 2005.
1.4       After considering the recommendations of the Expert Committee, the Government   introduced the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2005 in Lok Sabha on 22.8.2005 to suitably amend the existing Khadi
and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956, so that the statutory provisions governing the organizational structure and
functions of the KVIC could be   made more professional and in keeping with the requirement of the present times.
1.5       Towards the objective  of making the membership of the KVIC more professional and broad-based, the Bill
proposes to include two more part-time members in the  Commission. One member would be an expert in the field of
marketing because improving the marketing of Khadi and Village Industry (KVI) products has been identified as one of
the most important requirements for speeding up the growth of the KVI sector.  Similarly, availability of credit is an
important requirement for improving the performance of the sector. Therefore, it has also been proposed in the Bill to
include the Chairman of the State Bank of India (or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Managing Director of that
Bank) as a part-time member of the Commission. This is because the State Bank of India is not only the largest public
sector bank but also the highest lender to the working institutions and producing units in the khadi and village industry
sector.
1.6       In order to facilitate better coordination with the State Khadi and Village Industries Boards established by State
Governments, obtain regular feed-back on the problems being faced by the KVI sector in the six zones of the country and
suggest to the Commission measures to resolve difficulties after reviewing the implementation of the programmes at the
field level, provision for constitution of one Zonal Committee in each of the six geographical zones of the country has also
been provided in the Bill. The membership of the Zonal Committee includes the Chairmen of State KVI Boards in the
Zone.
1.7       In the existing KVIC Act, there is no provision for re-constitution of the Commission after its dissolution.
Therefore, to enable reconstitution of the Commission after its dissolution, suitable provision has also been proposed in the

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
Bill.
1.8       (i)         In this Bill, it has also been proposed that the tenure of Chairman and Members of the Commission shall be
upto a continuous period of five years and that they shall hold office upto that period at the pleasure of the Government.
(ii)        Similarly, provision for regular meetings (at least twice a year) of the existing Khadi and Village Industries Board
(a central level consultative institution) has been made in the Bill.
(iii)       Provisions for clearer demarcation of the roles of the Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and Financial Adviser of
the Commission have also been proposed in the Bill.
1.9     The suggested changes will not adversely alter the basic objectives, powers and functions of the KVIC in the
existing KVIC Act.  In fact, it is expected and believed that with these proposed changes, the KVIC will become more
professional and relevant in the times to come and be better equipped in the discharge of its key role in facilitating
generation of sustainable and wide-spread non-farm employment in the rural areas of the country. 
1.10     The Bill aims at facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of small and
medium enterprises and seeks to:-
(a)
                include two more part-time Members in the Khadi and Village Industries Commission;
 
(b)               confer voting rights upon the ex officio Members of the Commission;
 
(c)
                provide requirement of ten years of experience in appropriate fields for appointment as a member of the
Commission and also widen the field of expertise for appointment as a Member of the Commission;
 
(d)               make specific provisions for clear demarcation of functions and powers among the Commission, the Chief
Executive Officer and the Financial Adviser of the Commission;
 
(e)                provide for constitution of Zonal Committees, its functions and meetings;
 
(f)                 make specific provisions for undertaking certain functions by the Commission through specified agencies;
 
(g)                clarify that the Chairman and Members of the Commission shall hold office at the pleasure of the Central
Government which shall not exceed continuous period of five years as such in the Commission;
 
(h)                confer power upon the Central Government to re-establish the Commission after its dissolution; and
 
(i)                  make other provisions which are clarificatory or consequential in nature.
CHAPTER-II
 
VIEWS EXPRESSED BY THE STATE REPRESENTATIVES / INDIVIDUALS / ORGANISATIONS /
EXPERTS  BEFORE THE  COMMITTEE  ON  THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS  IN  THE  PRINCIPAL  ACT
 
2.1                   In  response to the Press Communiqué which appeared  in the major national and regional dailies on behalf
of the Committee seeking views and opinion of the general public and experts on the proposed provisions of Khadi and
Village Industries (Amendments) Bill, 2005 which sought to amend the Principal Act,  the Committee received valuable
inputs from the State representatives, NGOs, experts, KVI institutions and Self-help Groups. The Committee inter–alia
received suggestions from Resham Khadi Bhander, Acharya Kripalani Memorial Trust,  Indian Council of Small
Industries,   Gandhi Smruti Trust,  Bhavnagar, Khadi Garmodyog Sangh, Allahabad, Puducherry Khadar Grama Thozhil
Varia Paniyalargal Nala Sangam, Pondicherry,  Uttar Pradesh Gandhi Smarak Nidhi, Shaurashtra Rachnatmak Samiti, 
Rajkot, Shadhbhavana Sewa Samiti, Durg,  Federation of Sarvodaya Sanghs and Khadi Village Industries institutions of
Tamilnadu and Pondicherry, Association of voluntary Agencies for Rural Development, Gujarat Khadi Gramodyog
Sanstha Sandh,  Punjab Khadi Mandal, Khadi Gramodyog Federation of National Capital Region Delhi, Association of
Maharashtra Khadi Gramodyaga Institutions,  Dhanlaxmi Su-Udyog,  Kshetriya Shri Gandhi Ashram Lucknow , Gandhi
Smarak Nidhi, New Delhi,  Gramodaya Sangh Bhadrawati and individual experts  Shri T.R. Subramanianm,  J.S. Khathri, 
R.B. Chavan,  P. Bhatt,  Bhupal Singh,  K.S. Sreekumaran Nair,  Milap Choraria,  Prof. Arvind Kr. Jindal,  Shakar Kumar

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
Das.
 
2.2                   The Committee interacted  with the representatives  of the State Governments on 27 th October, 2005, 7th
November, 2005 and on 8 th December, 2005.  The Committee also heard the select NGOs and SHGs of the States along
with the representatives of the State Governments.
 
2.3                          During the Committee’s study visit to Kolkata, Mumbai,, Chennai and Bangalore from 9 th to 14 th
November, 2005 the Committee interacted  with the representatives of State Governments, SHGs and NGOs.
 
2.4
                          The suggestions received from institutions, individuals, experts and the representatives of the State
Governments on the various provisions of the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 are enumerated in succeeding paras .
 
2.5
                          In Section-2, Clause (h) (i) the definition of the Village Industries has been defined in the Principal Act as 
any Industry located in a rural area which produces any goods or  renders any service with or without the use of power and
in which the fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker does not exceed fifteen thousand rupees or such
other sum as may be notified by notification in the Official Gazette.  The proposed Amendment Bill substituted the words
fifteen thousand with words one lakh rupees. 
 
2.6
                          There were suggestions that the limit of the  fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker
should be differential for the plain  area and the hilly areas as the cost of establishment of Industries in the hilly areas are
comparatively higher. 
 
2.7
                          There was also suggestion  that  the limit of   the  fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a
worker for the plain  area and the hilly areas  should be one lakh fifty thousand.  Further the amendment should be worded
as “the fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker enlisted as a member of registered society does not
exceed one lakh. Or 1.5 lakh.”
 
2.8
                          Regarding the proposed amendment  in the Sub-clause(b) of Clause –3 of the Bill,  relating  to the 
substitution of the words “having specialized  knowledge and experience of khadi and village industries” with the words 
“having specialized knowledge and  not less than  ten years of experience of  khadi or village industries”,  the Committee  
received the opinion that   all the Members should be the full time Members and should have experience in both khadi and
village industries instead of Khadi or Village Industries.  It was stated that the word “Khadi and Village Industries ” is
more  appropriate as  the definition of Village Industries is ever expanding after 1987, but Khadi and 26 V.I., (which are
listed in the Amendment of 1987) provide  direct employment under the implementing agencies of the KVIC. 
 
2.9
                          The Zonal members of the body are expected to be  the experienced both in Khadi and V.Is.  With the word
“or” replacing “and” of the original Act, there may arise a  possibility at any stage of the Govt. nominating all the Zonal
members with V.I. experience alone and thus the future KVIC may be deprived of Zonal members, with the expertise in
Khadi.   Therefore, the earlier word  “and” should be retained and not  replaced with the word“or”.
 
2.10
          On the proposed insertion of clause (1A) after sub-section (I) of Section – 4  (1)  relating to the vesting  in the
Commission  the exercise  of  all the powers and discharge of all functions under this Act, including general
superintendence, direction and management of day to day affairs of  the Commission, the Committee  received the
suggestion that  power has to be vested  with Chairman, subject to overall control of the Commission.   It was also
suggested that   the CEO be held responsible for the management of day to day affairs of the Commission. 
 
2.11
          The Sub-clause (b) (ii) of Clause-3 of the Bill, proposes   amendment in Section 4(2)(b) of the Principal Act which
provides the appointment of non-officials  Members  in the Commission having expert knowledge and experience in one
or more of the  disciplines, namely Economics, Planning, Rural Development, Science and Technology or Technical 
Education and Training. The proposed amendment entails increasing the membership of KVIC from 10 to 12 .  
 
2.12
          It was suggested that the appointment of non-officials Members over and above  5  Members be avoided. 
Knowledge and experience in the discipline of Science and Technology, Marketing etc. should also be kept in view  while
appointing 5  Members of the Commission.  Further such expertise required could be availed of by appointing experts in
various advisory Committees as used to be done prior to 1987 amendment.

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
 
2.13          The proposed amendment in the Section 4 (2) of the Principal Act provides for either whole time or part-time
Members.  The Committee received the opinion that such differentiation between the Members should be done away with
and all the Members should be treated   as full-time Members.  The differentiation between the Members is at the root of
making other Members, excepting the Chairman ineffective and turns them into mere advisors, participating in the
activities of the KVIC on the days of meetings alone. 
 
2.14
          Taking cue from this provision, after the Amendment of 1987, Rules of KVIC (no.4) made all other Members,
excepting the Chairman as part time Members and the Chairman stopped sharing his responsibilities with the other
Members and thus began a downward trend in the KVIC in the field of performance, in spite of mounting administrative
costs.  The golden period of the KVIC from the point of view of growth, was between 1957-87, when all the Members
were entrusted with specific responsibilities of the KVIC, under the overall supervision and guidance of the Chairman.  
Hence all the Members should be made capable to share the responsibility of the Chairman of the KVIC.
 
2.15
          The proposed insertion of    the new  clause (ba) after   clause   (b) in the section-4 (2) of the Principal Act
provides that  the Chairman,  State  Bank of India (constituted  under Sub-Section (1)  of Section 3  of the State Bank of
India Act 1955) or an  officer  not below the rank of Deputy  Managing Director  may be nominated by the Chairman of
the State Bank of India, as the ex-officio Member of the Commission .  The Committee received the suggestions that 
instead  of the Chairman, SBI, either the collegiums of Banks, including the Chairman of the NABARD   should be 
incorporated  as ex-officio   member of the Committee.
 
2.16
          Pertaining to the provision for substitution  of Clause ( c) CEO  as ex-officio member   and (d) Financial Adviser 
who shall be  the Chief Accounts officer of the Commission, ex-officio  member of the Commission  in Clause 3 (b) (iv), 
the Committee was  suggested that   the  CEO should continue as an ex-officio member with no voting rights.  While
Financial Adviser should   attend all meetings of the  Commission,   he should not be made a member of the Commission. 
Similarly the  Financial Adviser  should not be made the Chief Accounts Officer as the functions of two posts  are likely to
come into conflict.  The CEO and Financial Adviser should not be made ex-officio member.
 
2.17
          Regarding the omission of the proviso to Clause  3(b) (v)  of section – 4(2)  of the Principal Act  which reads that 
“ Provided that the ex-officio Members  shall not have the  right  to vote  in any of the matters discussed  at a  meeting of
the  Commission” , the Committee received the  suggestion that  the said provisio should be retained.
 
2.18
          On the issue of  the proposed amendment  in  Section-5 (1) of the Principal Act, stating that the Chief Executive
Officer  appointed   under Clause 4 (2) (c) shall  exercise   powers and discharge such functions  in respect   of the  general
superintendence over the affairs of the Commission and its  day-to-day  management,  the Committee received the  
suggestion that  for  the words  “the Commission” the  words  “ the Commission and its Chairman” should be substituted.
 
2.19
          The Committee also received the suggestion that  the provisions  in Section 5 (1) in the  Act  should be retained
which reads as  “ the Chief Executive Officer appointed under Clause (d) of sub-section (2) of  section (4) shall exercise
powers of  general superintendence over the  affairs  of the Commission  and its day to day management  under the
direction and control of the Chairman.”  This is essential as the same  ensures preservation of the non  -official and
autonomous (as  against being a government  department and directorate )    character of the KVIC, without   which  such
a body with net working with the people in more than 2 lakh of villages  cannot do justice  to the duty assigned. 
Notwithstanding,  the powers  and duties   allotted to the Chairman, he cannot  be effective and become functus officio
without  any say over the working of the Chief Executive  of the  organization  he is supposed  to head.  Since the
Members  are  expected to meet once  in a month only,  the  CEO  cannot have  the  scope of having the benefit of 
“superintendence, direction and management of the commission”  as  envisaged  in the KVIC Amendment Bill, 2005   for 
most of the days in  a month and  this again  may effect the non-official character of KVIC,  which has to deal with the 
people  and their voluntary organizations.
 
2.20
          On the issue of the powers and functions of the CEO pertaining to the general superintendence, direction and
management of the Commission, the Committee was  suggested that the proposed amendment in the Section 5(1) of the
Act is not referred   and consequently Sub-Section (1A) is not required to be added.  That  is to say  that  the sub-section
(1A) should  remain as the same whereupon CEO  will continue to  function   under the  general supervision and  control
of the Chairman and not the corporate body.  It was suggested that any dilution of powers vested  in the Chairman  under
the provisions  of the Principal Act  is neither wise  nor desirable for effective   functioning of the Commission.  The

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
proposed amendment in the Bill would render the Chairman ineffective and therefore existing provision of Section 5, Sub-
Section 1 of the Principal Act needs no change.
 
2.21
          Regarding the provision of the  meeting  of  Khadi and Village Industries Board at least   twice in a year under  the
Clause 6 (3) of the proposed  amendment Bill, 2005, the Committee received the suggestion that  their should be quarterly 
meeting of the Board instead  of twice in  a year.   However, it may be pointed out that     the said provision  already exists 
in  Rule  13A(3)  of the KVIC Rules, 1957,  its incorporation in the  Act  shall strengthen  the  functioning  of the Board
and mandate its regular meetings  more emphatically.    This will ensure at least two meetings in a year and more meetings
could be held depending on the need.
 
2.22
          On the issue of proposed amendment in Section 12 of the Principal Act in sub-section (3), for the words  “votes of
the members present” and its substitution with the words “votes of the members including ex-officio members present”,
the Committee received the suggestion that no voting right to be conferred to the ex-officio member, therefore, the existing
practice of  ex-officio Members  without  voting right  should be restored.  This is  necessary   for the purpose of
maintaining the non-official character of the KVIC. 
 
2.23
          On the issue of the formation of Zonal Committees  and its functions  under   Clause 12A after the Section 12  of
the Principal Act,  the Committee received  a mixed response  beginning from the  raison-de-teir  for the  constitution of
the  Zonal Committees as the same would   cause   delay and complications, therefore  the need  was to give  functional 
responsibility to the non-official member at  national level. 
 
2.24
          However, some of the  KVIC institutions  welcomed the measures  for formation  of the Zonal Committees
towards  decentralized  functioning.   But   with a view to ensuring  peoples participation, it was suggested that   two
representatives of  institutions  (one big, the other small) from  each of the States in the zones should be made Members of
the Zonal Committee.   It was contended  to be essential as  it  is mainly by the  voluntary   institutions/co-operatives 
which implements the   programmes of the KVIC.   Without their direct  involvement in the Committee , the real  picture
of the programme in the field  may not emerge before the zonal member   to enable them to realize the  correct position.  
Without  correct  feed    back  from the field,   the KVIC at the  central level  may not be  able  to  arrive at the correct
decision. 
 
2.25
          If it is felt  that the Zonal Committee may become  unwieldy due to the addition of the  representatives of the 
institutions, the proposal  of the membership of the  State Directors  be dropped since  the zonal   Deputy CEO of KVIC  
is proposed to be   the member   Convener of the Committee.  The Deputy  CEO of KVIC being a  higher authority  than
to   the State Directors,   the former would be  in a position   to utilize  the expertise and experience of the State Directors
.  
 
2.26
          Regarding the functioning of zonal committee as forum for consultation under Clause  8(4) of the KVIC
(Amendment) Bill, 2005, the Committee was suggested that in order to empower the zonal committee with appropriate
decision making and execution of its programme and scheme as delegated by the Commission, for the words  “a forum for
consultation, the words  “a forum for consultation, decision making and execution should be substituted.”   Moreover, a
new clause after the   Clause (a)  with regard to  making of decision  and execution of  programme and  scheme by the
zonal committee should be  inserted .     
 
2.27
          On the proposed amendment in  Section 15(1)  of the Principal Act  by the clause 10(b)  of the amendment Bill,
2005,   regarding the substitution of  the words  “plan  and organize”,  with  the words “plan and organize, directly  or
through  specified agencies”,  the Committee received the suggestions that after the words “specified agencies”  the
words   “having  adequate  expertise and knowledge and not less than  10 years of  experience  in the related  function of
the khadi  and village industries”  be added.
 
2.28
          The clause 12 of   the  KVIC (Amendment)  Bill, 2005 proposes amendment in Section-25 of the Principal Act,
which pertains to the provision for  dissolution of the Commission.   The said  sub-section 3 of  section – 25  as proposed
through the amendment   provides that the Central government may re-establish the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of Section 4 and on and from the date of the re-establishment of the Commission, the properties and funds
which had previously vested in the Central Government under clause (a) of Sub-Section (2) shall stand vested in the
Commission so re-established.   The Committee received the suggestions that  section 25 (2)(a)(1) may be inserted  with
the provision that “all rights, obligations  and liabilities (including  any liability under any contract) of the KVIC, on the

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
date of dissolution shall become the rights  , obligations and liabilities of the Government.” 
CHAPTER-III
CLAUSE –BY- CLAUSE CONSIDERATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE KHADI AND VILLAGE
INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
 
           
3.0                   After   examining the provisions of the Khadi And Village Industries Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2005
and the consideration of suggestions thereto by the individual experts and organizations/institutions  and their implications
on the over- all working of the  Principal Act, the Committee took up the Clause-by-Clause consideration of the provisions
of the  Khadi and Village Industries Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2005, which are enumerated in the foregoing paras.   
 
CLAUSE – 2
 
3.1                   Clause-2 proposes Amendment in Section-2 of the Principal Act which deals with the definition of the
Village Industries.  Under the proposed amendment in Sub-Clause-(i) of Clause-(h) the Village Industry would be  defined
as  any Industries located in a rural area which produces any goods or renders any service with or without the use of poser
and in which the fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker does not exceed one lakh rupees.  
 
3.1.1    The Committee is in agreement with the proposed Amendment in Sub-Clause-(i) of Clause-(h) of  in the  Section-2
of the Principal Act for enhancing the limit of the Village Industry for   fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a
worker in general.   The Committee wonders as how the Village Industries continued to be defined with the fixed capital
of fifteen thousand which is a too meager amount for establishing even the Village Industries.  This Amendment must
have come much earlier.   
           
3.1.2    The Committee, however, feels that there  should be differential  criteria for defining the Village Industries for the
plain area and the hilly areas so far as the limit of the fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker is
concerned.   That is so because the cost of establishment of Industry in the hilly areas is higher in comparison   to the plain
areas.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the proposed KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 must include provision for
the limit of the fixed capital investment per head of an artisan or a worker to the tune of rupees one lakh fifty thousand for
hilly areas. 
 
3.1.3.   The Committee takes note of the suggestion made by several stakeholders that the definition of “rural areas” as
given in Section 2 (ff) of the Principal Act needs to be revised in view of growing population.  The Committee is also of
the view that the definition of “rural areas” may be revised.  The Committee accordingly suggests that “rural areas”may
now be defined as  “the area comprised in any village, and includes the area comprised in any town, the population of
which does not exceed twenty thousand or such other figure as the Central Government may specify from time to time.” 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Section 2 (ff) of the Principal Act may accordingly be amended.
 
3.1.4    Subject to such changes , the Clause was adopted. 
 
CLAUSE – 3
 
                       
3.2                   The Clause relates to the insertion of new clause (1A) after (a) Sub-Section (1) in section 4 of the Principal
Act. The Section 4 of the Principal Act stipulates KVIC as body corporate having perpetual succession with power to
acquire hold and dispose of property and to contract with KVIC assuming the juristic personality.   The proposed
amendment through insertion of new Clause (1A) after (a) after Sub-Section (1) in Section 4 of the Principal Act stipulates
that the exercise of all powers and discharge of all functions under this Act, including general superintendence, direction
and management of day-to-day affairs of the Commission, shall vest in the Commission.
 
3.2.1    The Committee agrees with the intention of the proposed KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 to envisage KVIC
corporate body with the team of experts in various segments of the Khadi and Village Industries.  The purpose of the
proposed amendment is to acquire professionalism in approach with functional autonomy.  The Committee is of the view
that the proposed amendment investing in the Commission the exercise of all the powers and discharge all the functions
including general superintendence, direction and the management of day-to-day affairs of the Commission may cause
apprehension of delay in the decision-making process.  Necessary precautions are required to be taken by the Government

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
to remove such apprehension.  
 
 3.2.2   The Sub-Clause (b)  (i) proposes Amendment in Clause (a) of Sub-Section (2) of the Principal Act by substituting
the words “having specialized knowledge and experience of Khadi and village Industries”, with the words , “having
specialized knowledge and experience of Khadi or Village Industries”.
                       
 
3.2.3    In regard to the qualification of Members the Act provided that Members  to be appointed by the Central
Government as member of the Commission, one must have specialized knowledge and experience of Khadi and Village
Industries. Therefore, it is  appropriate to amend  that section as “ having specialized knowledge and not less than ten years
of experience of Khadi or Village Industries” in the Sub-Clause (b) of clause-3 of the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005.  
           
3.2.4    The Sub-Clause (b)  (ii) of Clause-3 of the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 Seeks to appointment of three non-
officials Members in the Commission having expert knowledge and experience in one or more of the disciplines, namely,
Science and Technology, Marketing, Economics or Planning or Rural Development or Technical Education and Training. 
 
 
3.2.5    The Committee suggests that there is a need that there should be separate appointment of Members from each i.e.
Economics and Planning, Rural Development; and Technical Education and Training.  Accordingly, the Committee
recommends Sub-Clause (b)(ii)(b) should provide for five non-official Members instead of three as proposed in the Bill
and the Clause may  be suitably amended.
 
3.2.6    The Sub-Clause (b) (iii) of Clause-3 further seeks the nomination of and officers not below the rank of Deputy
Managing Director as may be nominated by the Chairman of the State Bank of India to be the ex-officio member of the
Commission. 
 
3.2.7    The Sub-Clause (b) (iv) of Clause-3 makes chief executive officer and one Financial Adviser as ex-officio
Members of the Commission.
 
3.2.8.   The Committee suggests that in the Clause 3 (b) (iv) (d) of the Bill, the word, “one”, may be substituted with the
word “a”. 
 
3.2.9    The Sub-Clause (b) (v) of Clause-3 proposes omission of the provision made after Clause (d) of Sub-Section (2) of
the Section 4 of the Principal Act, which would amount to the effect that the ex-officio member shall have the right to vote
in any of the matters discussed at a meeting of the commission.    
                                               
3.2.10  Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted. 
 
CLAUSE – 4
 
3.3                   The Clause proposes amendment in Sub-Section (1) of the Section-5 of the Principal Act, which relates to
the provision for Power and Functions of the Chief Executive Officer who has been empowered to exercise powers of
general superintendence over the affairs of the Commission and its day to day management under the General
Superintendence, direction and management of the Commission  and inserts (1A) providing that CEO shall exercise such
powers and discharge such functions under general Superintendence, direction and management of the Commission. 
 
3.3.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
 
CLAUSE – 5
                       
3.4                   The Clause proposes amendment in Section-5A of the Principal Act, which relates to the  powers and
functions of the Financial Advisor who shall be in charge of such financial matters of the Commission including its
budget, accounts and audit as may be prescribed.
           
3.4.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
 

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
CLAUSE – 6
 
3.5                   The Clause proposes amendment of Section-10 of the Principal Act which relates to constitution of the
Khadi and Village Industries Board, which shall meet at least twice in a year at such times and places and observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum at the meeting.
 
3.5.1    The Committee is of the view that in order to avoid the confusion between the State KVI Boards and the Khadi and
Village Industries Board, under the KVIC Act, 1956 the latter may be termed as “National Khadi and Village Industries
Board”.   The Section 10(1) may be suitably amended.
                       
3.5.2    Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted. 
 
CLAUSE – 7
 
3.6       The Clause proposes amendment in Section-12 of the Principal Act, which relates to the timing, places and
procedures of meetings of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission and proposes amendment in  Sub-Section (3) of
Section-12 of the Principal Act by substituting the words “votes of the Members present” by  the words and brackets 
“votes of the Members (including ex-officio Members) present”.   
 
3.6.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
 
CLAUSE – 8
 
3.7       The Clause proposes for formation ofZonal Committee’s for each of the six geographical zones. The Zonal
Committee shall consists of the the non-official member representing the zone (as Chairman of the respective) Zonal
committee, Chairman of each of the State Khadi and Village Industries Boards of the States as the zone-member, Zonal
Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the Commission (as convener of the Zonal committee-member), State Directors in
charge of the Commission’s Directorates for the States  and a Zonal or Regional manager of one of the lead banks
operating in the zone-member.  The Zonal Committee will observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including the quorum at the meetings)  as per regulations made by the Commission. The
Committee shall meet at least once in every three months.    The Zonal Committee shall function as a forum for
consultation and act as a conduit for the dissemination of information relating to the programmes and schemes of the
Commission for the development of Khadi and Village Industries in the zone; monitor, from time to time, the
implementation of the programmes and schemes and provide feedback to the Commission on the problems and difficulties
envisaged and suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engaged in the operation of programmes
and schemes .
     
 
3.7.1    The Committee welcomes the formation of Zonal Committees and the measures towards  decentralized 
functioning of KVIC, however, with a view to ensuring participation of the real stakeholders, at least one   representative
of  institutions having not less than ten years of   experience with khadi and/or village industries with good track record of
performance from  each one of the States in the zones should be made members of the Zonal Committee.   The Committee
understands that the voluntary   institutions/co-operatives implement the programmes of the KVIC, therefore,   their direct 
involvement in the  Zonal Committee would enable them to realize the  correct field  position/  correct  feed    back  from
the field and thus would be helpful in decision making – process .  
             
3.7.2    The Committee received the suggestion that in many States the Chairman of the State Khadi and Village Industries
Boards of the States is politically appointee with Ministerial rank and it may not be feasible for him to attend the meeting
of the Zonal Committee.  Accordingly, the Central Government may decide the representative of the State KVIBs as
member of the Zonal Committee in consultation with the State Governments.  The Committee also agrees with the view
point and therefore recommends that  in place of the Chairman, State KVIB, the representative of each of the State Khadi
and Village Industries Boards of the States or  the Government of each of States in the zone,  as the case may be,  to be
notified by the Central Government within 30 days in consultation with State Government concerned –member. 
 
3.7.3    Subject to such changes, the Clause was adopted. 
 

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
CLAUSE – 9
 
3.8       The Clause proposes amendment in Sub-Section (1) of Section-13 of the Principal Act, which relates to the term of
office and conditions of service of the Chairman and other Members of the Commission.  The Clause proposes that
Members of the Commission other than ex-offico Members shall hold office at the pleasure of the Central Government
which shall not exceed continuous period of five years.
 
3.8.1    The Clause was adopted without any change.
 
CLAUSE – 10
 
3.9    The Clause proposes amendment in Section-15 of the Principal Act, which pertains to the functions of the
Commission. The  Sub-Clause (a) proposes amendment in Sub-Section (1) of Section-15 of the Principal Act substituting
the   words “ plan, promote, organize”, with words  “plan, promote, facilitate, organize”.
 
3.9.1    The Sub-Clause (b) (i) proposes amendment in Sub-Section (2) (a)  of Section-15 of the Principal Act by
substituting the words  “plan and organize”, with the words “plan and organize, directly or through specified agencies”.
3.9.2    The Sub-Clause (b) (ii)  proposes amendment in Sub-Section (2) (b)  of Section-15 of the Principal Act by  
substituting the words “build up”, with the words “build up directly or through specified agencies,” and by substituting the
words “supply them “, with words “supply them or arrange supply of the raw materials and implements” .
3.9.3    The Sub-Clause (b) (iii) proposes amendment in Sub-Section (2) (g) of Section-15 of the Principal Act by
substituting the words “provide financial assistance”, with the words “provide financial assistance, directly or through
specified agencies.
3.9.4    The Sub-Clause (b) (iv) of Clause proposes amendment in Sub-Section (2) (h)  of Section-15 of the Principal Act
by  substituting the words “ undertake experiments”, with the words “undertake, directly or through specified agencies,
experiments.” 
3.9.5.   As per explanation for the purposes of clauses (a), (b), (g) and (h) of Sub-Section (2), the expression “specified
agencies” means the agencies which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf.” 
 
 
3.9.6    On the proposed amendment in  Section 15 (1)  of the Principal Act  by the Sub-Clause (b)  regarding the
substitution of  the words  “plan  and organize”,  with  the words “plan and organize, directly  or through  specified
agencies ”,  the Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the KVI stakeholders that “specified agencies”  should
have  adequate  expertise and knowledge   in the related  fields of the khadi  and village industries.   The Committee
accordingly suggest that Government should take care while specifying them.
 
3.9.7    The Clause was adopted without any change. 
 
CLAUSE – 11
 
3.10     The Clause proposes insertion of a proviso to Section-19A of the Principal Act, which pertains to the provision for
constitution of Standing Finance Committees   of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) for spending. The
Sub-Section (1) of the Section-18  provides that the Commission shall have three separate funds to be called the khadi
fund, the village industries fund and the general and miscellaneous fund. The purported amendment under  the Clause 
inserts  the  proviso in Sub-Section(1) of Section-19A of the Principal Act providing  that the Chief Executive Officer and
Financial Adviser shall be ex-officio Members of the Standing Finance Committee in respect of each of the three separate
funds referred to in Sub-Section (1) of Section 18
 
3.10.1  The Clause was adopted without any change. 
 
CLAUSE-12

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
 
3.11     The Clause-12 of the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 proposes insertion of new sub-section after sub-section (2) of
Section-25 of the Principal Act, which pertains to the provision for dissolution of the Commission.  The Section-25 (1)
provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct  the dissolution of the
Commission on  such date as may be specified in the notification and thereupon the Commission shall be deemed to be
dissolved accordingly. This Clause inserts  a  Sub-Section, (designated as Sub-Section (3) of Section-25) after Sub-Section
(2) in Section 25 of the Principal Act providing that any time after the issue of the notification under Sub-Section (1), the
Central Government may re-establish the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 4 and on and from the
date of the re-establishment of the Commission, the properties and funds which had previously vested in the Central
Government under clause (a) of Sub-Section (2) shall stand vested in the Commission so re-established.
 
3.11.1  The Clause was adopted without any change.
CLAUSE-13
 
  3.12 The Clause proposes amendment in Section-26 of the Principal Act, which pertains to the provision for the Central
Government to make rules to give effect to the provisions of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956.  The
proposed amendment under this Clause purports insertion of the provisions in Sub-Section (2) of Section 26 of the
Principal Act which inter-alia include the provisions relating to the powers to be exercised and functions to be discharged
by the Chief Executive Officer under Sub-Section (1) of Section 5; the financial matters in respect of which the Financial
Adviser shall be in charge under Section 5A and the transaction of business at the meetings of the Board under Sub-
Section (2) of Section 10.
 
3.12.1 The Clause was adopted without any change.
 
CLAUSE-14
 
3.13 The Clause proposes amendment in Section-27 of the Principal Act, which pertains to Power of the Commission to
make regulations with the prior permission of the  Central Government. The proposed amendment under Clause (i) of the 
Clause inserts (ba)  after Clause (b)  in Sub-Section (2) of Section 27 of the Principal Act which provides the the
transaction of business at the meetings of the Zonal Committee under Sub-Section (2) of Section 12A. The Sub-Clause (ii)
purports omission of the words “the Chief Executive Officer or”  of Clause (c)  in Sub-Section (2) of Section 27 of the
Principal Act. The Sub-Section (2A) has the provision for giving retrospective effect to some regulations with respect to
the terms and conditions of service and the scales of pay and pension to be paid to the employees of the Commission. 
 
            3.13.1 The Clause was adopted without any change.
 
Clause-1, the enacting formula and title
 
            3.14   Clause 1, the enacting formula and title was adopted without any change.
 
            3.14. 1  Out of 14 Clauses, the Committee recommends amendments in  four  Clauses & adopts remaining Clauses
without any change.
 
             3.14. 2   The  Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating  amendments approved by it
along with necessary consequential changes to give effect to the recommendations of the Committee, wherever required. 
The Committee impresses upon the Government to give due consideration to General Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee.
CHAPTER-IV
 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION/ OBSERVATION/CONCLUSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE AIM,
OBJECTIVES AND PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
 
            4.1       The Committee is of the view that the process of liberalization and globalization in the Indian economy
started since 1991 when the structural-adjustment gave fillip to the concept of corporatistion when the Companies in the
private sector and PSUs in the Government sector address the problem of management through having a body of
professional management.  The Committee wonders as to why the Government took almost 15 Years to adopt the concept

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
in regard to functioning of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission.  The delay caused in adopting the KVIC to the
fast- changing economic and corporate environment crippled the growth and development of Khadi and Village Industries
in the Country and KVIC remained a mute spectator.
 
4.2              The Committee has been given to understand that the KVIC (Amendment)  Bill, 2005 is a step towards
corporatistion of the Commission.  But the real question arises to what extent ?  Is not the proposed amendment is a half –
way effort towards professionalisation of the Commission.  How  much time the Government would take for converting
the Commission into corporation.  The Government may take the plea that the Commission is dependent upon budgetary
support to provide subsidy to the Khadi Industries.  But how long the Government would be in position to provide subsidy
to the Khadi is a big question, which requires the immediate and in-depth attention of the Government. 
 
4.3
              The Committee, while giving due respect to the Khadi as national symbol during India’s struggle for Independence
and the importance being attached to Khadi by Father of the Nation, is of the view that sooner the Khadi Industries
become economically self-reliant, the better would be for its future business in the competitive environment and also for
the Government which is withdrawing itself from the business course.
 
4.4
              The Committee understands that the main objectives of the proposed KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 is to set into
place the professional team in the KVIC.  The Committee is, however, of the view that aiming at achieving the
professional standard in the working system through appointment of experts at top level is merely “ a window dressing”.
The Committee during the course of interactions with the various stake-holders including the representatives of State
Government received significant suggestions that total overhauling of Khadi and Village Industries Commission is
required to inject a new lease of life into the organizational structure to unleash   operational efficiency and functional
efficacy in the over all working system of the Khadi and Village Industries Sector.   The Committee is surprised to observe
that no provision has been made in the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 for achieving professionalism in the middle and
lower level of management in the KVIC.  The Committee is of the considered view that in order to attain organizational
efficiency and professional proficiency KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 must have the provision for ushering
professionalism in all ranks and files of the overall umbrella under   KVIC. 
 
4.5
              The Committee is surprised to find that functions of Khadi and Village Industries Board has not been specified
either in the Principal Act or in its Rules except with the provision that it would assist the KVIC. The Committee is unable
to understand what sort of assistance is being imparted by KVI Board to the Commission in the absence of clear provisions
in the Principal Act.   Nor do the rules framed under the Act elaborate on this aspect.  The Committee desires that the
functions of the KVI Board should be clearly spelt out at least in the rules.
 
4.6
              In order to make the recovery proceedings effective, the officers of the KVIC at State level should be conferred
with the power of Revenue Recovery on the analogy of a similar empowerment of two Central Government Corporations
like ESI and EPF.  
 
4.7
              The Village Industries Programme also need identification of marketable products to undertake manufacturing of
the same, utilizing local raw material and workmen in its area-wise quality control common facilitation unit set up and run
under supervision and monitoring of technical and trained persons for supply of the indented items in given / contracted
time.  The successful marketing of Khadi and Village Industries Products in both i.e. domestic and foreign markets can
only be the real success key for revamping of Khadi and Village Industries Programme in the interest of the poor rural
beneficiaries. 
 
4.8
              One of the important factors envisaged for revamping of Khadi and Village Industries Programmes are to create
awareness, readiness and acceptability of the same by the targeted beneficiaries.  There is a pressing need for special
measures in this respect.  One such suitable method in the Committee’s opinion is to set up multi-disciplinary training
center at every State/district level to educate and train the local youth.
 
4.9
              The Committee received the suggestion that in order to usher National Khadi Revolution, the Government should
make it compulsory for the Government officials in various departments to wear khadi.  However, the Committee feels
that the State should not impose limitations/restrictions ‘on fashion’ and people of free India should be allowed the
‘freedom of choice’ so far as the fashion is concerned.  The Committee is of the view that if the khadi industries are to
grow, it has to grow on its own because of the ongoing liberlisation process and the prevalence of open and competitive
market.  However, the Khadi Institutions under the direction of the KVIC should make khadi more attractive to the

177th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/177threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:47]
consumer.  The Committee understands that it is through consensus, persuasion and appeals and not through coercion,
restriction and regulation, the Khadi revolution has to be ushered in the country. 
 
4.10
          The Committee has been given to understand that the proposed (Amendment) Bill, 2005 would not alter the
Working Equilibrium of KVIC  because the suggested  modifications will not adversely change the basic objectives,
powers and function of the KVIC as provided in existing Principal Act.  However, the Committee feels that the provisions
of the KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 based on the accepted recommendations of the Expert Committee should not get the
same fate as the recommendations made in the High Powered Committee and the Aurther Anderson Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 