 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
312 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 308th Report of the 
Committee on 
Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on MSME Sector and 
Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter It 
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
PERTAINING TO 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the 308th Report of the Committee on 
Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on MSME Sector and 
Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter It 
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................... (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION..................................................................................... (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS............................................................................................ (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT....................................................................................................        1 - 45 
   
 Chapter I      
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted 
by the Ministry................................................ 
 
      2 - 12 
 Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry’s 
replies...................................................... 
 
      13 - 30 
 Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted replies of the 
Ministry………………..................................................... 
 
      31 - 44 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited………………………………………………... 
 
       45 - 45 
5. ANNEXURES...........................................................................................  46 – 54 
6. MINUTES........................................................................................... 
 
55 - 57 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2021) 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao    -   Chairman 
 2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 6. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 8. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 9.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 10.  *Vacant 
  LOK SABHA 
 11.  Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.  Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.  Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.  Shri Hemant Godse 
 15.  Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.  Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.  Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.  Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.  Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.  Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.  Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.  Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.  Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.  Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.  Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.  Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.  Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.  Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.  Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.  Shri Thirunavukkarasar S.U. 
 31.  Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.  Shri. Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.  Shri Anuj Verma, Assistant Research Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
*Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar from DRPSC on Industry w.e.f. 
08.11.2021, notified on 12th November, 2021. 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Co mmittee, hereby present this Three Hundred 
and Twelfth Report on Action Taken Note s furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations /observations contained in the 
Committee’s Three Hundred and Eighth Report on “Impact of Covid -19 Pandemic on 
MSME Sector and Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter It” pertaining to             
M/o MSME.  
 
2. The Three Hundred and Eight Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry  was presented to t he Rajya Sabha on 27 th July, 2021 
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2021. 
 
3. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  furnished the Action 
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Three Hundred 
and Eighth Report, of the Committee on Industry on 25th October, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 21st December, 202 1 considered and 
adopted the Report. 
 
  
 
 
New Delhi 
21 December, 2021 
Agrahayana 30, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
AATO Annual Aggregate Turnover 
ABRY    Aatmanirbhar Bharat RojgarYojana 
ADD    Anti Dumping Duty 
AICTE   All India Council of Technical Education 
AIFI All India Financial Institutions 
ASPIRE A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural Industry and 
Entrepreneurship 
B2B Business to Business 
BIS   Bureau of Indian Standards 
CCEA   Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CGTMSE Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises 
CGSSD Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt 
CGST      Central Goods and Services Tax 
CITD Central Institute of Tool Design 
CLCSS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme 
CLCS-TUS Credit Linked Capital Subsidy & Technology Upgradation Scheme 
CMRI Central Mechanical Research Institute 
COVID-19 Corona Virus Disease-19 
CPAP Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CRR Cash Reserve Ratio 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 
CTTC Central Tool Room & Training Centre 
CVD Countervailing Duty 
DC Development Commissioner 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade  
DPE Department of Public Enterprises 
DPRs Detailed Project Reports 
ECs Extension Centers 
ECGC Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
ECLGS  Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EFC Export Facilitation Cells 
EPF Employees Provident Fund 
EPFO Employees’ Provident Fund Organization 
EPZs Export Processing Zones 
ESIC Employees’ State Insurance Corporation 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GeM Government e-Marketplace 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GoI  Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
 
(iii) 

 
GSTIN  Goods and Service Tax Identification Number 
IBC Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
IFF Invoice Filing Facility 
IIFT Indian Institute of Foreign Trade 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IITs Indian Institute of Technology 
ISRO  Indian Space Research Organisation 
IT Income Tax 
KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
LBIs  Livelihood Business Incubators 
LLP Limited Liability Partnership 
MFIs Micro Finance Institutions 
MGIRI Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural Industrialization 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development 
MLIs Member Lending Institutions 
M/o MSME Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSEs   Micro and Small Enterprises 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
MSME-DIs Micro, Small &Medium Enterprises Development Institutes 
MSE-CDP Micro & Small Enterprises Cluster Development Programme 
NABL  National Accreditation Board for Laboratories 
NBFCs Non Banking Financial Companies 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NCS National Career Service 
NDTL Net Demand and Time Liabilities 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGO Non Government Organization 
NI-MSME National Institute for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NITs National Institutes of Technology 
NLAP National Level Awareness Programme 
NPA Non Performing Assets 
NSIC National Small Industries Corporation 
NSP National Steel Policy 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
PMGKY Pradhan Mantri Garib KalyanYojana 
PMMY   Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana 
PMS   Procurement and Marketing Scheme 
PSL Priority Sector Lending 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 
 
PSU  Public Sector Undertaking 
QRMP Quarterly Return Monthly Payment 
R&D  Research & Development 
RAMP Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance 
RBI  Reserve Bank of India 
RRBs  Regional Rural Banks 
SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
SCBs  Scheduled Commercial Banks 
SEZ Special Economic Zones 
SFBs   Small Finance Banks 
SGST State Goods and Services Tax 
SHGs  Self Help Groups 
SISFS   Startup India Seed Fund Scheme 
SFURTI Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SPRS Single Point Registration Scheme 
SLTRO Special Three-Year Long-Term Repo Operations 
TCs   Technology Centres 
TCSP   Technology Centre Systems Programme 
TIs  Technical Institutions 
TRs   Tool Rooms 
TReDS Trade Receivables Discounting System 
UAM  Udyog Aadhar Memorandum 
UMANG Unified Mobile Application for New-Age Governance 
UR Udyam Registration 
UV Ultraviolet 
ZED Zero Defect and Zero Effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations  contained in the 
Committee’s Three Hundred and Eighth Report on “Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on MSME 
Sector and Mitigation Strategy Adopted to Counter it” pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Note s have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in  respect of the recommendations/observations contained in the          
308th Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Ministry. 
  Para: 50, 57, 81, 83, 87, and 89 (Total: 06) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to   
pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
Para: 23, 24, 27, 41, 51, 53, 58, 61, 68, 69,76, 79,86,88 and 90 (Total:15) 
 
Chapter-III-  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not 
accepted replies of the Ministry. 
  Para: 25, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 43, 56, 62 and 84 (Total:10) 
 
Chapter-IV- Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited. 
Para: NIL 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are given 
in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. Also the Committee was informed about the key observations of the study 
which was that the small businesses were worst hit by the economic fallout of Co vid-
19 Pandemic. Unprecedented lockdown and other containment measures have 
resulted in supply chain disruptions and massive demand drop especially for Micro 
units and significant economic losses in general to MSMEs. Further as per the 
survey data, 88 per cent of the beneficiaries of PMEGP units reported that they were 
negatively affected due to Covid -19 Pandemic and the remaining 12 per cent stated 
that they were not affected. In terms of beneficiaries (88 per cent) who were 
negatively affected, around 57 per cent stated that their units were shut down during 
this period, 30 per cent reported that there was drop in production and revenue, 28 
per cent stated issues pertaining to raw material availability or supply chain issues. 
In terms of beneficiaries (12 per cent) who were positively affected, around 65 per 
cent stated that there is an increase in business activity as they had units in retail 
and health sector, 53 per cent stated an increase in telephonic supply/delivery and 
around 25 per cent stated that their units were dealing with essential commodities or 
services. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate 
suitable action to rescue the small business units from collapsing, by providing 
additional financial support, relaxation or w aiver of interest, marketing support,  
etc.  
(Para 50) 
Action taken 
 
The Reserve Bank has announced the following relief measures for MSMEs 
adversely affected by the outbreak of the pandemic:  
(i) Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector – Restructuring of 
Advances: With a view to facilitate meaningful restructuring of stressed MSME 
accounts a one -time restructuring of loans to MSMEs that were in default but 
‘standard’ as on January 1, 2019 , was permitted, without an asset classification 
downgrade, vide our circular dated January 1, 2019, subject to certain conditions. 
The scheme was extended vide circular dated February 11, 2020 to stressed MSMEs 
loans that were ‘standard’ as on January 1, 2020 subject to certain conditions 

 
 
3 
 
including implementation of restructuring by December 31, 2020. In view of the 
need to support the viable MSME entities on account of the fallout of COVID -19, 
the scheme has been extended for restructuring of advances whe re the borrower’s 
account was a ‘standard asset’ as on March 1, 2020 and aggregate exposure was up 
to Rs. 25 crore. The restructuring under this scheme had to be implemented by 
March 31, 2021. This scheme permits banks to upgrade such accounts as ‘standard  
asset’ upon implementation of the restructuring plan which may have slipped into 
NPA category between March 2, 2020 and date of implementation.  
 
(ii) Resolution Framework for COVID -19-related Stress: Stressed MSME units 
having exposure of more than Rs. 25 cror e may avail benefits under RBI circular 
dated August 6, 2020 on Resolution Framework for COVID -19-related Stress which 
has permitted a window under the Prudential Framework to enable the lenders to 
implement a resolution plan in respect of eligible corpora te exposures without 
change in ownership while classifying such exposures as standard subject to 
specified conditions. Under the guidelines, provisions have been made for inter alia 
allowing extension of the residual tenor of the loan, with or without paym ent 
moratorium, by a period not more than two years as well as providing additional 
funding based on viability considerations. 
 
Further, in view of the resurgence of Covid -19, the Reserve Bank has 
announced the Resolution Framework 2.0 dated May 05, 2021 s ubsequently revised 
on June 04, 2021 which permits lending institutions to restructure the advances to 
MSME borrowers, which could not be restructured under earlier schemes, without a 
downgrade in the asset classification subject to the conditions specifie d in the 
Resolution Framework 2.0. The facility is available to MSME borrowers having 
aggregate exposure, including non -fund based facilities, of all lending institutions 
not exceeding 50 core INR as on March 31, 2021 and shall have to be invoked by 
September 30, 2021. 
 
Even in respect of MSME accounts restructured under earlier schemes, 
lending institutions have been permitted, as a one -time measure, to review the 
working capital sanctioned limits and / or drawing power based on a reassessment of 
the working capital cycle, reduction of margins, etc. without the same being treated 
as restructuring. 
 

 
 
4 
 
(iii) Rescheduling of Payments and other reliefs on account of Covid -19 Pandemic 
under Covid-19 Regulatory Package– Term Loans and Working Capital Facilities 
 
a) All comm ercial banks (including regional rural banks, small finance banks 
and local area banks), co -operative banks, all -India Financial Institutions, and 
NBFCs (including housing finance companies and micro -finance institutions) were 
permitted to allow a moratorium of six months on payment of installments in respect 
of all term loans outstanding as on March 1, 2020. 
 
b) In respect of working capital facilities sanctioned in the form of cash 
credit/overdraft, lending institutions were permitted to allow a deferment of  six 
months on payment of interest in respect of all such facilities outstanding as on 
March 1, 2020. The accumulated interest for the period would be paid after the 
expiry of the deferment period. Alternatively, the lenders could convert the 
accumulated interest into a funded interest term loan payable by not later than March 
31, 2021. 
 
c) In respect of working capital facilities sanctioned in the form of cash 
credit/overdraft, lending institutions were allowed to recalculate drawing power by 
reducing margins and/or by reassessing the working capital cycle for the borrowers.  
 
(iv) Loans against Gold Ornaments and Jewellery for Non -Agricultural End-uses: 
Loan-to-value ratio (LTV) was temporarily increased from 75 per cent to 90 per cent 
till March 31, 2021 for loans  against gold ornaments and jewellery for non -
agricultural end -uses. Fresh gold loans sanctioned on and after April 1, 2021 shall 
attract LTV ratio of 75 per cent as hitherto. 
 
(v) Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS): Government of India 
has launched Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) for business 
including MSMEs and the scheme is being implemented by National Credit 
Guarantee Trustee Company (NCGTC). As credit facilities extended under the 
scheme guaranteed by NCGTC are backed by an unconditional and irrevocable 
guarantee provided by GoI, Member Lending Institutions (SCBs including 
scheduled RRBs), NBFCs (including HFCs as eligible under the scheme) and AIFIs) 
have been permitted to apply zero percent risk weight on the credit faci lities 
extended under this scheme to the extent of guarantee coverage. A circular in this 
regard has been issued by RBI on June 21, 2020. 
 

 
 
5 
 
(vi)  Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt (CGSSD): GoI has launched 
Distressed Assets Fund Scheme for providing s ubordinate debt to stressed MSMEs. 
The scheme is being implemented by Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and 
Small Enterprises (CGTMSE). As the credit facilities extended under the scheme are 
backed by a guarantee from CGTMSE, as a special dispensation,  banks were 
permitted to reckon the funds infused by the promoters in their MSME units through 
loans availed under the above scheme as equity/quasi equity from the promoters for 
debt-equity computation. A circular in this regard has been issued on July 1, 2020. 
 
(vii) In order to reduce the cost of credit to MSME and to encourage incremental 
lending to the sector, the threshold for exposures which qualify as regulatory retail 
portfolio and attracts a lower risk weight of 75%, was increased from Rs.5 crore to 
Rs.7.5 crore on October 12, 2020. Generally, unrated exposures attract a risk weight 
of 100%. 
 
(viii) In order to incentivi ze new credit flow to the micro, small, and medium 
enterprise (MSME) borrowers, Scheduled Commercial Banks have been allowed to 
deduct credit di sbursed to ‘New MSME borrowers’ from their Net Demand and 
Time Liabilities (NDTL) for calculation of the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR). This 
exemption is available only up to ₹25 lakh per borrower disbursed up to the fortnight 
ending December 31, 2021 for a per iod of one year from the date of origination of 
the loan or the tenure of the loan, whichever is earlier. 
 
In order to facilitate “Marketing Support” to Small business units of  the 
MSME sector and to enhance their marketability of products and services, Mi nistry 
of MSME is implementing Procurement & Marketing Support Scheme which has 
components like participation of individual MSEs in Trade Fairs/Exhibitions, 
Organizing Trade Fairs/Exhibitions and Vendor Development Programmes, 
Capacity building of MSMEs in  Modern Packaging, National Seminars / workshops 
on relevant topics of market access, Vendor Development programmes, etc.  
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) registers Micro & small 
Enterprises (MSEs) under Single Point Registration scheme (SPRS) for participation 
in tender floated by Government/CPSEs. The units registered under SPRS are 
eligible to get the benefits under Public Procurement Policy for Micro & Small 
Enterprises (MSEs) Order 2012. MSEs have to apply online on NSIC website 
www.nsicspronline.com&www.nsic.co.in. for registra tion under the Scheme. 

 
 
6 
 
Further, NSIC has created MSME Global Mart ( www.msmemart.com) a global 
business to business (B2B) portal, facilitating online marketing support to Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by  way of increased visibility on internet, 
showcasing their product & services 24X7, connecting buyers & suppliers,  
providing trade leads & keyword based Tender alerts etc. to grow their business. 
Services of MSME mart not only focus towards increasing the  visibility of products 
globally but also focus on providing value added services and relevant information 
to support MSMEs throughout the business cycle & it acts as online platform / 
market place for connecting buyers and suppliers for providing them ope n market 
access. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. At  present, the biggest concern for MSME is non -availability of raw 
materials on time and at reasonable price. Traders are hoarding the raw materials 
and rigging the market with their whims and fancy pricin g. The Committee 
recommends that NSIC should make suitable arrangements so that raw materials 
are made easily available at reasonable price for Micro enterprises, on credit basis.  
 
(Para 57) 
Action taken 
 
National Small Industries Corporation Limited (NSIC) facilitates raw material 
requirement of MSMEs by making arrangements with bulk manufacturers for 
procuring the materials and supplying the same to MSMEs. NSIC also provides 
financial assistance to MSMEs under their Raw Material Assistance Scheme aga inst 
bank guarantee for payment to the suppliers. Further, NSIC has taken up the matters 
regarding price fluctuating and raw material shortage with bulk producers during the 
pandemic period and to support NSIC to facilitate MSMEs. NSIC will also assess 
the other supports required by the MSMEs and associations and further take up with 
bulk producers for the necessary interventions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee is of the view that in order to achieve the target of generating 
employment opport unities for the unemployed, investment should be made in 
providing more back -end services to improve performance of the MSME sector. In 

 
 
7 
 
the absence of suitable technology -based production activities as well as low 
investment in R&D activities, the MSME Sec tor is not able to compete with its 
global counterparts and the condition has become more conspicuous during the 
pandemic era. Therefore, steps should be taken to bring in technical knowhow and 
the same could be made available to indigenous MSMEs at subsid ized rates so that 
the MSMEs are enabled to compete with their global counterparts and achieve the 
export target. Besides, research and development (R&D) services of various 
Technical Institutions may be garnered for product innovation.  
(Para 81) 
 
Action taken 
 
Components under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy and Technology 
Upgradation Scheme (CLCS -TUS) is aimed at promoting competitiveness amongst 
Indian Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by the way of wastage 
reduction through Lean Manufacturing, support for Design improvement, building 
awareness on Intellectual Property Rights, Zero Defect Zero Effect (ZED) Scheme, 
digital empowerment of MSME through Digital MSME and to promote & support 
untapped creativity of individual and to promote adoption of  latest technologies in 
manufacturing as well as knowledge based innovation MSMEs through Incubation 
across the country. 
 
These sub -components have been merged into one vertical under MSME 
Champions scheme which works with 4 guiding principles to break the  paradigm i.e. 
Openness, Smart Implementation, Unified and Coordinated approach & Outreach.  
 
These verticals have been redeveloped with the intent to (i) generating 
employment (ii) making MSMEs resilient & sustainable (iii) ease of execution & 
achieving mi le stones (iv) reducing cost, waste & optimizing resources, so as to 
make them competitive. 
 
As regards ‘Research &Development (R&D)’ services of various technical 
institutions, under incubation scheme, technical institutions such as IISc, IITs, NITs 
and other academic institutions are on boarded for designs innovations to improve 
performance of the MSME sector. 
 
Tool Room & Technical Institutions (TRs & TIs) of the Ministry of MSME are 
providing Tooling facility and technical assistance (design, development, 

 
 
8 
 
production) and consultancy in relevant sectors to industry focusing MSMEs. Few of 
the Patent application filed by TRs &TIs in the past are:- 
(i) Central Tool Room & Training Centre (CTTC) Kolkata, has applied for:  
a) Waste Water Captive Power vide patent application no. MSME/TR/Kol/Pat -01/18 
b) Signaling System vide patent application MSME/TR/Kol/Pat-02/18. 
c) Life Saving Impact Jacket vide patent application MSME/TR/Kol/Pat-03/18. 
(ii) CTTC Bhubaneswar has applied for:  
a) Auto Sweeper vide Application No. 308376 & Terrestrial Surveillance Rover vide 
 Application No. 308377 dated 02.08.2018. 
b) Automatic Hand Sanitizer vide application no. 331094-001 date 15.07.2020 
(iii) Central Institute of Tool Design (CITD), Hyderabad along with M/s standard 
Fireworks Private Limited has been granted a Patent  No. 376805 on 09.09.2021 for 
innovating “Automatic Machine for the Production of Conical Shaped  Fireworks” in 
Fireworks Industries. 
 
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), through its Technical Centres 
facilitates MSMEs in getting trained manpower, testing & common facilities. NSIC 
facilitates skill development by imparting training as per th e requirement of 
industries by making linkages with them so as to strengthen ongoing training 
programmes through updated knowledge from the industries.  NSIC through Rapid 
Incubation programmes provides support to the prospective entrepreneurs to learn 
product manufacturing, its processes coupled with technology development, 
business development and financing arrangements etc. under one roof.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Covid -19 Pandemic has emphasized the need and importance of 
accelerated digital  adoption in business and MSMEs are no exception. Therefore, 
the MSMEs need to switch over to digital platform from core traditional selling 
platforms through newer technology adoption which can not only facilitate access to 
e-markets and customers, but al so streamline payments, obtain finance for 
expansion of business etc. A large faction of MSEs are located in rural areas and 
mostly being in unorganized business without any access to modern technology. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should tak e initiatives to create awareness 
among the MSMEs about digital marketing and extend handholding for a smooth 
transition to digital e -commerce platforms which would help them in situations like 
COVID pandemic. 
(Para 83) 

 
 
9 
 
Action taken 
 
I. Ministry of MSME has specific programmes/Schemes for digital adoption in the 
sector. 
a) Under the Digital MSME Scheme following is undertaken:  
 Cloud based support SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, and security. 
 Awareness Programme/workshops to create digital awareness amongst MSMEs.  
b) Further, for  handholding & facilitation, the Ministry has officials & local experts 
through the 68 state level control rooms under Champions across the country.  
NSIC, SIDBI, KVIC  & Coir Board have handholding agencies for supporting 
MSMEs. Ministry of MSME has create d MSME Global Mart exclusively for 
MSMEs of India & developing countries to boost export, manufacturing, supply of 
machines through a digital platform i.e. www.msmemart.com under NSIC. 
c) Under Procurement and Marketing  Support Scheme, a new component of “Virtual 
Trade Fair/Exhibition” has been incorporated to promote e -market linkages. The e -
market linkage acts as a replacement for conventional Trade Fairs and Exhibitions 
and provides MSMEs access to markets, including global markets at competitive 
prices as compared to the conventional mode.   The “Virtual Mode” will be helpful in 
saving the conveyance / travel  cost and valuable time of micro enterprises along 
with providing them opportunity to attend multiple events sim ultaneously.   
d) Under Public Procurement Policy for MSEs Order, 2012, to help MSMEs to switch 
over to a digital platform, Ministry of MSME encourages MSMEs to get themselves 
on-boarded on the Government e -Marketplace (GeM) portal. Bulk emails were sent 
to a ll UAM holders for on -boarding themselves on GeM portal. UAM Portal was 
replaced by Udyam Registration Portal w.e.f. 01.07.2020. Udyam Registration 
Portal has a facility through which an entrepreneur can opt for linking itself with 
GeM by selecting an opti on on Udyam Portal, due to which flow of information 
becomes possible between these two portals. With this facility, MSEs can link 
themselves with the Government’s procurement system and can participate in 
Government’s mandatory procurement programme from MSEs. All Central 
Government Ministries / Department and CPSEs have been requested to procure 
25% of their annual target from MSEs. The total number of MSEs on -boarded on the 
GeM portal and their order value are as follows:  
 
MSE Sellers & Service 
providers 
Order value (MSE %) Till 
18.10.2021 
7,28,034 56.56 

 
 
10 
 
 
II. To promote e -Commerce among MSMEs following initiatives have been taken by 
Ministry of MSME. 
 
 National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC),has created MSME Global Mart 
(www.msmemart.com) a global business to business (B2B) portal facilitating online 
marketing support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by way of 
increased visibility on internet, showcasing their product & s ervices 24X7 , 
connecting buyers & suppliers,  providing trade leads & keyword based Tender 
alerts etc. to grow their business. Services of MSME mart not only focus towards 
increasing the visibility of products globally but also focus on providing value ad ded 
services and relevant information to support MSMEs throughout the business cycle 
& it acts as an online platform / market place for connecting buyers and suppliers by 
providing them open market access. Mobile app is also functional and already 
downloaded by 43,100 users. The portal has been on-boarded on UMANG Portal. 
 
 New portal of KVIC ( www.ekhadiindia.com) has been launched on 01.01.2021 and 
is running on trial basis. More than 3,300 products have been on-boarded on the 
portal. Mobile app for the portal is also functional. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. Import Substitution strategy cannot be effective unless Indian enterprises are 
made well aware about the products which are being imported. Government should 
put out a list of such products along with their production specifications so that 
enterprises could be able to venture into such production areas. The Committee 
recommends that online exhibitions of the samples of such products, along with their 
market potential, could be organized by the Ministry in coordination with MSMEs 
Associations for information of MSMEs. 
(Para 87) 
Action taken 
 
 Procurement & Marketing Support Scheme of Ministry of MSME has 
components like participation of individual MSEs in  Trade Fairs/Exhibitions and 
Organizing Trade Fairs/Exhibitions. 
 

 
 
11 
 
 To provide first hand support to MSMEs willing to set up/diversify their units 
to manufacture import substitution products, Ministry of MSME is preparing 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). In  the first phase, 45 DPRs have already been 
prepared, especially for reducing the import of items reserved for exclusive 
procurement from MSEs.  The Ministry has already identified 50 items which were 
imported in significant amount in last few years. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee is deeply concerned about the possibility of impending third 
wave of the COVID -19 pandemic in the near future as predicted by experts. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should adopt a proact ive 
approach and take pre -emptive measures to meet the unforeseen challenges arising 
out of the possible third wave to save the MSMEs, which are already reeling under 
the devastation of first and second wave of COVID pandemic.  
(Para 89) 
 
Action taken 
 
  In order to meet the challenges due to third wave, Ministry of MSME has 
taken following pre-emptive measures: 
 
a) Ministry of MSME has incorporated a new component of “Virtual Trade 
Fair/Exhibition” under the Procurement and Marketing Support Scheme (PMSS) to 
promote e -market linkages. The e -market linkage acts as a replacement for 
conventional Trade Fairs and Exhibitions and provides MSMEs access to markets, 
including global markets at competitive prices as compared to the conventional 
mode. The “Virtual Mode” will be helpful in saving the conveyance / travel  cost and 
valuable time of micro enterprises along with providing them opportunities to attend 
multiple events simultaneously. 
 
b) Central Tool Room & Training Centre (CTTC), Bhubaneswar has signed an  MoU 
with CSIR-Central Mechanical Research Institute (CMRI), Durgapur for 
Technology Transfer for manufacturing of Oxygen enrichment unit (Pranvayu). The 
prototype has been developed. The testing is under process.  
 

 
 
12 
 
c) KVIC is taking all possible efforts to extend assis tance through its programmes and 
schemes to aid and foster growth of the Khadi and Village Industries sector in this 
pandemic situation.  
 
d) Based on the need of Entrepreneurs/SHG’s/Artisans/NGO’s, Mahatma Gandhi 
Institute for Rural Industrialization (MGIRI)  will provide technical support, 
product/process development, skill enhancement training programs and support to 
adopt technologies needed in collaboration with other institutions for the KVI sector.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee observes that the stimulus package announced by the 
Government for the economic revival from  the Pandemic hit economy has been 
found to be inadequate as the measures adopted were more of loan offering and 
long-term measures instead of improving the cash flow to generate demand as 
immediate relief. In the process of economic recovery post -first wa ve of the 
Pandemic, the second wave even more vigorously ripped the economy particularly 
the MSME Sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government 
should immediately come out with a larger economic package aimed at bolstering 
demand, invest ment, exports and employment generation to help the economy, 
including MSMEs to recover from the Pandemic fall-out. 
(Para 23) 
Action taken 
 
Details of key schemes recently announced and related to MSME sector under 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat, Budget for 2021 -22 and the recent financial package 
announced by the Government in June 2021 are mentioned at Annexure-I. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee expresses concern over the grim situation of the Small 
Enterprises due to Covid -19 Pandemic. Unlike Large and Medium enterprises, 
Small enterprises depend on regular cash flows to stay afloat. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that to ensu re the survival of the Small enterprises, it is 
imperative for the government to provide them with much -needed liquidity support 
to keep their businesses running and generate job opportunities for the workforce.  
 
(Para 24) 
Action taken 
 
 In order to help the Micro and Small Enterprises get  higher access to 
institutional Credit, following are the measures undertaken by Government: 

 
 
14 
 
 
a) Ministry of MSME and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) had 
jointly set up Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micr o and Small Enterprises 
(CGTMSE) in the year 2000. CGTMSE provides guarantee to Member Lending 
Institutions (MLIs) for credit facilities sanctioned by them to Micro and Small 
Entrepreneurs (MSEs) without collateral security and third party guarantee up to Rs. 
2 crore. During the year 2020 -21, the trust has extended guarantees to 8.35 lakh loan 
accounts, amounting to Rs 36,899 crore. The Trust has taken multiple initiatives 
during the last few years to make the scheme more accessible to the MSEs.    
b) The Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) has been formulated as a 
relief measure to MSMEs by providing them additional funding of up to Rs. 3 lakh 
crore in the form of a fully guaranteed emergency credit line. Borrowers with up to 
Rs. 25 crore outstanding  and Rs. 100 crore turnover are eligible. This scheme 
provides 100 per cent credit guarantee cover to Banks and NBFCs on principal and 
interest. No guarantee fee and fresh collateral is required.  
c)  Provision made for Rs. 20,000 crore subordinate debt for M SMEs which are NPAs 
or are stressed. Government to support them with Rs. 4,000 crore to Credit 
Guarantee Trust for Micro and Small enterprises (CGTMSE). Banks are expected to 
provide the subordinate -debt to promoters of such MSMEs equal to 15 per cent of 
the existing stake in the unit subject to a maximum of Rs. 75 lakhs.  
d)  Government has set up a Fund of Funds with a corpus of Rs. 10,000 crore that will 
provide equity funding support of Rs.  50,000 crore for MSMEs. The Fund of Funds 
shall be operated throug h a mother and multiple daughter funds. It will provide 
equity funding for viable MSMEs. This scheme will help MSMEs to expand its size 
and capacity and will also encourage them to get listed on stock exchanges.  
e)  Income tax refunds to nearly 8.2 lakh smal l businesses worth Rs. 5,204 crore 
have been issued with the objective to help MSMEs to carry on their business 
activities without pay cuts and layoffs in these challenging times.  
f) Government will   provide Interest subvention of 2 per cent to prompt payees  for a 
period of 12 months which will benefit Small business under MUDRA. The total 
relief is expected to be to the tune of Rs. 1500 crore.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
9. The Committee observes that a large number of jobs were lost due to Covid -
19 Pandem ic and economic conditions of the households suffered a jolt and their 

 
 
15 
 
regular income declined significantly during lockdown periods. The Committee 
recommends that Government should focus on employment generation and ensure 
that new means of livelihood are  generated especially for the youth of the country. A 
new National Employment Policy may be considered along with exploring the 
feasibility of establishing a National Electronic Employment Exchange and building 
a skill-based database to provide employment to skilled manpower in their area of 
expertise. Besides, the Ministry should facilitate the MSMEs to scale up their 
capacity building and technical knowhow through extensive training and up -skilling 
programs.   
(Para 27) 
Action taken 
 
  Following are the measures taken by government for employment generation: 
 
a) Ministry of MSME is implementing Prime Minister’s Employment Generation 
Programme (PMEGP) which,  apart from financing the projects, provides backward 
and forward linkages support to the prospective f irst generation entrepreneurs and 
the units set up under the scheme. Target fixed and achievements made under 
PMEGP Scheme during the last two years are as follows:  
(Project and Employment in numbers and Margin Money Rs. in lakh) 
b) During pandemic , Atmanirbhar Bharat RojgarYojana (ABRY) has been 
launched w.e.f. 1st October, 2020 to incentivize employers for creation of new 
employment along with social security benefits and restoration of employment. This 
scheme being implemented thro ugh Employees’ Provident Fund Organi zation 
(EPFO) seeks to reduce the financial burden of the employers and encourages them 
to hire more workers. Under ABRY, Government of India is providing credit for a 
period of two years, both the employees’ share (12% of wages) and employers 
share’ (12% of wages) of contribution or only employees’ share of contribution 
Year Target Achievement  
Project Margin 
Money 
Employment Project Margin 
Money 
Employment 
2019-20 79236 239644.00 633888 66653 195082.
15 
533224 
2020-21 78625 228968.00 629000 74415 218880.
15 
595320 
2021-22  
(as on 
15.08.2021) 
96939 285000.00 775512 22210 70062.0
0 
177680 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
depending on employment strength of the EPFO registered establishments, for new 
employees whose monthly wage is less than Rs. 15,000/ - per month. The new  
employees under the scheme include those who lost their jobs during COVID -19 and 
didn’t join in any EPF covered establishment upto 30.09.2020. The terminal date for 
registration of beneficiary under the scheme has been extended from 30 th June, 2021 
to 31st March, 2022 in view of the Covid-19 pandemic situation. 
 
c) Under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY), Government of India 
has contributed both 12% employer’s share and 12% employee’s share under 
Employees Provident Fund (EPF), totaling 24% of the wa ge for the wage month 
from March to August, 2020 for the establishments having upto 100 employees with 
90% of such employees earning less than Rs. 15,000/ -.This has helped in protecting 
employment in EPFO registered establishments during the post -COVID period. 
 
d) The unemployment benefit under the Atal  Beemit Vyakti Kalyan Yojana 
being implemented by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) has been 
enhanced to 50% from 25% of the average wage, payable upto 90 days, alongwith 
relaxation of eligibility conditions to claim the benefit. 
 
e) Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY) is being implemented by the 
Government inter alia,  for facilitating self -employment. Under PMMY, collateral 
free loans upto  Rs. 10 lakh are extended to micro/small business enterprises and to 
individuals to enable them to setup or expand their business activities.  
 
f) The Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment is 
implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission Mode Project 
for transformation of the National  Employment Service to provide a variety of 
employment related services like job matching, career counselling, vocational 
guidance, information on skill development courses, apprenticeship, internships etc. 
This project consists of three important componen ts namely - (i) NCS Portal 
(www.ncs.gov.in); (ii) Model Career Centres; and (iii) Interlinking of Employment 
Exchanges. 
 
National Career Service (NCS) Portal (www.ncs.gov.in)  is a digital platform 
for providing various employment services at national level such as registration, 
renewal, job information/career information, reporting of vacancies, submission of 
list of suitable candidates, providing vocational guidance, facilita tion of job fairs etc. 
This portal is supported by a help desk/call centre. 

 
 
17 
 
 
The NCS portal is integrated with employment exchanges, career centers, 
state portals and leading private job portals.  The portal is also integrated with other 
Ministries/departments like Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE), Ministry of Human Resource Development(MHRD), All India Council of 
Technical Education(AICTE), etc. to enhance the search.  
 
In order to facilitate the MSMEs to scale up their capacity building and 
technical knowhow through extensive training and skilling programs, MSME 
Ministry has taken following measures: 
 
a) 18 Tool Rooms & Technical Institutions functioning under the Ministry of 
MSME provides technical support to industr ies and conduct various skill 
development programmes as per the needs of industry to provide industry ready 
manpower. 
 
b) Ministry of MSME has also started implementa tion of the “Technology 
Centre      S ystems Programme” (TCSP) under which 15 new Technology C entres 
are being established in the country with an estimated cost of  Rs. 2,200 crore 
including World Bank funding.  These Centres are being established to assist MSME 
in high end technologies. These  Centres will also  provide skilled workforce to 
Industries by conducting training programme for youths &  will support MSMEs  in 
manufacturing in situations like Covid-19 Pandemic with the following targets: 
 Rapid absorption of latest technology 
 Readily available skilled workforce 
 Improved Competitiveness of MSMEs 
 Promotion of Entrepreneurship & Innovation 
c) Ministry of MSME is implementing Scheme of Funds for Regeneration 
of Traditional Industries (SFURTI) with an objective to organi ze the traditional 
industries and artisans into clusters by making them  competitive and provide 
sustainable employment to artisans. The focus of the scheme is to provide physical 
infrastructure and machines, re -skilling and marketing connect for the traditional 
artisans so that they can produce value -added goods and sell them at remu nerative   
price. During the COVID -19 period, 213 new clusters have been approved with the 
aim to provide sustainable employment to  artisans. 99 clusters became functional 
during the COVID-19 period.  
 

 
 
18 
 
d) Under ‘A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Ind ustries and 
Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE)’   during 2020 -21, 31 Livelihood Business Incubators 
(LBIs)  have been approved for providing hands on   training  on various trades in 
agro-rural sector for setting up micro -enterprises and providing skilled human 
resources to nearby industries. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10. The Committee is of the view that the 90 days limit fixed by RBI for classifying 
overdues of MSMEs should be increased to 180 days so that MSMEs are not 
constrained to divert their working capital towards servicing of their loan -
instalments and clearing th eir dues at the cost of normal business operations. This 
proposed change in the RBI guidelines will save a large number of MSMEs from 
turning sick or getting closed resulting in loss of economic activity and employment. 
It will also prevent avoidable class ification of bad debts and unwarranted litigation 
by banks, thereby saving the banks too, from losses.  
(Para 41) 
 
Action taken 
 
The extant asset classification norms of RBI which stipulate 90 -days past due 
(DPD) requirement for declaring an account as NPA  were issued based on the 
recommendations of the Financial Sector Reforms Committee (Chair: Shri  
Narasimham) after extensive deliberations and based on best international practices. 
Most of the jurisdictions around the world, particularly all the G20 count ries, follow 
the same norm of 90 days for classification as NPA, which has also been enshrined 
as part of Basel guidelines. 
 
The current norms constitute one of the key pillars of the prudential regulation 
and diluting the same will have broader financial stability implications. 
Classification of a borrower account as NPA by lending institutions is merely a 
formal, albeit delayed, recognition of the underlying stress in the borrower accounts 
and any dilution of the same will only delay the process of resolu tion of the stress in 
borrower accounts. Doing so will ultimately impair the financial health of the 
banking system and constrain their lending ability. 
 
Moreover, merely changing the criteria for recognition of an asset as non -
performing may not solve the financial stress associated with the exposure. 

 
 
19 
 
Resolution of financial stress involves recognition of stress as the first step, which 
may entail the lending institution having to recognize the losses incurred. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee notes that there is abundant scope for job creation in domestic 
Agarbatti making industry as huge gap presently exists between the demand and 
supply of Agarbatti due to certain policy measures taken by the Government such as 
import restriction on raw Agarbatti and increase in import duty on bamboo sticks, 
etc. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry of MSME to 
implement the pilot p roject, Khadi  Agarbatti Atmanirbhar Mission, through KVIC, 
paving the way for large scale employment opportunities in Agarbatti making 
industry in different parts of the country, by enhancing domestic production 
substantially, with low investment. The Comm ittee is of the view that this new 
initiative would be a boon to the artisans in rural areas who have lost their jobs due 
to Covid -19 Pandemic as it would not only restore livelihood to them but also 
generate large scale employment opportunities to the une mployed youth. 
(Para 51) 
Action taken 
 
KVIC has taken various initiatives to increase the production in 
manufacturing of Agarbatti in the country through the implementation of 
Schemes/Programmes under Gramodyog Vikas Yojana. 
 
To increase the production of Agarbatti in the country, KVIC has launched 
and implemented “Pilot Project on Agarbatti” for pedal operated and automatic 
machines throughout the country. 
 
SHGs/Artisans programme of Agarbatti of Pedal operated and  Automatic 
Agarbatti Machines has commenc ed in each Zone of KVIC throughout the country, 
including 10 days manufacturing of Agarbatti training and distribution of Machines.  
 
The targets fixed and achievements made under Pedal Operated Machines are as 
follows:  
 
S. No Name of zone Target Achievement (machine 
distributed) as on 23.08.2021 
1 South Zone 150 150 
2 East Zone 370 150 
3 North Zone 50 50 
4 Central Zone 100 100 
5 West Zone 50 - 

 
 
20 
 
KVIC has awarded the study regarding Impact on Agarbatti Industry of the 
restrictions imposed on the Import of Agarbatti to Indian Institute of Foreign Trade 
(IIFT), New Delhi. This study will also cover other aspects and provide a detailed 
report on domestic Agar batti production, demand for domestic Agarbatti, cost 
competitiveness of domestic Agarbatti and demand-supply chain management. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
12. The Committee notes that the production of Covid related medical and 
auxiliary items are very much required in large quantities during the present times 
to fight the Pandemic and production of such items by the MSMEs will help them to 
stabilize their livel ihood. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should 
extend all possible assistance to those MSMEs engaged in the manufacture of 
medical and auxiliary items, to meet the domestic requirement to overcome the 
Pandemic.  
(Para 53) 
Action taken 
 
For fight against Covid -19 pandemic, Tool Rooms & Technical Institutions 
have developed/manufactured various components/products  such as 
Sanitizers, Masks, Parts of PPE Kit, Corona testing kit, Box to sanitize office files 
and other articles using UV lights, accurate infrared thermometer, non -contact 
dispensers, Pulse -oximeter, prototype of Oxygen Generator, prototype of Non 
Invasive Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)  type Ventilator  etc. Most of 
these items were supplied to various Central /State Gov ernment, offices, Bank, PSUs 
and Industries. Few items like Non -Invasive CPAP    type Ventilator, Automatic 
Hand Sanitizer Dispenser Machine, UV light based Sanitization Channel for 
material, Automatic sanitization channel etc. have been shared with 
MSMEs/Industries for domestic/indigenous production and marketing.  
 
MSME-DIs and Branch MSME -DIs have assisted and extended hand -holding 
support to many MSME units to manufacture PPE kits, Masks, Medical Oxygen, 
cloth Mask, N -95 Mask, sanitizer, sanitizer pump, Pl astic bottle pump and other 
auxiliary items. 
 
Based on the local needs and availability of raw materials, MSME -DIs 
prepared Project Profiles and provided to existing MSME units for their product 
expansion/diversification and prospective entrepreneurs for m anufacturing of 

 
 
21 
 
medical & auxiliary items like Mask, Sanitizers, Phenyl, Soap, Healthcare 
Garments, Pet Bottles, etc. Project Profiles thus prepared were uploaded in their 
websites for immediate reference. During the COVID -19 pandemic period, 940 new 
entrepreneurs have been given guidance to start new enterprises out of which 171 
MSME units have been established. 
 
MSME units engaged in the manufacture of medical & auxiliary items were 
given handholding support for registration on GeM portal, financial assis tance under 
PMEGP, financial assistance under ECLGS etc. 
 
Pharmaceutical manufacturers were assisted to establish a Pharma Cluster Lab 
for Testing of Raw Materials & Finished Goods. 
 
Webinars were organised in many States for establishing Oxygen enrichment  
and Ventilator Technology with the Technology support of CSIR and ISRO. ISRO 
received more than 200 applications from prospective entrepreneurs for technical 
know-how to establish Oxygen enrichment unit. 
 
Ministry of MSME is implementing SFURTI programme wherein traditional 
artisans have been encouraged to re -align their  product line to meet the market 
demand created during COVID pandemic. Various clusters have started 
manufacturing auxiliary items like masks, sanitizers, etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. MSMEs are finding it difficult to procure raw material to run their businesses 
normally due to non -availability of raw materials. Moreover, a steep hike in the 
prices of raw material like steel etc. has adversely affected the business 
environment. The Committee recommends that the Public Sector Enterprises should 
not impose penalty or black list the MSMEs in the event of cancellation of orders by 
them since increase in prices of raw materials is a Force Majeure event, beyond the 
control of the MSMEs. Besides, the Government should also allow import of all steel 
materials based on cost and quality requirements at zero import duty (no anti -
dumping) and also ban export of iron ore and steel products for the time being. 
Better GDP growth can be realized only if value-added products are exported rather 
than raw materials. Further, GST -based funding is needed for MSMEs at marginal 
rates, which will encourage them to purchase raw materials easily.  
 
(Para 58) 
 

 
 
22 
 
Action taken 
 
Steel is a deregulated sector where prices are a function of demand and 
supply, global market conditions, trends in price of raw materials, logistics cost, 
power and fuel cost etc. The factors contributing to increase in price of steel over the 
last one ye ar include demand -supply mismatch following Covid -19 led lockdown, 
disruption in supply chains, logistics, availability of human resources, raw materials 
and working capital etc., reduced availability of steel across the globe during the 
pandemic leading t o global increase in iron ore and steel prices and reduced 
availability of iron ore domestically due to non -operationalization of working mines 
in Odisha post auction in March 2020. 
 
The Government has also taken steps to ramp up production of iron ore and  
steel to increase their domestic availability so as to offset the impact due to price 
which include increasing availability of iron ore through Mining and Mineral Policy 
reforms to enhance production and availability of iron ore, ramping up production 
and maximum capacity utilization by government mining companies, grant of 
permission to Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) to sell 25% fresh fines and 70 
Million Ton dumps and tailings, accelerating auction of iron -ore fines by SAIL and 
early operational ization of forfeited working mines of Odisha by the State and 
Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) etc. 
 
In Union Budget 2021-22, Customs Duty has been reduced uniformly to 7.5% 
on Semis, Flat and Long products of non -alloy, alloy and stainless steels . Further, to 
provide relief to metal re -cyclers, mostly MSMEs, BCD on steel scrap has been 
exempted for a period up to 31 stMarch 2022. In addition to the above, anti-dumping 
duty (ADD) and countervailing duty (CVD) on certain steel products have also been 
revoked / temporarily revoked. 
 
Keeping in view the overall interest of the domestic steel sector, blanket ban 
on imposition of Anti -dumping duty and complete ban on export of iron ore and 
steel may not be a feasible proposition in a de -regulated and diversified steel sector. 
Considering all aspects, Government makes required adjustments in Export/Import 
duty and takes safeguard measures from time to time.  
 
The Nationa l Steel Policy  (NSP), 2017 aims at inter -alia achieving a wider 
presence globally in value added/ high grade steel. The Government has approved a 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Specialty Steel to boost the domestic 

 
 
23 
 
production of ‘Specialty St eel’ and attract significant investment for production of 
‘Specialty Steel’ in the country. It will help the Indian steel industry mature in terms 
of technology as well as move up the value chain. 
 
Regarding GST based funding, some banks have started GST b ased credit 
scheme for the MSMEs where the MSME unit/borrower should have requisite 
registration under GST Act and it should have valid GST returns for a prescribed 
period which varies from Bank to Bank.  
 
Besides, Government has taken a slew of relief measures for the benefit of 
GST taxpayers, including for MSME units, so as to cope with the adverse effects 
of COVID-19 Pandemic. The list of such measures is placed at Annexure- A. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
14. The TReDS initiative by the Government is a useful tool for MSMEs to access 
the immediate fund at a cheaper cost with an option to select the offer from various 
banks without recourse to borrowing. Currently, it is mandatory for all CPSEs and 
companies having annual turnover of more than Rs. 500 crore to register on TReDS 
platform. The Committee recommends that the registration should be made 
mandatory for all CPSEs having a turnover of more than Rs.250 crores as it would 
enlarge the ambit of TReDS. Despite  the mandate of the Government that all CPSEs 
sign up on the TReDS Platforms to improve the cash flows of MSMEs, many have yet 
to comply with the mandate. Necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry to 
onboard more and more CPSEs on the TReDS platform.   
(Para 61) 
Action taken 
 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)  has been extending 
guidelines/instructions to CPSEs issued by Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
MSME on matters relating to MSEs from time to time.  
 
DPE has advised on 17.11.2017, all the administrative Ministries/ 
Departments the instructions of Department of Financial Services for mandatory 
registration of CPSEs under Trade Receivables Discounting System(TReDS). DPE 
further vide O.M. dated 14.11.2018 forwarded the Gazette Notification issued by 
Ministry of MSME regarding mandatory on -boarding of CPSEs on TReDS Platform 
for compliance by CPSEs under  the concerned administrative control of 
Ministries/Departments. 

 
 
24 
 
 
The matter has been followed up regularly by DPE with 
Ministries/Department as well CPSEs from time to time. As on 31.07.2021, 170 
CPSEs are registered on TReDS. 
 
Ministry of MSME has already had consultations with representatives of 
TReDS platforms, RBI and Departments concerned. Except Department of Financial 
Services, comments/inputs have been received from all the participants.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
15. The Committee notes that though the Emergency Credit Linked Guarantee 
Scheme recorded a high success rate, yet, around 50 per cent of total guarantee 
amount only has been issued to MSMEs. As a result, a large number of MSMEs hard 
hit by the Covid Pandemic remained deprived from the benefit of the scheme. More 
so, it is observed that the complete a mount of sanction has not been disbursed to the 
borrowers’ vis -à-vis sanctions, for fear of loan defaulting by MSMEs in the 
backdrop of the 2nd wave of the Pandemic. The Committee recommends that the 
Banks should be more liberal at this juncture in extendi ng credit facilities to MSMEs 
and ensure that loans are disbursed without delay after sanction.  
(Para 68) 
Action taken 
 
Credit related issues have been largely deregulated, with freedom for banks to 
take credit decisions based on credit appraisal and internal processes as well as on 
operational aspects, including touch points and delivery channels. However, the 
Reserve Bank has taken a number of measures in the aftermath of Covid -19 
pandemic to facilitate credit flow to the industry, in general, and MS MEs in 
particular as detailed at response to Recommendation No. 12. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
16. The Committee notes that the Traders, Retailers as well as Wholesalers have 
all now been reinstated in MSME category by the Government which is a welcome 
step. Hence nearly 2.5 crore Traders are likely to be eligible for obtaining credit 
facilities under the ECLGS. The Committee recommends benefits of the Scheme may 
be extended to small traders/dealers too as they have no access to institutional 
finances meant for MSMEs, as of now. 
(Para 69) 

 
 
25 
 
 
Action taken 
 
ECLGS 1.0 being an opt-out scheme provides credit to all businesses subject 
to their fulfilling the eligibility criteria. All businesses, including traders, retailers 
and wholesalers are eligible for assistance under ECLGS. 
  
Banks have separate MSME verticals and specialised MSME branches to 
handhold and guide the MSME borrowers and create ease in sanction and 
disbursement of credit. A target of 7.5% of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) or 
Credit Equivalent Amount of Off -Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher, has 
been fixed for SCBs for lending to Micro Enterprises. As informed by Reserve Bank 
of India, the credit outstanding for the MSME sector by Scheduled Credit Banks 
stood at Rs 17.11 lakh crore as 31.3.2021, registering an y-o-y growth of 6.07 %. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
17. The Committee was informed by the Industry Associations that in many 
instances the Banks have not been forthcoming to accord credit facilities to the 
MSMEs or have not  been showing considerate approach towards the MSMEs 
interested for availing the loan facility. The Committee desires that separate 
counters should be opened at every MLI exclusively to deal with the MSMEs and 
handhold them to avail the eligible credit fac ility in a hassle -free manner and take 
benefit of all the Governmental Schemes meant for them.  
 
 
(Para 76) 
 
Action taken 
 
Credit related issues have been largely deregulated, with freedom for banks 
to take credit decisions based on credit appraisal and internal processes as well as 
on operational aspects, including touch points and delivery channels. However, 
the Reserve Bank has taken a number of measures in the aftermath of Covid -19 
pandemic to facilitate credit flow to the industry, in general, and MS MEs in 
particular as detailed at response to Recommendation No. 12.  
 
 

 
 
26 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18. The Committee notes that, after the emergence of second wave of the Covid -
19 in April, 2021, the Government has recently announced ECLGS 4.0 with the 
Scheme period extended up to 30.9.2021. However, there has been no increase in 
the earmarked amount sanctioned under the Scheme. Keeping in view the efficacy of 
the Scheme, the Committee recommends that the Government should enhance the 
guarantee amount as nea rly 2.5 crore traders have also become eligible for the 
Scheme as per the Government policy. 
(Para 79) 
 
Action taken 
  
The resurgence of COVID -19 pandemic in India in recent weeks and the 
associated containment measures adopted at local/regional levels created new 
uncertainties and impacted the nascent economic revival that was taking shape. In 
this environment the most vulnerable category of borrowers are individual 
borrowers, small businesses and MSMEs, for which, ECLGS, as a targeted policy 
response w as introduced by GoI. The ambit of ECLGS was expanded to provide 
some relief to the vulnerable sectors not covered earlier and also keeping in view the 
adverse impact of the second wave of Covid -19 on different sectors, the Cabinet in 
its meeting dated 30. 6.2021 has approved enhancement of the existing overall 
guarantee limit of Rs. 3 lakh crore to Rs. 4.50 lakh crore. 
  
Initially the scheme was launched to all eligible borrowers with opt -out clause. 
Later, in the subsequent versions of ECLGS i.e. ECLGS 2.0 , 3.0 & 4.0, the specific 
stressed sectors were included as per their enterprise business needs.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
19. The Committee notes that the Government is focusing on indigenous 
development strategy upon Import Substitution and Make in India which is a 
welcome effort. However, the Government should develop a framework to support 
enterprises which are capable to deve lop Import Substitution as more investment 
would be required in such areas. Availability of soft loans to MSMEs at minimal 
interest rate of 3 -4 per cent with extended repayment tenure, Easy land acquisition, 

 
 
27 
 
less parameters of compliances etc. could help i n developing import substitution in 
the country. Besides, SEZ focusing upon import substitution could be developed 
across the country and special benefits should be given to MSMEs for establishing 
units in such SEZs. It is suggested that Government should aggregate large adjacent 
land parcels at suitable manufacturing and logistics locations, which are free from 
encumbrances and make it available for the MSMEs at a fair market value for 
developing such export zones.   
(Para 86) 
Action taken 
 
Ministry has de veloped dedicated support system for export promotion in 
MSME Development Institutes of all states to facilitate MSMEs for export from 
domestic tariff area and special economic zones/EPZs. Under this strategic 
initiatives, 52 Export Facilitation Cells (EFC ) have been established across the 
country to explore the untapped potential of MSME sector to boost export from 
domestic tariff area and special economic zones (SEZs) by promoting MSMEs and 
clusters in them. The testing facilities available at MSME -Testing Centres, MSME -
Testing Stations and MSME -Technology Centres are being augmented to match 
with mandatory export related requirements as per International, BIS and other 
National Standards.  They are also NABL accredited. The common facilities centres 
being set up under MSE -CDP are also given due weightage for creation of testing 
facilities.  
 
Ministry of MSME has designed and implemented  several schemes for 
infrastructure development such as Micro & Small Enterprises -Cluster Development 
Programme (MSE -CDP), Scheme for Promotion of MSMEs in NER & Sikkim, 
Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI), 
Entrepreneurship & Skill Development Programme (ESDP) and up -skilling through 
testing/technology centres, support for tooling/technology ser vices etc. 
 
Ministry has also taken various initiatives to enhance MSME competitiveness 
by way of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy, Lean Manufacturing, Design 
Improvement, Zero Defect Zero Effect Certification, Support for Incubators, 
Awareness of Intellectua l Property Rights & Digital Empowerment of MSMEs, 
Procurement and Marketing Scheme (PMS), A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, 

 
 
28 
 
Rural Industry and Entrepreneurship (ASPIRE), Credit Guarantee Scheme 
(CGTMSE), Interest Subvention Scheme for MSMEs etc.  
 
Special Economic Zones (SEZs) being set up under the SEZ Act,2005 are 
primarily private investment driven initiatives and No budgetary support is provided 
by the Central Government for setting up an SEZ. Fiscal concessions and duty 
benefits are available to develo pers and units as per the SEZ Act and Rules. Further, 
any proposals received in this regard for setting up of SEZs as well as SEZ units 
shall be duly facilitated through the jurisdictional DC office.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
20. Promoting Start up Innovations: MSME start -ups have ideas which sometimes 
look impractical to be operationalized but many such ideas have become unicorns 
(billion-dollar companies). Israel has a start -up system in which the Government 
allows minimum suppor t by providing basic funding, office, infrastructure, 
broadband and other facilities to the start -up, free of cost. The Committee is of the 
view that in order to encourage and incentivize potential entrepreneurs and new 
Start Ups with their ideas for implementation, initiatives should be taken to facilitate 
them with basic infrastructure and financial support.   
(Para 88) 
Action taken 
 
 Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) has created 
Startup India Seed Fund Scheme (SISFS) with an  outlay of Rs.945 Crore to provide 
financial assistance to startups for Proof of Concept, prototype development, product 
trials, market entry, and commercialization. This would enable these startups to 
graduate to a level where they will be able to raise i nvestments from angel investors 
or venture capitalists or seek loans from commercial banks or financial institutions. 
The scheme will support an estimated 3,600 entrepreneurs through 300 incubators in 
the next 4 years. 
 
As on date, 18 incubators have been selected under the scheme. 734 startups 
have applied under the scheme to these incubators. 
 

 
 
29 
 
In order to encourage and incentivize potential entrepreneurs and new Start 
Ups with their ideas, Ministry of MSME is already providing financial assistance to 
MSMEs through the following schemes: 
(i) Support for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of MSMEs through 
Incubators (Incubation): During FY 2020 -21, 60 Host Institutes and 87 Ideas have 
been approved under the scheme.  
(ii) Design expertise for manufacturing MS ME sector (Design): During FY 2020 -21, 
Ministry has signed 20 MoUs with IITs/NITs for implementation of the Scheme and 
25 Design Projects have been approved under the scheme. 
Building Awareness on Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) For Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises.: During FY 2020 -21, 28 IP Facilitation Centres have been 
approved and 105 Patents/Trademarks have been reimbursed under the scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
21. Most of the policies formulated are aimed at benefit of Medium and Large 
enterprises in the country whereas the position should be contrary. Policies 
&Schemes needs to be designed for the benefit of Micro & Small enterprises, which 
constitute the majority of Indian MSME sector. The Committee recommends that 
while formulat ing policies/schemes, the Ministry should consider the benefits of 
MSEs, which are often deprived of the benefits of various policies/schemes 
announced by the Government. The stimulus package announced by Government 
last year could not percolate down prope rly to the lower levels of MSME sector. The 
Committee feels that extra efforts need to be taken on this front.  
(Para 90) 
Action taken 
 
Many of the schemes implemented by the Ministry of MSME caters to the 
needs of ‘Micro’ and ‘Small’ category enterprises, with a view to encourage and 
promote them to graduate to ‘Medium’ category enterprises. Such schemes for 
Micro & Small Enterprises (MSE s) include Micro & Small Enterprises - Cluster 
Development Programme (MSE -CDP), Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro 
and Small Enterprises, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy (CLCS) component of CLCS - 
TUS, Public Procurement Policy for MSEs Order, 2012 etc.  There are other 
schemes for the benefit of MSMEs including medium enterprises , which include Six 
components of CLCS -TUS viz, Zero Defect Zero Effect (ZED), Lean 

 
 
30 
 
Manufacturing, Design, Digital MSME, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and 
Incubation.  
 
The E mergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) was announced as 
part of the AatmaNirbhar Bharat Package in 2020 with the objective to help 
MSMEs/small businesses to meet their operational liabilities and resume business in 
view of the distress caused by the  COVID-19 crisis, by providing MLIs 100 percent 
guarantee against any losses suffered by them due to non -repayment of the ECLGS 
funding by borrowers. The number of guarantees issued and guarantee amount under 
ECLGS as on 02.07.2021 is as follows: 
 
Category Guarantee Nos. Guarantee Amount (in Rs. Crore) 
Micro 1,01,92,105 63,524.57 
Small 4,64,086 63,243.36 
Medium 2,58,970 39,097.63 
Other Business 
Enterprises 
5,16,680 82,906.96 
Total 1,14,31,841 2,48,772.52 
 
From the above table, we see that 95 % of total guarantees have been issued to 
MSMEs, out of which 89%, 4% and 2% are Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
respectively. 
 
Public Procurement Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) Order 
2012 has mandate that every Central Ministry/Department/PSU has to set an 
annual goal for procurement of minimum 25% from the MSE sector. During FY 
2020-21, procurement of Rs.40,729.61  crore (28.19%) from MSEs by the Central 
Ministry/Department/PSU out of the total procure ment of Rs. 1, 44,499.18crore 
has exceeded minimum procurement of 25% from MSEs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in Respect of Which the Committee Has Not 
Accepted the Replies of the Ministry 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
22. The Committee notes from the written replies furnished by the Ministry that no 
intensive study has been conducted by the Ministry of MSME to ascertain the actual 
losses suffered by the MSME Sector as a whole due to nationwide lockdown imposed 
by the Govern ment. More so, the second wave of the Pandemic exposed the 
vulnerabilities of MSMEs like never before and highlighted the problems faced by 
them such as delayed payments, high informality, low financial resilience, scarcity 
in raw material availability etc . The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that a 
detailed study needs to be conducted to make an assessment of the actual losses 
suffered by the MSME Sector so as to chalk out an effective plan for revival of the 
MSME Sector, which has the potential to  contribute significantly in achieving the 
much coveted target of making India a $5 trillion economy.   
(Para 25) 
 
Action taken 
 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) had assigned the task of 
conducting a National level evaluation of the PMEGP Scheme to Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu India LLP.  The agency had submitted the report in September, 2020.  
 
Key Observations:  
 
 Small businesses were hit by the economic fallout of COVID -19 pandemic. 
Lockdown and other containment measures resulted in supply chain 
disruptions and demand drop  especially for micro units.  The containment 
measures taken to check the spread of pandemic led to significant economic 
losses to MSME units. 
Units affected by COVID-19 pandemic: 
 

 
 
32 
 
As per the survey data 88% of the beneficia ries of PMEGP units reported that 
they were negatively affected due to COVID -19 and the remaining 12% stated that 
they were not affected. 
In terms of beneficiaries (88%) who were negatively affected around 57% 
stated that their units were shut down during this period, 30% reported that there was 
drop in production and revenue, 28% stated issues pertaining to raw material 
availability or supply chain issues.  
 
In terms of beneficiaries (12%) who were positively affected, around 65% 
stated that there is an increase in business activity as they had units in retail and 
health sector, 53% stated an increase in telephonic supply/delivery and around 25% 
stated that their units were dealing with essential commodities or services.  
 
Ministry of MSME has also initiated the process to conduct a study to assess 
the impact of change in classification of MSMEs. This study will also inter -alia 
focus on the actual losses suffer ed by the MSME sector due to Covid -19 pandemic. 
This study will also focus on impact of simplification of registration process, impact 
of inclusion of traders under the ambit of MSMEs and benefits accruing to the 
MSME sector due to introduction of various schemes under AatmaNirbhar Bharat in 
the background of COVID -19 Pandemic. The study has already been assigned to 
SIDBI.  Besides, A Quick Survey (836 responses) was recently conducted with the 
help of NI-MSME to assess the impact of MSMED Act, 2006.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that the Report of the National Level Evaluation of 
the PMEGP Scheme assigned to Deloittee Touche Tohmatsu India was 
submitted to the Ministry in Septemb er, 2020. The Committee desires that the 
Action Take n on the Report may be shared with the Committee . The 
Committee further notes that the Ministry has initiated the process to conduct a 
study to assess the impact of change in classification of MSMEs t hrough SIDBI 
and a quick survey was recently conducted b y the Ministry with the help of NI-
MSME to assess the impact of MSMED Act, 2006. The Committee hopes that 
the report on the study would be complete d soon by SIDBI . The Committee 
further recommends that the action taken  on survey conducted by NI-MSME 
may also be shared with the Committee. 
 

 
 
33 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
23. The Committee is of the view that the M/o MSME may make all -out efforts to 
instil confidence in more women entrepreneurs to on -board the Udyam Portal. 
Likewise, majority of industrial sectors, including the ancillary ones as well as more 
States may be encouraged to register in the Portal so that they can avail the benefits 
of Government packages. These can be done by creating awareness campaigns in 
the form of seminars/conferences in ve rnacular languages, advertisement in local 
dailies etc., which can be easily assessed by the MSME entrepreneurs.  
(Para 33) 
Action taken 
 
The Ministry, through its field offices across the country conducts awareness 
campaigns in the form of seminars/conferences in vernacular languages, 
advertisements in local dailies etc. to encourage the entrepreneurs, including women 
entrepreneurs, to file  Udyam Registration. As many as 8,96,167  women 
entrepreneurs have registered on the Udyam portal since 1 st July, 2020.  
 
MSME-Development Institutes (MSME -DIs) and Branch MSME -DIs have 
organised around 583 programmes such as Industrial Motivation Campaign,  
Entrepreneurship Awareness programme, Entrepreneurship and Skill Development 
programme and Entrepreneurship Development programme exclusively for women 
to encourage more women entrepreneurs to register in the Udyam Portal. MSME -
DIs are organizing nearly 200 similar programmes during FY 2021-22. 
 
In addition to the above, MSME -DIs encourage Women entrepreneurs in 
association with respective Women Industries Association and SHGs in the States to 
register themselves as Self Help Groups in Udyam Portal, to get  the benefits of 
various schemes of the Government. 
 
Monthly meetings are being organized with Women Entrepreneurs’ 
Associations regularly to create awareness / assistance for Udyam registration.  
 
Publicity about various schemes through social media like F acebook, Twitter, 
Youtube etc., have been initiated. 
 
For wider publicity, benefits of Udyam Registration have been prepared in 
English and Hindi and translated into other regional languages and uploaded on the 

 
 
34 
 
website of Office of DC (MSME) and websites o f respective MSME -Development 
Institutes. 
 
A monthly e -newsletter 'MSME Insider' is brought out by the Media Cell of 
the Ministry of MSME, which contains information on schemes and initiatives of the 
ministry in easy language with graphics, events around t he ministry, showcases 
success stories of the various entrepreneurs who took the benefit of the schemes etc.  
The e -newsletter is released on the official website of the Ministry and also being 
circulated to all the UAM/Udyam registered MSMEs through bulk e-mail. Its 
estimated readership is around 10 lakhs.  National Level Awareness Programme 
(NLAP) was organised by the Ministry on the Schemes/Initiatives/Activities of the 
Ministry from 17.02.2020 to 09.03.2020 through its field offices across the country. 
Under NLAP, 126 field offices of the Ministry conducted the programme in more 
than 630 colleges throughout the country encompassing more than 70,000 
participants. Besides, Ministry is regularly releasing campaigns on social media to 
promote its schemes, activities, Udyam Registration etc. 
 
As part of the programme ‘Skill Upgradation and Mahila Coir Yojana’ under 
Coir Vikas  Yojana, the Coir Board is conducting various field level awareness 
programmes like EDPs, Workshops, Seminars, Conferences, etc. for the coir 
entrepreneurs including women, in different States of the country.  In such 
programmes, the Board is giving awareness to the entrepreneurs and encouraging 
them for getting registered under the Udyam Portal to enable them to avail the 
benefits of Gover nment packages.  The details are explained to them in regional 
languages. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
24. It has been observed that after reclassification of criteria of MSMEs and 
subsequent introduction of Udyam Registration Portal, less number of MSMEs have 
got registered on the new Udyam Portal since 1st July, 2020. It appears that MSMEs 
feel better off wit hout registration as the compliance costs would be much greater 
than the benefits that would accrue post registration. Besides, without registration, 
they find it more convenient to escape the income tax net and compliance structure. 
Accordingly, the Commi ttee recommends that the Government may provide 
incentives to attract more and more MSMEs to register themselves on the Udyam 
Portal.  
(Para 34) 

 
 
35 
 
Action taken 
 
The three biggest incentives for registration on the UDYAM portal are:  
(i) to avail benefits of schemes implemented by the Ministry of MSME;  
(ii) to avail benefits of schemes of State Governments/UTs. e.g. Haryana, Bihar, 
Maharashtra, Jharkhand, etc.; 
(iii) to avail benefits of Priority Sector Lending (PSL),  RBI has issued a circular 
dated 21stAugust, 2020, wherein the lending under PSL category is linked to Udyam 
Registration. 
 
The erstwhile system of Udyog Aadhaar Memorandum was started in the year 
2015 and till 30 thJune, 2020, there were 1.02 crore registrations under it. The new 
registration process was started w.e.f 01.07.2021, and in a span of around 1 year and 
3 months, the total number of registrations have crossed 52 lakh, i.e. more than 
12,000 registrations per day.  
 
National Level Awareness Programme (NLAP), was organised by the Minis try 
on the Schemes/Initiatives/Activities of the Ministry from 17.02.2020 to 09.03.2020 
through its field offices across the country. Under NLAP, 126 field offices of this 
Ministry conducted the programme in more than 630 colleges throughout the country 
encompassing more than 70,000 participants.  A monthly e -newsletter 'MSME 
Insider' is brought out by the Media Cell of the Ministry, which contains information 
on schemes and initiatives of the ministry in easy language with graphics, events 
around the ministry, showcases success stories of the various entrepreneurs who took 
the benefit of the schemes, etc.  The e -newsletter is released on the official website of 
the Ministry and is also being circulated to all the UAM/Udyam registered MSMEs 
through bulk e-mail. Its estimated readership is around 10 lakhs.  Besides, Ministry is 
regularly releasing campaigns on social media to promote its schemes, activities, 
Udyam Registration etc. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25. The Committee notes that as per the new guide lines, it is mandatory to have 
PAN & GSTIN for every enterprise to get registered in the new Udyam Registration 
Portal. However, due to lack of publicity and awareness among the MSMEs 
regarding migration to the new Udyam Registration Portal, many have not been 

 
 
36 
 
able to register within the mandatory timeline of 31.03.2021, set for registration. 
The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the mandatory timeline for 
registration with PAN& GSTIN may be extended to facilitate the MSMEs. The 
Committee also desires that the Ministry of MSME should make concerted efforts to 
create awareness regarding the launch of a new Udyam Registration Portal so that 
maximum number of MSMEs get registered in the Portal and avail the relief 
packages and benefits offered by the Government. 
(Para 35) 
Action taken 
 
The Ministry of MSME, through its field offices across the country conducts 
awareness campaigns in the form of seminars/ conferences in vernacular languages, 
advertisement in local dailies etc. to encourage the entrepreneurs for Udyam 
Registration. Registration on the Udyam portal is an on -going process and there is 
no deadline for registrations on the portal.   
 
It is further stated that the validity of Udyog  Aadhaar Memorandum (UAM) 
which was earlier up to 31 st March, 2021, has now been extended up to 31 st 
December, 2021. 
 
MSME-DIs and Branch MSME -DIs have organised583 Webinars to create 
awareness regarding the launch of a new Udyam Registration (UR) Portal so that 
maximum number of MSMEs get r egistered in the Portal and avail the relief 
packages and benefits offered by the Government of India.  
 
MSME-DIs are conducting seminars/webinars and Udyam Registration Boot 
Camp in association with Industry Associations. Social Media such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter, Newspapers are efficiently utili zed for guiding and motivating 
MSMEs for Udyam Registration. 
 
Many MSME DIs are providing assistance to Existing and New Entrepreneurs 
to get registered for Udyam Registration in their Front office itself. S tate Champions 
control room is operating in all MSME -DIs and Branch MSME -DIs to address 
MSME issues. 
 
Benefits of taking Udyam Registration have been published in their office 
websites in Hindi, English and local language. 
 

 
 
37 
 
Coir Board is extending all assi stance to those who are approaching the Board 
directly and through the Champions Portal, for Udyam registration. The Board is 
also taking concerted efforts to create awareness among the entrepreneurs regarding 
the launch of the new Udyam Registration Porta l so as to get them registered in the 
portal and avail the relief packages and benefits offered by the Government.  
 
Ministry of MSME is regularly releasing campaigns on social media to 
promote its schemes, activities, Udyam Registration etc. Besides, Natio nal Level 
Awareness Programme (NLAP) was organised by the Ministry on the 
Schemes/Initiatives/Activities of the  Ministry from 17.02.2020 to 09.03.2020 
through its field offices across the country. Under NLAP, 126 field offices of this 
Ministry conducted th e programme in more than 630 colleges throughout the 
country encompassing more than 70,000 participants.  A monthly e -newsletter 
'MSME Insider' is brought out by the Media Cell of the Ministry, which contains 
information on schemes and initiatives of the m inistry in easy language with 
graphics, events around the ministry, showcases success stories of the various 
entrepreneurs who took the benefit of the schemes, etc.  The e -newsletter is released 
on the official website of the Ministry and also being circul ated to all the 
UAM/Udyam registered MSMEs through bulk e -mail. Its estimated readership is 
around 10 lakhs. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (For Paras 33, 34 and 35)  
 
 The Committee feels that a Regulatory Body for MSMEs with domain 
experts from the Government (Both Central and State Governments on 
rotation basis) and Industry Associations is the need of the hour , s o as to 
seamlessly integrate the various aspects of MSME Sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends setting up of a Regulatory Body for MSMEs.  The 
Committee also impresses upon the Ministry to extend the validity of 
registration beyond 31 st December, 2021  keeping in view the slow pace of 
registrations under Udyam Portal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26. The Committee observes that the directions issued by the Government of India 
to its agencies and CPSEs to release payments to MSMEs within 45 days has yielded 
some positive results and outstanding payments have been released by PSUs/CPSEs 

 
 
38 
 
to MSMEs. However, it is observed that many PSUs/CPSEs have still not released 
payments. Though there is a provision for 1 per cent penalty on delayed payments, 
in practice, the penalty clause is seldom invoked, which encourages the defaulting 
entities to flout the prescribed t imeline. The Committee recommends that strict 
provisions against delayed payments need to be put in place to ensure timely release 
of payments by CPSEs, which will immensely help the MSMEs to meet their working 
capital/credit requirements.  
(Para 38) 
 
Action taken 
 
Provisions related to delayed payments to MSEs are included in Chapter V of 
MSMED Act, 2006. As per Section 16 of the Act, if a buyer fails to make payment 
to MSE suppliers, there is a provision to pay compound interest on the due amount 
at three times of the bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank of India.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The malaise of delayed payments for goods supplied and services 
rendered continues to plague the growth of the MSME Sector in India . The 
Government’s initiatives in this direction yielded some positive results but still 
a huge amount is pending on the CPSEs. The Committee , therefore,  
recommends that  provisions contained in Chapter V of MSMED Act, 2006 
should be strictly implemented in lette r and spirit for quick redressal of the 
issue of delayed payments to MSMEs by CPSEs , which will ultimately 
strengthen MSME Sector in the country.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
27. The Committee also recommends that necessary guidelines should be issued 
for mandatory reporting of the delayed/pending payments (beyond 45 days) to 
MSMEs, by CPSEs/PSUs in their Annual Reports, in a separate section, as it would 
impress upon the CPSEs/PSUs to make payments to MSMEs in a time -bound 
manner. 
 
(Para 39) 
 

 
 
39 
 
Action taken 
 
The Ministry of MSME vide Notification No. S.O.5622 (E) dated 2 nd 
November, 2018 directed all companies which get supplies of goods or services 
from Micro and Small Enterprises and whose payment to Micro and Small 
Enterprises exceeds 45 days from th e date of acceptance or the date of deemed 
acceptance of the goods or services, to submit a half yearly return to the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs stating the amount of payments due and the reasons of the delay.  
 
In May 2020, the Ministry of MSME created a special sub-portal within Samadhaan 
portal for reporting the dues and monthly payments by GOI Ministries and CPSEs to 
the MSMEs. Dues of  Rs. 70,125.63 crore  has been paid to the MSME vendors by 
Government Ministries/Departments/CPSUs from May 2020 till 13thOctober, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee reiterate its recommendation that necessary 
guidelines/direction should be issued regarding mandatory reporting of the 
delayed payments (beyond 45 days) to MSMEs, by CPSEs/PSUs in their Annual 
Reports as this measure would encourage the CPSEs/PSUs to release the 
pending payments to MSMEs in a time-bound manner.  The Committee further 
recommends that details of delayed payments by CPSEs/PSUs should also be 
uploaded on their respective portals/website s with regular updation of the 
same.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
28. The Committee notes that the subordinate debt scheme was supposed to 
benefit nearly two lakh MSMEs whose non -performing assets are stressed. However, 
it has been observed that only a few MSMEs have availed the Scheme. The 
Committee feels that the sub -debt scheme in the present form has not been utilized 
much for the benefit of stressed MSMEs. The Committee therefore, recommends  that 
the Government should re -visit the scheme for restructuring as to cover and benefit 
maximum number of stressed MSMEs.  
 
(Para 43) 
 

 
 
40 
 
Action taken 
 
Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate Debt is a demand -driven scheme and 
meant for a specific set of borrowers. This might be one of the reasons for low 
off-take of the scheme. Ministry of MSME has been requesting State 
Governments, Bankers and Industry Associations to create more awareness about 
the scheme. The implementing agency, i.e. CGTMSE has also t aken initiatives in 
this regard. Ministry has had a series of consultations/meetings with stakeholders. 
On the basis of the inputs received from them, the Ministry has issued certain 
clarifications with regard to the scheme guidelines. Ministry has also pr oposed 
certain other modifications in the ‘Operational Guidelines’ of the scheme.  The 
Scheme has been extended upto 31stMarch,2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee desires that the M/o MSME may follow up the action 
taken by the State Gov ernments, Bankers, Industry Associations etc. to 
create more awareness about the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Subordinate 
Debt.  Further, the new initiatives taken by CGTMSE to increase the offtake 
of the scheme may also be apprised to the Committee.  The i mpact of the 
aforesaid collective measures on the offtake of the scheme may also be 
assessed and reported to the Committee for perusal.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
29. The Ministry of MSME informed the Committee that during Covid Pandemic, 
MSME Technology Centres (TCs) developed/manufactured various medical and 
auxiliary products such as Sanitizers, Thermometers, Masks, Parts of PPE Kit and 
Corona Testing Kit etc. and su pplied them to various Central/State Governments, 
Banks, PSUs and shared these with MSMEs for domestic/indigenous production and 
marketing. The Committee notes that these Technology Centres contributed 
significantly by manufacturing various Covid -related p roducts indigenously thus 
fulfilling the domestic demands. The Committee recommends that Ministry of MSME 
should focus on setting up of more such Technology Centres across the country to 
make India Atmanirbhar in manufacturing in situations like Covid Pand emic.   
 
(Para 56) 

 
 
41 
 
Action taken 
 
To increase the outreach of the Technology Centres, Ministry of MSME has  
initiated following schemes; 
I. Technology Centre Systems Programme” (TCSP) :Under the scheme, 15 new 
Technology Centres are being established in the country with the estimated cost of 
Rs. 2,200 crore including World Bank funding. 
II. Establishment of new Technology Centers/ Extension Centers: Under the 
Scheme, new Technology Centers (TCs) as ‘Hub’ and 100 Extension Centers (ECs) 
as ‘Spoke’ throughout the c ountry at a projected cost of Rs. 6000 Cr. has been 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 01.11.2018. 
35 locations have been approved for establishment of Extension Centers. Out of 
these, Detailed Project Report (DPR) of 23 ECs ha s been approved. And 16 
Extension Centers have started training and assisting MSMEs across the country to 
make India Atmanirbhar in manufacturing in situations like COVID -19 Pandemic. 
 
These Technology Centres are being established to assist MSME in their 
skilling and technological needs especially in high -end technologies. These are 
equipped with multiple cutting edge manufacturing technologies, 3D 
Manufacturing/Additive Manufacturing, Laser/Ultrasonic machining, Robotics and 
Process Automation, Precision measurement/ Metrology equipment, for General 
Engineering and Automotive Sector, State -of-the art Electronics Manufacturing 
Facilities, Calibration and Testing Facilities for Electronic System Design and 
Manufacturing Sector. These Technology Centres will also provide skilled 
workforce to industries by conducting training programmes for youths.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by M/o MSME and the 
Technology Centres in the fight against Covid -19 pandemic in the form of 
manufacturing of various Covid -related products in such a short time , which 
proved very useful and lifesaving in the time of distress  caused by Covid 
pandemic.  The Committee recommends that efforts should be made by the 
Ministry to expedite the se tting up of the 15 Technology Centres under 
consideration.  Further, such more Centres should be set up by the Ministry 
across the country in a time bound manner with more budgetary allocations as 

 
 
42 
 
this will not only make India Atmanirbhar, but also will help in employment 
generation as well as provide help in fight against any unforeseen situation like 
Covid. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
30. It has also been observed that MSMEs do not publish their invoices on TReDS 
platform despite having the registration  due to unsaid pressure from corporate 
(buyers). Further , it is seen that corporate (buyers) do not approve the published 
invoices of MSMEs on TReDS platform, which defies the sole purpose of the 
platform, as Banks cannot fund such invoices. The Committee is of the view that 
every tax invoice raised by GST registered MSMEs should reflect automatically on 
the respective TReDS platforms. After the delivery of Services or Goods, within a 
certain number of days, the corporate must accept or reject the automatic ally 
published invoice of MSMEs. After the stipulated period, the published invoice 
should be deemed accepted and should be available for banks to provide fund to 
MSMEs. If the CPSEs rejects any invoice, a mandatory clarification must be sought 
which shoul d be visible to Banks and respective MSMEs. Consequently, MSMEs 
would be encouraged to get themselves registered on GST and TReDS Platforms as 
their invoices would automatically get published on TReDS which would open the 
doors for them to have access to e asy and cheaper funds. It would also provide 
significant business potential for banks due to rise in number of invoices available 
on TReDS. The Committee feels that it would also make CPSEs responsible and 
cautious while rejecting any invoice raised by MSM Es and help them financially in 
this critical juncture. The proposal if implemented, would thereby, become a win -
win situation to MSMEs, CPSEs and Banks as each one of them are likely to benefit.   
 
(Para 62) 
Action taken 
 
Besides the registration of CPSEs on TReDS platform, Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) has also advised all the administrative Ministries/ Departments on 
17.10.2018 to direct their CPSEs to ensure MSE vendors registered with CPSEs are 
also to be registered on TReDS platform.  
 
CPSEs have also been advised to have a system with facility for uploading of 
bills of vendors and payment through the portal. 
 

 
 
43 
 
There is already a provision for deemed acceptance in MSMED Act, 2006 
administered by Ministry of MSME . Section 2 (ii) of the Act provides that in case 
no objection is made by the buyer regarding acceptance of goods and services 
within 15 days from the date of delivery of the goods or the rendering of services, 
it would be treated as “deemed acceptance”. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee would like to know the outcome of the advisory issued to the 
CPSEs and what steps have been taken by the CPSEs in respect of uploading 
of bills of vendors and payment through the portal  after the advisory .  The 
Committee further recommends that this should be taken up on priority by 
the Ministry in a time -bound manner and also the Committee should be 
apprised about the outcome of the action taken by the CPSEs and Ministry in 
this respect.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31. Ecommerce is growing at a very fast pace and it is expected to grow to 
US$200 billion by 2026. It plays a major role in streamlining business processes 
right from receiving a product order, to managing deliveries, keeping tr ack of stock 
and even analyzing consumer feedback and data. The future is the age of online 
marketing. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry may study the working of 
big ecommerce players to adopt efficient and successful practices for strengtheni ng 
the entry and survival of MSMEs in ecommerce. Through ecommerce, MSMEs not 
only can sell in indigenous markets but also get into markets abroad, which will 
definitely be a booster for MSMEs.   
(Para 84) 
 
Action taken 
 
To promote e -Commerce among MSMEs following initiatives have been 
taken by Ministry of MSME. 
 National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) has created MSME Global Mart 
(www.msmemart.com) a global business to business (B2B) portal facilitating online 
marketing support to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by way of 
increased visibility on internet, showcasing their product & services 24X7 , 
connecting buyers & suppliers,  providing trade leads & keyword based Tender 

 
 
44 
 
alerts etc. to grow their bu siness. Services of MSME mart not only focus towards 
increasing the visibility of products globally but also focus on providing value added 
services and relevant information to support MSMEs throughout the business cycle 
& it acts as online platform / mark et place for connecting buyers and suppliers for 
providing them open market access. Mobile app is also functional and already 
downloaded by 43,100 users. The portal has been on-boarded on UMANG Portal. 
 New portal of KVIC ( www.ekhadiindia.com) has been launched on 01.01.2021 
and is running on trial basis. More than 3,300 products have been on -boarded on the 
portal. Mobile app for the portal is also functional. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
Ecommerce has enab led MSMEs to widen their market reach, create 
more jobs and boost their revenues and this trend is expected to continue  in the 
future also  exponentially. Through e -commerce, even small MSMEs get to 
showcase their products across the globe without spending much on expansion 
or changing their location. E -commerce has immensely helped MSMEs to get 
rid of the business hurdles  and acquiring a larger customer base and increase 
in their revenue.  The Committee recommends that Ministry should pay special 
attention to this tool of new age which is capturing the market rapidly .  
Ministry should study the methodology and tactics of big e -commerce giants 
like Flipkart & Amazon and adopt the same for Indian MSME Sector for its 
empowerment.  The Committee feels that MSMEs in India have the potential to 
compete with global players by using the power of e -commerce and they can 
grow in leaps and bounds in coming future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
45 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in Respect of Which the Final Replies of the 
Ministry Still Awaited 
 
 
      Nil 
 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
47 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
Measures taken so far to support MSMEs 
 
A. Atmanirbhar Bharat  
1. ₹ 3 lakh crores Collateral -free Automatic Loans for Businesses, including 
MSMEs: The Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) has been 
formulated as a relief measure to MSMEs by providing them additional funding 
of up to ₹ 3 lakh crore in the form of a fully guaranteed emergency credit line. 
Borrowers with up to ₹ 25 crore outstanding and ₹ 100 crore turnover are 
eligible. This scheme provides 100 per cent credit guarantee cover to Banks and 
NBFCs on principal and interest. No guarantee fee, no fresh collateral is required.  
2. ₹20,000 crore Subordinate D ebt for Stressed MSMEs : Provision made for ₹ 
20,000 crore subordinate debt for MSMEs which are NPAs or are stressed. 
Government to support them with ₹ 4,000 crore to Credit Guarantee Trust for 
Micro and Small enterprises (CGTMSE). Banks are expected to pro vide the 
subordinate-debt to promoters of such MSMEs equal to 15 per cent of the 
existing stake in the unit subject to a maximum of ₹ 75 lakhs.  
3. ₹ 50,000 crores equity infusion through MSME Fund of Funds:  Government to 
set up a Fund of Funds with a corpus of ₹ 10,000 crore that will provide equity 
funding support for MSMEs. The Fund of Funds shall be operated through a 
mother and a few daughter funds. It will provide equity funding for viable 
MSMEs. This scheme will help MSMEs to expand its size and capacit y and will 
also encourages them to get listed on stock exchanges.  
4. New definition of MSME: Low threshold in MSME definition have created a fear 
among MSMEs of graduating out of the benefits. Hence, government has revised 
definition of MSME by raising the I nvestment limit. An additional criteria of 
turnover has been introduced and distinction between manufacturing and service 
sector stands removed.  
5. Global tenders to be disallowed upto ₹ 200 crores:  General Financial Rules 
(GFR) of the Government amended to disallow global tender enquiries in 
government procurement of goods and services of value of less than ₹ 200 crores. 
This is a step in support of the Make in India initiative and will promote MSMEs 
to grow.  
6. Other Measures for MSMEs: e-market linkage for M SMEs to act as a 
replacement for trade fairs and exhibitions. MSME receivables from Government 

 
 
48 
 
and CPSEs to be released in 45 days. This would help MSMEs to solve the 
problems of marketing and liquidity.  
7. Income Tax Refund:  Income tax refunds to nearly 8.2  lakh small businesses 
worth ₹ 5,204 crore has been issued with the objective to help MSMEs to carry 
on their business activities without pay cuts and layoffs in these challenging 
times. 
8. Relief of ₹ 1500 crores to MUDRA - Shishu loans: GoI to provide Intere st 
subvention of 2 per cent to prompt payees for a period of 12 months. Small 
business under MUDRA to be benefited. 
9. Ease of doing business for business including MSMEs : Government announced 
further enhancement of Ease of Doing business through Insolvency a nd 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) related measures which include (a). raising of the 
minimum threshold to initiate insolvency proceedings to Rs. 1 crore from Rs. 1 
lakh (which largely insulates MSMEs), (b) special insolvency resolution 
framework for MSMEs under Sec tion 240A of the Code, (c) suspension of fresh 
initiation of insolvency proceedings up to one year depending upon the pandemic 
situation and (d) empowering Central Government to exclude COVID 19 related 
debt from the definition of “default” under the Code for the purpose of triggering 
insolvency proceedings.  
10. Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro Finance Institutions:  Guarantee to be 
provided to Scheduled Commercial Banks for loans to new or existing NBFC -
MFIs or MFIs for on lending upto  Rs 1.25 lakh to approximately 25 lakh small 
borrowers. Loans from banks to be capped at Marginal Cost of Funds based 
Lending Rate (MCLR) plus 2%. Maximum loan tenure will be 3 years, and 80% 
of assistance to be used by MFI for incremental lending. Interest rates will be a t 
least 2% below maximum rate prescribed by RBI. Guarantee cover will be 
available for funding provided by MLIs to MFIs/NBFC -MFIs till March 31, 2022 
or till guarantees for an amount of Rs. 7,500 crore are issued, whichever is 
earlier. 
11. Udyam Registration P ortal-The Udyam registration Portal has facility through 
which an entrepreneur can opt for linking itself with Government e -market 
(GeM) place. With this facility, MSEs can link themselves with the 
Government’s procurement system and can participate in Gov ernment’s 
mandatory procurement program from MSEs. In addition to it, the portal has 
linkages with IT, GST and TReDs portals. In this regard, the Public Procurement 
Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) Order 2012  had mandated every 

 
 
49 
 
Central Ministry /Department/PSU to set an annual goal for procurement of 
minimum 25% from the MSE sector. In addition, the Public Preference (Make in 
India) Order 2017 has mandated manufacturing, production of goods and services 
in India, in which preference for local man ufacturers and service providers and 
local content requirement is supporting public procurement from local suppliers, 
especially by MSMEs. 
12. Government of India on 02.07.2021 decided to include Retail and Wholesale 
Trade as MSMEs and they are allowed to be registered on UDYAM registration 
portal. However, benefits to the MSMEs engaged in Retail and Wholesale Trade 
would be restricted to availin g credit under Priority Sector Lending only. This 
measure will benefit a large number of trading entities.  
13. The World Bank has approved a loan of $500 million to support Government of 
India’s programme “Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance (RAMP)” 
aimed at revitalizing the MSME sector, which has been heavily impacted by the 
COVID -19 pandemic. The Cabinet approval for the same is under process. 
RAMP is a part of the COVID Resilience and Recovery initiatives of the 
Government. The program aims at improv ing market access, access to credit, 
strengthening Institutions and governance at the Central and State level. The 
programme will support the ongoing support programmes of the Government, 
focusing on competitive aspect of MSMEs. It would enhance MSME 
performance through capacity building, handholding, skill development, quality 
enrichment, technological upgradation, digitization, outreach and marketing 
promotion through delivery of higher quality integrated services.  
14. Amendments to the Factoring Regulation A ct 2011 have been approved by 
Parliament which will enhance supply of credit to MSMEs from NBFCs.  
15. Government, on 23.10.2020, approved the Scheme for grant of ex -gratia payment 
of difference between compound interest and simple interest for six months, to 
borrowers in specified loan accounts. 
 
B. Union Budget for 2021-22 
1. To ensure faster resolution of cases, NCLT framework to be strengthened,             
e-Courts system shall be implemented and alternate methods of debt resolution 
and special framework for MSMEs shall be introduced.    
2. Budgetary allocation for MSMEs  of Rs. 15,700 crores provided in 2021 -22, 
which is more than double of BE for 2020-21.    

 
 
50 
 
3. Customs duty have been reduced uniformly  to 7.5% on semis, flat, and long 
products of non -alloy, alloy, and s tainless steels to provide relief to metal re -
cyclers, mostly MSMEs, Duty on steel scrap has been exempted for a period up 
to 31st March, 2022.  
4. Basic Customs Duty rates have been uniformly reduced  on caprolactam, nylon 
chips and nylon fiber & yarn to 5%. This will help the textile industry, MSMEs, 
and exports, too. 
5. Certain customs duty changes to benefit MSMEs have been made. Duty 
increased from 10% to 15% on steel screws and plastic builder wares. On prawn 
feed it is increased from  5%  to  15%.  Exemptio n  on  import  of  duty -free  
items  is rationalised as  an incentive  to  exporters  of 36 garments,  leather,  and  
handicraft  items.  Almost all these  items are made  domestically by MSMEs.  
Exemption  are withdrawn on imports  of certain  kind  of  lea thers  as  they  are  
domestically  produced  in  good  quantity and  quality,  mostly  by  MSMEs.  
Customs  duty  on  finished synthetic  gem  stones  is increased to  encourage  
their  domestic  processing. 
 
C. Announcements related to MSMEs in Relief Package announced on 28thJune 
2021 
1. 1.1 Lakh crore Loan Guarantee Scheme for COVID Affected Sectors which 
includes Rs. 50,000 crore for health sector to scale up medical infrastructure 
targeting under-served areas and Rs. 60,000 crore for other sectors. Interest  rate 
capped at 8.25% p.a. for other sectors and further decisions to be taken at later 
stage based on evolving needs. 
2. Additional 1.5 lakh crore for Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
(ECLGS) launched as part of AtmaNirbhar Bharat Package in May, 2020.  Limit 
of admissible guarantee and loan amount increased above existing level of 20% 
of outstanding on each loan. Overall cap of admissible guarantee raised from Rs. 
3 lakh crore to Rs. 4.5 lakh crore. 
3. Extension of Atmanirbhar Bharat RozgarYojana Launched on 1st Oct, 2020. 
Scheme extended from 30.6.2021 to 31.03.2022. Incentivizes employers for 
creation of new employment, restoration of loss of employment through EPFO. 
Approved outlay Rs. 22,810 crore for 58.50 lakh estimated beneficiaries. Last 
date for re gistration is 30.06.2021. Subsidy provided for two years from 
registration for new employees drawing monthly wages less than Rs. 15000 for:  

 
 
51 
 
(i) Both Employer’s and Employee’s share of contribution (total 24% of wages) 
for establishment strength upto 1000 employees. 
(ii) Only Employee’s share (12% of wages) in case of establishment strength of 
more than 1000. 
4. Rs. 88,000 crore  Boost to Export Insurance Cover  Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation (ECGC) promotes exports by providing credit insurance services. 
Proposed to infuse equity in ECGC over 5 years to boost export insurance cover 
by Rs. 88,000 crore. 
 
D. Measures taken by Reserve Bank of India 
1. As credit facilities to MSME borrowers, extended under the emergency credit 
line guarantee scheme of GoI guaranteed by national credit guarantee trustee 
company (NCGTC), are backed by an unconditional and irrevocable guarantee 
provided by the GoI, member l ending institutions, viz., SCBs (including 
scheduled RRBs), NBFCs (including HFCs as eligible under the scheme) and 
AIFIs, permitted to assign  zero per cent risk weight on the credit facilities  
extended under the ECLGS scheme to the extent of guarantee cov erage. 
2. In view of the need to support viable MSME entities on account of the fallout of 
COVID-19, the scheme of one -time restructuring of loans to MSMEs without an 
asset classification downgrade, was extended where the borrower’s account was a 
‘standard as set’ as on March 1, 2020 and the aggregate exposure of banks and 
NBFCs was not more than Rs.25 crore. The restructuring had to be implemented 
by March 31, 2021, subject to certain conditions. 
3. Scheduled Commercial Banks allowed to deduct credit disbursed to new MSME 
borrowers from their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) for calculation of 
the cash reserve ratio. To further incentivize the inclusion of the MSMEs into the 
banking system, this  exemption, available for exposures up to Rs 25 lakh and 
credit disbursed up to October 1, is being allowed until December 31, 2021.  
4. Special liquidity facility of Rs 16,000 crore to Small Industries Development 
Bank of India (SIDBI) for on -lending/refinancing - To meet the funding 
requirements of small industries including MSMEs and to kick start the 
investment cycle with additional focus on smaller MSMEs and businesses 
including those in credit deficient and aspirational districts, the Reserve Bank 
extended to SIDBI refinance facilities of ₹15,000 crore in April 2020, ₹15,000 
crore in April 2021 and ₹16,000 crore in June 2021 at the repo rate.  
5. Restructuring of MSME Accounts under Resolution Framework 2.0: Individual 

 
 
52 
 
borrowers, small businesses and MSMEs hav ing aggregate exposure of up to Rs 
25 crore and classified as ‘Standard’ as of March 31, 2021, are eligible for the 
latest framework. They, however, shouldn’t have availed restructuring under any 
of the earlier frameworks (including the August 2020 resolut ion). Restructuring 
under the latest framework needs to be invoked up to September 30, 2021 and 
shall have to be implemented within 90 days after invocation.  
6. In February 2020, scheduled commercial banks were allowed to deduct the 
equivalent of incremental credit disbursed by them up to the fortnight ending July 
31, 2020 as retail loans for automobiles, residential housing and loans to micro, 
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), over and above the outstanding level of 
credit to these segments as at the end of the fortnight ending on January 31, 2020 
from their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) for maintenance of cash 
reserve ratio (CRR). This exemption is available for a period of five years from 
the date of origination of the loan or the tenure of the loan, whichever is earlier. 
7. To provide support to small business units, micro and small industries, and other 
unorganised sector entities adversely affected during the pandemic, the Reserve 
Bank announced in May 2021 special three -year long -term repo opera tions 
(SLTRO) of ₹10,000 crore at repo rate for the Small Finance Banks (SFBs), to be 
deployed for fresh lending of up to ₹10 lakh per borrower.  
  

 
 
53 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
Measures to encourage MSMEs 
 
1. No registration is required for inter -state and intra -state supply o f services up to 
Rs. 20 lakhs in a year (Rs. 10 lakhs for the states of Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland 
and Tripura). 
2. No registration is required for intra -state supply of goods up to Rs. 40 lakh in a 
year(Rs. 20 lakh in the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur , Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura and Uttarakhand) 
w.e.f. 01.04.2019. 
3. Composition scheme has been formulated for small businessman. Under the 
scheme, person with turnover up to Rs. 1.5 crore needs to pay tax equal to 1%  to 
5% on his turnover and needs to file his returns every quarter. An alternative 
composition scheme has been made for supplier of services or mixed suppliers 
(not eligible for the earlier composition scheme) having an annual turnover in 
preceding financial year uptoRs. 50 lakhs with tax rate equal to 5% Composition 
taxpayers have to furnish annual return along with quarterly payment of taxes.  
4. Filing of Annual Return in FORM GSTR -9 or FORM GSTRR-9A for F.Y. 2017-
18,2018-19 and 2019 -20 has been made option al for taxpayers having aggregate 
annual turnover less than 2 crore rupees. The threshold of aggregate annual 
turnover for getting accounts audited and furnishing reconciliation statement in 
FORM GSTR -9C for F.Y. 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 has been raised from 2 crore 
rupees to 5 crore rupees.  
5. QRMP (Quarterly Return Monthly Payment) Scheme:  QRMP scheme has been 
launched with effect from 01.01.2021 under which registered persons having 
aggregate turnover up to five crore rupees are allowed to furnish return on 
quarterly basis along with monthly payment of tax. This would considerably 
reduce compliance under GST for such taxpayers. Flexibility has also been 
provided for taxpayers to easily opt -in and opt -out of the scheme throughout the 
year.  In first two months o f a quarter, taxpayers have an option to pay tax 
through auto -generated Challan of a fixed amount. Taxpayers may choose to 
upload selected B2B (Business to Business) invoices in first two months of a 
quarter in an IFF (Invoice Filing Facility) that would e nable the recipient to avail 
credit on such supplies. 
6. Amnesty Scheme to provide relief to taxpayers regarding late fee for pending 
returns: To provide relief to the taxpayers, late fee for non -furnishing FORM 

 
 
54 
 
GSTR-3B for the tax periods from July, 2017 to April, 2021 has been reduced/ 
waived as under:- 
 late fee capped to a maximum of Rs 500/ - (Rs. 250/- each for CGST & SGST) 
per return for taxpayers, who did  not have any tax liability for the said tax 
periods. 
 late fee capped to a maximum of Rs 1000/ - (Rs. 500/- each for CGST and 
SGST) per return for other taxpayers. 
The reduced rate of late fee would apply if GSTR -3B returns for these tax periods 
are furnished between 01.06.2021 to 31.08.2021. 
7. Rationalization of late fee imposed under section 47 of the CGS T Act: To reduce 
burden of late fee on smaller taxpayers, the upper cap of late fee has been 
rationalized to align late fee with tax liability/ turnover of the taxpayers, as 
follows: 
 The late fee for delay in furnishing of FORM GSTR -3B and FORM GSTR -1 
capped, per return, as below: 
 For taxpayers having nil tax liability in GSTR -3B or nil outwards supplies in 
GSTR-1, the late fee to be capped at Rs. 500/ - (Rs.250/- CGST  + Rs.250/ - 
SGST) 
 For other taxpayers: 
 For taxpayers having Annual Aggregate Turnover (AAT O) in preceding 
year upto Rs 1.5 crore, late fee to be capped to a maximum of Rs 2000/ - 
(Rs.1000/- CGST+ Rs.1000/- SGST); 
 For taxpayers having AATO in preceding year between Rs 1.5 crore to Rs 
5 crore, late fee to be capped to a maximum of Rs.5000/ - (Rs.2500/- CGST 
+ Rs.2500/- SGST); 
 For taxpayers having AATO in preceding year above Rs 5 crores, late fee 
to be capped to a maximum of Rs 10000/ - (Rs.5000/- CGST+ Rs.5000/ - 
SGST). 
 The late fee for delay in furnishing of FORM GSTR -4 by composition taxpayers 
capped to Rs.500/ - (Rs.250/- CGST + Rs.250/ - SGST) per return, if tax liability 
is nil in the return, and Rs.2000/- (Rs.1000/- CGST + Rs.1000/- SGST) per return 
for others. 
 Late fee payable for delayed furnishing of FORM GSTR -7 reduced to Rs. 50/ - 
per day(Rs.2 5/- CGST + Rs.25/ - SGST) and to be capped to maximum of 
Rs.2000/- (Rs.1000/- CGST + Rs 1000/- SGST) per return. 
**** 

 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
56 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
IV 
Fourth Meeting  
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10:30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 21st December, 2021 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
        1.        Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.    Shri Hardwar Dubey 
3.    Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
4.    Shri Shwait Malik  
5.    Shri Sanjay Seth 
6.   Shri Abdul Wahab  
7.    Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
8.    Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
9.    Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
       10.    Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
       11.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
       12.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
       13.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
       14.   Shri Sunil Soren 
       15.   Shri  Thirunavukkarasar S.U.   
       16.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
 

 
 
57 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, 
the Committ ee took up for consideration the draft 3 10th and 311th Action Taken 
Reports on the 304 th and 306 th Reports of the Committee pertaining to Demand for 
Grants (2021-22) o f the Ministry of Micro,  Small and Medium Enterprises and 
Ministry of Heavy Industries respectively  and 3 12th Report on the “Impact of 
COVID-19 Pandemic on MSME Sector and Mitigation Strategy adopted to counter 
it”. After a brief discus sion, the Committee adopted the draft 3 10th, 311th and 312th 
Reports unanimously. 
 
2. The Committee then decided to present/lay the above Reports in both the 
Houses of Parliament on Wednesday, the 22 nd December, 2021. It was decided that 
the Reports may be  presented in the Rajya Sabha by the Chairman and in his 
absence by Shri Sanjay Seth , MP and in his absence by Shri Narain Dass Gupta, 
MP. Likewise, the Committee decided that in the Lok Sabha, Shri Bharatsinhji 
Shankarji Dabhi, MP and in his absence Shri  Vincent H. Pala, MP would lay the 
Reports. 
  
3.  The Committee then adjourned at 10.55 a.m 
 
                      
 
  
New Delhi                 Narendra Kumar 
21st December, 2021            Additional Director             
 
*********** 
 
 