PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
ON
REQUIREMENT OF COIR INDUSTRIES FOR ITS PROMOTION AND PROLIFERATION
 
(MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  12th May, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 12th May, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY   2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
RAJYA SABHA
___________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
ON
REQUIREMENT OF COIR INDUSTRIES FOR ITS PROMOTION AND PROLIFERATION
 
(MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES)
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  12th May, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 12th May, 2005)
 
            
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
MAY,  2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
 
             
CONTENTS
                                    PAGES
1.         COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                                      (i)-(ii)
2.         COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE                                                     (iii)
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                          (iv)
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   1-38
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND                                                 39-50 
            RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                              

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
Shri Santosh Bagrodia                     —        Chairman
 RAJYA SABHA
2.
      Prof. M.M. Agarwal
3.      Shri Surendra Lath 
4.      Shri Suresh Bhardwaj        
5.      Dr. K. Malaisamy    
6.      Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya       
9.      Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10. Smt. Vanga Geetha
 LOK SABHA
11. Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12. Shri Kailash Baitha            
13. Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                       
14. Shri Subhash  Deshmukh  
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan   
16. Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria                
17. Shri Sunil Khan                               

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
18. Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato   
19. Shri Prakash Paranjpe                  
20. Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel 
21. Shri Rajnarayan                              
22. Shri Bagida  Ramakrishna
23. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana         
24. Smt. Rubab Sayeda                       
25. Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
 
 
(i)
 
 
26.
 Shri Manvendra Singh                   
27. Shri Ganesh Singh             
28. Shri Suraj Singh                  
29. Shri Chandramani Tripathi            
30. Shri Girdhari Yadav
31. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure      
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
I N T R O D U C T I ON
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Industry,  having  
been   authorised   by the  Committee, hereby present this   One Hundred Seventy Second   Report  on

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
Requirement of Coir Industries for its Promotion and Proliferation (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries).
 
2.         The Sub-Committee for the Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries in its meeting held on 5 th April, 2005 
interacted with the representatives of the Coir Board and the Ministry of ARI .  The Coir Board furnished a detailed
background note on the issue of Requirement of Coir Industries for its Promotion and Proliferation.   The present has
been prepared on the basis of the interaction of the Committee with the Coir Board and the Ministry of ARI in the said
meeting and the detailed background as furnished by the Coir Board.
3.         The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 9TH May, 2005 considered and  adopted the Report.
4.         The Committee in its meeting held on 9TH May, 2005 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     SANTOSH
BAGRODIA
NEW DELHI;                                             
                                        
                                                                     Chairman                     
9TH May, 2005                                                                                                                                         Department-related
Parliamentary
                                                                                                                                                                  Standing
Committee on Industry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
REPORT
 
The Coir industry is a traditional, labour intensive, export oriented and  agro based cottage industry.  The coir
industry originated in the State of  Kerala centuries ago and over the years it has spread to other coconut growing States
like Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Union Territories like Andaman & Nicobar Islands
& Lakshadweep etc. Coconut husk which was considered a throw away waste material is the basic raw material of this
industry.  The coir industry, therefore generates wealth from waste.  The coir industry employs more than half a million
people and majority of them are from rural areas and belonging to economically weaker sections of the society.  About
80% of the workforce are women.  It is of great importance to the coconut producing States in India as the industry
provides employment and livelihood to vast majority of the economically backward population with minimum
investment and contributes to the economy of these States.  This is because coconut husk, the raw-material for coir
industry is considered otherwise as a mere waste. The industry provides gainful employment mainly to rural

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
unemployed people where the scope for providing alternative employment is rather remote. The coir industry also
contributes to the valuable  foreign exchange earnings of the nation.
 
1.1       The emergence of new products like coir geotextiles  and coir composites as wood substitute have very good
potential.  Coir geotextile is used to prevent soil erosion and promote re-vegetation, as an effective soil conditioner and
biodegradable moisture retaining soilless growth medium which would find extensive application in greening projects,
agri-, horti- and flori-cultural   operations .   Similarly, coir composite has  extensive  application in the field of
construction and packaging.  Coir thus meet some of the market needs in respect of new products by way of geotextiles ,
garden articles and coir ply.
 
1.2       The expansion of cultivation of coconut in non-traditional areas in the States of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra
Pradesh, Orissa, etc has increased the availability of raw-material and coir industry is coming up in a big way in these
States contributing to rural employment generation through utilization of an agro-waste available in plenty.
 
1.3       In the pre-independent period, the industry was in the hands of foreign companies and production was highly
centralized merely catering to the requirements of exports.  The post independent period saw the decentralization and
fragmentation of the industry into small household cottage units.  It was in view of the socio economic importance that
the Coir Board was set up by the Govt. of India to safeguard the Indian industry including export. The Coir Board
extended its activities for development of coir industry in the State of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa,
West Bengal, Goa, Andaman & Nicobar Island, Pondicherry and Lakshadweep through its Regional Offices established
at Bangalore in Karnataka, Pollachi in Tamil Nadu, Visakhapattanam in Andhra Pradesh and Bhubaneswar in Orissa. 
 
 
 
 
1.4       Coir Board organised programme for developing skilled manpower by imparting training in various activities of
coir processing to the artisans in the above States, it opened sales outlets providing facilities to the small scale
manufacturers to sell their products through Coir Board showrooms & Sales Depots, introduced rebate system initially
and later it was replaced with Market Development Assistance Scheme to help the coir cooperatives and PSUs  engaged
in the manufacture and marketing of coir and coir products and  encouraged cooperativisation through specific schemes
to bring coir workers  in the cooperative fold and  ensure minimum wages.  With a view to safeguard the interests of the
industry, the Board had introduced minimum export price for price stabilisation and to prevent unhealthy competition
among exporters, Purchase Price to ensure minimum price to the small scale manufacturers and wages to workers,
import restriction to protect local industry, quality inspection to ensure quality of coir products. 
 
 
1.5       As part of empowerment of women, introduced Mahila Coir Yojana which provides motorised ratt/motorised
traditional ratt at subsidised rates to women artisans after giving  training in spinning coir yarn. 
 
1.6       Through R&D, the Board has developed the     motorised ratts, motorised traditional ratts and fully automatic
spinning machine which reduces drudgery in spinning and increases productivity and helps enhancement of wages of
coir spinners; Multi-purpose loom, semi-automatic loom and fully automatic loom for weaving mats, matting with
higher productivity;  ‘Coirret’ – a bacteria consortia; ‘Pith Plus’ – a fungal spawn, through its application the coir pith a
problematic waste product is composted for a genuine organic manures.  Coir geotextiles (Coir Bhoovastra) for
controlling soil erosion, protection of river embankments, road embankments, mud-wall, hill slopes; Coir composites to
produce coir ply a wood substitute for manufacture of furniture, doors, earthquake-free houses, panelling  and ceiling;
and instant lawn using Coir Bhoovastra, Coir Pith and grass.           The NRDC has been entrusted to patent the Coirret,
Pith Plus, Coir Geotextiles  and Coco Lawn developed by the research centre  of the Coir Board.  A number of novel
designs with attractive colour schemes have been developed for printing and weaving on coir products suitable for
different markets abroad. 
 
1.7       In line with the change of national policy and economic reforms etc. the Coir Board has reviewed its role.  The
Coir Board has assumed its new role of a promoter and facilitator in providing the industry and through increased
participation of the private sector in all activities.   The chanelisation of activities of the Coir Board by introducing

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
rationalized schemes under R&D and domestic market promotion, export market promotion, training, extension, Mahila
Coir Yojana and Quality Improvement, development of production infrastructure, welfare measures and
Cooperativisation, has been taken up for institutionalization   of the industry.   Restructuring of Cooperatives where the
workers are the members is necessary and the cooperativisation  scheme with the modification suggested in the report of
Institute of Rural Management, Anand (IRMA) is necessary to bring the coir workers in the cooperative fold to give the
coir industry a look of an organised sector. 
 
1.8       The Committee appreciates the role of  Coir Board in the overall development of coir industry in India
characterized by increased production, increased consumption, export and  employment in rural sector. 
Development of Coir Industries in India has led to  Women empowerment and welfare of workers. The role of
the Coir Board in the field of  R&D in coir sector has  strengthened, new products like coir ply, packaging
material and geotextiles .  Coir Board as a national organization has been  committed  to the sustainable
development.  The Committee hopes that the Coir Board would continue to make its lasting contribution in the
promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries not only in the Coir producing states but the non-traditional
zones also.
 
 
2.0       SWOT –analysis of Coir Industries
 
2.1       The strengths, weakness, opportunity  and threats of coir industry are;
 
Strengths
 
(i)
                  Abundant availability of raw material for industrial utilisation. Availability of skilled manpower.
 
(ii)                A renewable resource with inherent qualities  such as its biodegradability and eco-friendliness, which
advantages over synthetic products.
 
(iii)               An established and expanding export market.
 
(iv)              It provides employment for skilled and semiskilled workers, especially women, enabling empowerment of
women.
 
(v)                Virtual monopoly India enjoys as a producer of retted white fibre which are more suited for manufacture of
coir yarn, mats, matting, carpets.
 
(vi)              Scope for development of products out of coir for diversified use through R&D.
 
 
 
Weaknesses
 
(i)                 Obsolete production and process technologies.
(ii)                Slow pace of modernisation.
(iii)               Relatively high cost of production.
(iv)              The characteristic of coir limiting product diversification.
(v)                Inadequate credit flow and investment .
(vi)              Poor shipping infrastructure.
 
Opportunities
 
(i)
                  Increasing awareness for eco-friendly biodegradable products world over.
(ii)                Increasing awareness about need for erosion control and biodegradable Geotextile in erosion control
applications.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
(iii)               Opening up of markets through globalisation.
(iv)             The coir industry generates additional employment in rural areas through coir processing activities with
minimum investment and arrests migration of rural youths to urban areas.  
 
Threats
 
(i)                  Threats from synthetic products which are more attractive and sophisticated.
(ii)                Competition from cheaper natural fibres/ substitutes.
(iii)               Competition from other producing countries like Srilanka, Vietnam, Philippines and China. 
(iv)              Higher freight when compared to Srilanka.
 
2.2       The Committee recommends that the Coir Board would make a serious assessment of SWOT analysis of
Coir Industries.  Strength of the Coir industries must be capitalised and the opportunities ahead must be availed
of.  Similarly, strategy should be chalked out to combat the threats and overcome the weaknesses of the Coir
Industries.  The Committee has commended   contribution of the coir board in its 141
st  Report to chalk out
action plan for promotion and proliferation of coir industries in West Bengal and Andman  and Nicobar Islands. 
Similar action plan may be chalked out for other states  on the local logistics.  
 
3.0       Problems being faced by Coir Industries and the action taken/ being  taken
 
3.1       The present level of utilization of coconut husk in India is around 37 per cent.  There is a potential for increasing
the utilization of raw material at least to 50 per cent.   In that case the employment in the coir sector especially in the
rural villages of coconut producing states  could  be further  enhanced  by around 1,00,000 during the X Plan period.  At
present the husks are not fully utilized due to a variety of reasons particularly in the absence of an effictive  collection
and distribution mechanism. Extraction of one Kg. of fibre generates 2 Kgs. of coir pith.  It occupies large space
polluting the environment.  Its disposal was a big problem in all coir producing States.  The basic problems being faced
by the coir industry and the measures taken or to be taken by the Coir Board are stated as under:-
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic Problems Measures taken/to be taken
 
1.         Shortage of fibre due to “eryophide
mite” attack on the coconut and severe
drought resulting in low yield and inferior
quality fibre.
 
Due to various measures taken by the
Government, there has been improvement in
the availability of coir fibre.  The
Government of India has allowed duty free
import of coir fibre from neighbouring
countries for a period of one year.  Besides,
approval has also been given to the Coir
Board to procure coir fibre from
neighbouring coir producing states.  The Coir
Board has also established a Coir Relations
Committee to periodically review the raw
material situation and to initiate corrective
measures whenever necessary.
 
 
2.         Low utilisation of husk (current
utilisation is 37%)
 
 
The Coir Board has already entered into a
collaborative project with the PSG College of
Technology for the development of mobile

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
defibering unit for increasing the utilization
of husks even in the interiors of the rural
areas.
 
The Coir Board is implementing a Financial
Assistance Scheme to encourage setting up of
new units which results in enhanced
utilization of coconut husk.  Field Level
Training Programmes and Entreprenuership
development Programmes are also being
conducted to attract more artisans and
entrepreneurs to the sector.
3. Low productivity, low penetration of
technology, low investment, low level of
managerial skills
 
 
 
 
4.         Lack of modernisation, diversifi-
cation and quality upgradation of products.
1.         Strengthen R&D, collaborative
projects to devise coir processing equipments
with higher productivity, technological
upgradation and modernisation of existing
equipment for which enhanced Govt. funding
support is necessary.
 
2.Introduce suitable training programme as a
capacity building exercise for  improving the
managerial skill of the entrepreneurs.   The
Coir Board is also carrying out various     
remedial  measures to combat the problems
under its Plan Programmes.
5.         Inadequacy of skilled manpower to
take up post fibre activities in coir producing
States other than Kerala.
1.         Intensive skill development training
with the involvement of State Governments,
local bodies, NGOs, Cooperative Societies,
etc. through Mahila Coir Yojana, quality
improvement programme etc. are being
carried out.
6.         Lack of publicity to create awareness
among the users on various coir products in
general and coir geotextiles, coir composites,
coir garden articles in particular. 
1.         Participate as many as exhibitions and
fairs, conduct demonstration on the
application of coir geotextiles  for controlling
soil erosion, protection of embankments,  
watershed manage- ment, etc. and coir
composites as wood substitutes and
packaging materials. 
7.         Slow growth of export and domestic
markets.
1.         Identify suitable agencies for supply
of current market information and overseas
market intelligence through harnessing the
benefit of Information Technology, participa-
tion of international fairs, seminars, road
shows, etc. abroad.
8.         Low wages, higher cost of production
and poor welfare measures.
1.  Popularisation  of “Anugraha” loom 
developed by the CCRI in the trade.
 
2.         Introduction of process technologies
with minimum labour displacement and
enhanced productivity. 
 
3.         Introduction of cluster development
activities, formation of SHGs / consortia to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
enable them pool their resources to meet the
competition, evolve programmes such as bulk
sourcing of raw-material and marketing
through consortia approach to reduce cost of
production.
9.         Competition from synthetic products
and similar natural fibre substitutes.
1.         Proper publicity covering the
advantages of coir over synthetic products
like its biodegradability, environment
friendliness and 100% natural aspects
through print and electronic media in all
potential markets in India and abroad. 
 
2.         Recommend cost management
programmes in the coir manufacturing units
as per the model created by the
Entreprenuership Development Institute of
India, Ahmedabad.
10.       Lack of product innovation, poor
quality of raw-material and end products,
absence of clear strategy for guiding the
direction of exports, inadequate export
promotion, higher freight charges,
uncompetitive price structure, inability to
meet the delivery schedule of the buyer
1.         Strengthen R&D in coir sector
involving private participation, create quality
awareness at grass-root level, prepare action
plan for export promotion and strategy for
guiding direction of exports, provide
incentive to compensate higher freight
charges to exporters, political intervention to
avoid unnecessary strikes in coir sector and
ports.
 
 
The Committee was also apprised of special features characterized  by :
 
(i)
                  Dependent of  a large work force, that too from economically weaker section of the population
(ii)                Limited choice of alternative employment in areas of concentration of coir.
(iii)               A number of processing stages the product has to pass through in the processing cycle.
(iv)              Higher percentage of wage component in the product price.
(v)                A highly price sensitive market and  fluctuating demand.
(vi)              Lack of  homogeneity in production and processing with the involvement of a large    number of small-
scale tiny cottage industrial units.
 
 
4.0       Cost reduction of coir products
 
4.1       Under the cluster development activities, it is proposed to promote the formation of consortium among the small
scale manufacturers and small and medium exporters so as to have a common approach in sourcing of raw material,
marketing of products etc.   This will enable them to reduce the selling cost of the products to the minimum extent
possible.  Under the UNDP Project recently concluded, the Coir Board in association with the Entrepreneurship
Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad had implemented a project on revitalisation  of coir industry by
demonstration of cost management strategies.   Under the Project, 4 consortia, 2 each for the small scale manufacturers
and exporters were constituted.   These consortia have been successfully marketing coir products in a cost effective
manner.  It is proposed to replicate the strategy in other coir producing sectors.
 
4.2       The Committee takes note of the basic characteristics and  problems of coir industries and the action
taken or be envisaged to be taken by the Coir Board and the Ministry of ARI.  The Committee is of the view that
with massive efforts and implementation of financial assistance scheme to encourage setting up of new units
would result into higher utilisation of husk from the present level of thirty seven per cent.    The Committee

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
recommends that the Ministry of ARI and the Coir Board to undertake cost management programme in the coir
manufacturing units with the assistance of Research Institute like Entrepreneurship Development Institute of
India, Ahmedabad and the others. Due impetus may also  be given to cluster development activities and
consortium approach to reduce the cost of production.
 
4.3       State- wise details of  production and employment in the coir industry are given below (2003-04):
State No.of units Regd.
with the  Coir
Board
Production(MT) Employment
KERALA 7050          1,80,000
White Fibre    
11,200
Brown Fibre   
68,000
4,33,000
TAMIL NADU 1235                1,01,200  72,840
KARNATAKA   305                   36,900  18,000
ANDHRA PRADESH   297                   28,900  41,400
ORISSA  428                     1,655    6,520
OTHERS  143                   15,345  14,900
TOTAL 9458                3,64,000          5,86,660
 
4.4       The production of coir fibre during 1954-55 when the Coir Board set up was 1,30,000 MT.  The production has
been increased to 3,64,000 MT during 2003-04.  Similarly, the value of export of coir and coir products  during 1954-55
was Rs.836.85 lakhs.  This was increased to Rs.407.50 crore during 2003-04.
 
4.5       The Committee understands the Coir Industries is labour intensive industry and major components of the
labour force are the women.  Therefore ,  promotion and furtherance of coir Industries would lead to
empowerment of women besides enhancing the economic prosperity of the States.   Action plan may be chalked
out for enhancing the economy of scale so that cost of production may come down and avenues of employment
generation may further be explored.  
 
5.0       Coir industry  as export oriented industry
 
5.1       The coir industry is an export oriented industry and coir and coir products are exported to more than 80 countries
world over. The major importing countries are USA, UK, Germany, Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Australia, France,
Spain, Canada, Japan, Greece, Sweden, South Africa, UAE, Portugal, Denmark etc.
 
 
Item 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-05*
Quantity
MT
Value
Rs. lakh
Quantity
MT
Value
Rs. lakh
Quantity
MT
Value
Rs. lakh
Coir Mats 40242.63 24732.04 49102.77 29165.34 52751 32373.80
Coir Mattings 4955.80 3303.24 4854.60 3054.10 3366 2306.18
Coir
Geotextiles
2140.69 985.22 2599.53 1184.74 2045 902.97
Coir Rugs &
Carpets
1327.09 932.42 1694.56 1071.36 1466 888.38
Coir Pith 21064.20 1493.01 29179.35 1975.92 34505 2430.15
Rubberised
Coir
535.21 403.43 461.78 334.66 419 302.29
Coir Yarn 11482.46 2996.76 12364.43 3498.71 9779 2903.60
Curled Coir 492.37 80.05 76.54 14.02 69 10.11
Coir Fibre 1036.86 103.80 1120.75 142.44 1209 163.68

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
Coir Rope 332.39 102.05 308.88 111.46 280 98.02
Coir Other
Sorts
372.85 138.56 490.21 196.90 479.00 192.88
Total 84182.55 35270.58 102253.40 40749.65 106368 42572.06
* Up to February, 2005.  The figures are provisional only.
 
5.2       During 2003-04 there was an increase to the tune of 15.53 per cent in the export value over the previous year.  It
was 10.02 per cent during 2002-03 compared to the previous year.  In the current year, (2004-2005) there was an
increase to the tune of 16.86 per cent in quantity-wise and 15.95 per cent in value wise. The increase in the export has
been satisfactory as the growth recorded is in the case of export of a traditional commodity.
 
5.3       During 2003-2004, the Gross Domestic Product of the coir industry was valued roughly at Rs.1750 crore and out
of which an amount of Rs.407.50 crore was earned as foreign exchange from export.  The GDP of the industry for the
year 2004-2005 is estimated to be Rs.1900 crore and out of which the export earnings amounted to Rs.450.00 crore
(2004-2005). The industry generates additional employment in rural areas through adoption of coir processing activities
with minimum investment and arrests migration of rural youths to urban areas.  The contribution of coir industry to the
national economy can be further increased by augmentation of utilization of coconut husk abundantly available in all
coconut producing states.   
 
5.4       Export during first 11 months of the current year (2004-05) totaled to 1,06,368 Tonnes valued at Rs.425.72
crore, the target being Rs.450 crore.  
 
 
5.5       Till the removal of the Minimum Export Price applicable on export of coir and coir products and removal of the
Minimum Purchase Price applicable  for the goods manufactured for export, the coir industry was operating in a
protected environment.  With the advent of globalisation  and liberalisation and resultant removal of Minimum Export
Price and Purchase Price the industry is facing severe price competition from among the exporters and manufacturers,
resultant deterioration in quality. This is besides the competition from synthetic and other natural products in markets
abroad.  Coir faces competition from products like Chinese Grass Mats, Rubber, Sisal etc.  In the domestic market also
liberal imports have created competition from substitutes.  It is export which helps to adjust the imbalance in the
domestic market. 
 
 
5.6       Presently there is no specific scheme to prevent competition from among the exporters and manufacturers.  
However, the following schemes are suggested to reduce the competition:
 
(i)
                  Formation of Manufacturers Consortia: Under this the Consortium may be given the margin money to
procure goods produced, store and supply it for exports according to the requirements of exporters for
procuring and stocking raw materials required for manufacture of  products by the small scale manufacturers,
establishment of Shearing factories, Smoke house etc
 
(ii)
                One time assistance for setting up of Common Facility Centres;
 
5.7       Collection, compilation and publication   of  prices of various products at the production centres . This would
enable the exporters to  quote price for various products after adding overheads and profit.  For this purpose it is
necessary to strengthen the Statistics Wing of the Coir Board.
 
5.8       The Committee understands that the coir exporters face competition in markets abroad from other
natural products like Chinese Grass Mats, Rubber, Sisal and coir products being exported by Srilanka, Taiwan,
Philippines etc. Synthetic products manufactured using improved technology and supported by publicity also
pose great threat to the coir exports. The Coir Geotextiles  are facing competition from Srilanka and synthetic
geotextile materials which dominate the market.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the Government should
provide assistance by reimbursing a portion of the expenditure incurred on brand based publicity abroad
projecting the eco-friendly nature of the coir geotextiles to meet this competition.  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
6.0       Marketing and Sales
 
6.1       Traditionally coir fibre, coir yarn, coir rope, coir products etc. have been marketed in India by a number of
private traders who book orders from places of consumption in various States in India and supply materials on
procurement from the producers in Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.  The Co-operative Coir Marketing Federation in
Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are also engaged in the marketing of coir fibre, yarn and rope in the country.  In the
case of finished products of coir the major market players are a network of Showroom & Sales Depots established by
the Board in important places in India.  A number of producers in the private sector have their sales outlets established
through out the country.  The Apex Marketing Societies like Kerala State Co-operative coir Marketing Federation,
Karnataka State Coir Co-operative Federation and State owned Agencies like Kerala State Coir Corporation, Karnataka
State Coir Corporation, the State Industrial Coir Marketing Society of Tamil Nadu, etc., are also running a number of
sales outlets to market the products of coir in the country.  In addition to this the hawkers and mobile units are engaged
in the marketing of coir and coir products. 
 
 
 
7.0       Marketing Strategy
 
7.1       The Sub-Committee was apprised of the marketing strategy as chalked out and practiced by the Coir Board for
the promotion of Coir Industries as under:-
 
(i)
                  Identification of consumer needs through Identification of specific functional requirements and
modification of product quality and specification to meet the needs and Expansion of marketing outlets
 
(ii)                Projecting comparative advantages of coir products offer competing products.
 
 
(iii)
               Assessment of the market trends and changing taste of the consumer and to advise the industry for
production of products actually required by the consumer public.
 
(iv)              Product diversification and design development in association with national level organisation like National
Institute of Design etc.
(v)                Encouraging private participation in undertaking meaningful publicity.
 
(vi)              Popularisation of value added products through mail order literature and other products literature targeting
selective and prospective customers and Product promotion through publicity and propaganda measures
 
(vii)             Organisation of seminars and workshops with the objective of creating product awareness and Product
promotion through participation in Trade fairs and exhibitions
 
(viii)           Promotion of sales through innovative marketing strategies with the help of Market Development  
Assistance on a regular basis and Organisation  of Buyer-Seller Meet thereby encouraging the small scale
producers etc.
 
(ix)              Formulation of clusters among manufacturers to ensure a collective effort in marketing .
 
 
7.2       The Committee is of the view that steps being contemplated by the Coir Board to promote the marketing
and sales of coir products in the domestic market which interalia include intensification of promotional measures
like publicity through print and electronic media;    increased participation in trade fairs and exhibitions;
organisation of Buyer –Seller Meets in potential regions;  organisation of special sales campaign and festival
discount offer to promote sales; organising collective participation of manufacturers in selected trade fairs and
exhibitions;  popularisation of new products like coir geotextiles, garden articles, coir pith based products

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
through awareness creation programmes etc. would go a long way in the promotion and furtherance of the Coir
Industries in India and would inject competitive resilience to face the global competition wherein China is
becoming a great threat to the India's monopoly in the Coir Industries
 
 
7.3       The Committee is of the opinion that in the liberalized and globalized market structure since the
consumer is the king, all marketing and sales strategy should be based on the plank of the actual need and taste
of the consumer therefore, the marketing research should be conducted accordingly and efforts should be made
for introducing modification in products.   This would lead to widening of product range and suitably meeting
the demand of the consumer as per specification.   Popularization of value products through buyer-seller meet
and seminar would definitely lead to product promotion, cooperative Coir marketing strategy, and public private
partnership would lead to encouragement to coir industries. 
 
 
8.0       R&D activities
 
8.1       Coir Board has been provided with Plan funds for organising S&T and R&D Programmes for the development
of the coir industry. The Plan S&T Programmes have been broadly classified into four sub-heads viz Modernisation of
extraction and processing coir fibre, Development of coir processing machinery, Product development & diversification,
Testing and services.
 
8.2       The research & development programmes are being implemented through the two premier research institutes,
Central Coir research Institute, Kalavoor in Kerala and Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bangalore in Karnataka.
As the in-house facilities in the research & development programmes are inadequate in all the departments of CCRI to
meet the requirement of the industry, collaborative projects are also undertaken with reputed R&D institutions engaged
in organising research & development programmes of similar nature. The scheme wise R&D programmes undertaken by
the Board and the details of the beneficiary industrial units, individual and the quantum of benefits achieved by these
units in terms of rise in production, increase in income, quality upgradation etc are detailed below:
 
8.3       Modernisation, extraction & processing of coir fibre and pith
 
8.3.1    Objectives of the scheme are:
 
(i)
                  Modernisation of coir industry by rendering it a clean & pollution free processing technology and the
upgradation of the quality of the fibre produced in the industry.
(ii)                Production of Coirret at the pilot scale laboratory at CCRI.
 
(iii)               To design, develop & standardise machinery for brown fibre production.
 
(iv)              To extend facilities in conversion of coir brown fibre into coir needled felt and testing of coir products.
(v)                Blending of synthetic fibre with coir fibre and evolve non-woven material for production of coir polymer
boards.
(vi)              Collaborative study with reputed organisations on bio bleaching and bio softening of coir fibre.
 
8.3.2    As a ongoing project, a pilot scale laboratory is established at CCRI for the production of COIRRET, a
consortium of bacteria for reducing the period of retting of coconut husk and conversion of green husk fibre into quality
of retted coir fibre. A collaborative research programme was organised for the development of coir composite board
using non-woven fabric and production of decorative board using coir matting as base material with Regional Research
Laboratory, Trivandrum.
 
8.4       Development of coir processing machinery
 
8.4.1    Development of coir processing machinery is an ongoing project under the S&T programmes. The machineries
were developed for processing of coir and popularising  in the industry for improving the productivity, reducing the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
drudgery of the labour engaged in this sector, improve the earning of the workers and entrepreneurs   and quality of the
products intended for export.
 
8.4.2    In order to increase the utilisation of coconut husks from 35% to 50% produced in India, the main hurdle faced is
the high transportation cost of the raw material, coconut husk to the centralised  fibre extraction units.  There is no well
defined husk collection system existing in the industry as the coconut producers are not aware of the economic value of
the husks.  It is proposed to collect the husks available in the coconut producing sites and fibre extraction should be
organised at the site itself for reduction of transportation cost and cost of the end product.  Keeping this in mind, the
Board entered into a collaborative research project with the PSG College of Technology for the development of a
platform mounted mobile defibering machine. 
 
8.4.3    During the various market delegations to importing countries it was understood that the cost of the Geotextiles
exported by India is on the higher side than the competing countries such as Vietnams, Philippines, Sri Lanka etc.  The
existing technology available for the production of Coir Geotextiles  in India was mainly on traditional coir handlooms. 
As the production takes place in small and medium units, it is very difficult to bring down the cost of production as there
is a well defined wages structure prevailing in the coir industry in the product manufacturing sector.  Studies were
organised by Coir Board for reducing the cost of production of Coir Geotextiles  and also research was conducted for
developing a suitable.   technology  for production of woven geotextiles  without looms.   As a result the CCRI was
successful jn developing a technology for loomless weaving of coir geotextiles .  This technology was further improved
upon and a compact mild steel handloom viz. “Anugraha” was developed by the Institute. 
 
8.5       Product Development and Diversification
 
8.5.1    Product Development and diversified uses of coir are the major thrust area for R&D programmes.  For the higher
utilisation of raw material and production of value added items and for capturing export market and diversified uses of
coir.  The Coir Board has been undertaking various programmes under this head by expending the funds for organising
R&D and S&T activities.  Majority of the coir units functioning in the industry have been benefited by the outcomes of
these R&D projects and also to increase their quantum of export and improve the earnings by producing quality
products and implementing advanced technological developments which were the outcome of these projects. 
 
8.5.2    Research programmes were organised in collaboration with reputed research institutions such as National
Institute of Design, Ahmedabad , IIT, New Delhi. IPRTRI, Bangalore etc. for the development of novel and attractive
coir products especially for export purpose. Development of coir products using high count blended coir yarn was one of
the major achievement under this project. The outcome of these projects was well taken by the industry and most of the
exporters engaged in this sector have taken advantage for improving their performance in exports.
 
8.6       Ruberrised Coir
 
8.6.1    Due to the changing scenario and change achieved in the production sector of the coir industry especially in non-
traditional sector, it was highly essential to identify the areas for using coir for purposes other than the traditional use.
Rubberised coir was one of the items, which has been widely accepted as diversified uses of coir. Further the Coir Board
has imported and installed a needled felt plant at the CICT, Bangalore  for finding new user areas for brown coir fibre. 
The needled felt so developed has been used in different application areas in the field of Geotextiles  and as a Janatha
Mattress. This was also an achievement of the R&D work of the coir Board as the production of the Brown Fibre sector
has increased manifold, which led to the diversified uses of coir such as rubberised coir, needled felt etc.
 
 
8.7       Coir geotextile for soil bio engineering
 
8.7.1    The use of coir geotextile  for soil bio engineering purposes was one of the major breakthrough achieved during
the recent past under the R&D programmes undertaken by the Board. Coir geotextiles is being popularised in countries
in the Europe, USA, Japan, Korea etc.  However the exporters were not in a position to furnish any technical data on the
use of coir geotextiles for increasing their exports. Coir Board in collaboration with reputed organisations Border Roads
Organisations, Central Public Works Department, State Governments, National Highway Authorities, Road Research

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
Centres, Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute, Dehradun etc. in the application of coir
geotextiles for various bio engineering uses. There is a huge potential for export of coir geotextiles , which is still
untapped as the popularisation efforts were not backed with scientific data. The outcome of the collaborative research
projects has given valuable scientific data on the various physical, chemical and biological properties of coir geotextiles
and these data can be  used by the industry for promoting the export of coir geotextiles.  
 
8.7.2    A technology was developed under the R&D programmes undertaken by the Board to convert problematic pith
into organic manure by treating the pith using fungal spawn (Pithplus) for reducing the lignin contents to use it as an
organic manure. The technology was popularised  in the industry.  Further the coir pith hillocks can be converted into
manure “insitu” using the new technology.
 
8.7.3    R&D projects were organised for the development of fire retardant coir products especially rubberised coir
products for the use in automobile and railway industries.   Research programmes were organised for developing a
technology for obtaining fire retardant coir products.  The technology developed was successfully transferred to
rubberised coir industry for the production of fire retardant coir mattresses, cushioning materials, upholstery materials
etc. A technology for the production of coir composite boards was developed and transferred for commercial use.
 
8.7.4    A collaborative research project was organised with M/s. Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai for the
production of low cost packaging material and is in progress.  They have developed a concept technology for the
production of packaging material using coir products as the basic material.
 
8.7.5    The development of a green house using coir geotextiles and instant cocolawn using coir geotextile and coir pith
was developed under the R&D programmes of the Board.  The technology developed for production of cocolawn  was
patented and the technology was transferred to M/s. CADILA Pharmaceuticals India Ltd., Ahmedabad, Gujarat for
commercialisation.  The use of coir plant pots, coir poles, coir pith briquettes, coconut husk chips etc., in the agri-horti
sector are also included in the coir green house project. 
 
9.0       Extension Service
           
9.1       The outcome of Research and Development programmes undertaken by the Board are being extended to the
industry and public through the technical extension wing of the Board.  All major rubberised coir manufacturing units
are availing the facilities of the physical testing lab for testing their products as per BIS standards.  The exporters
engaged in the coir industry are utilising  the services of chemical testing laboratory for the testing of dyed materials for
different fastness ratings such as rubbing fastness, light fastness and wash fastness. 
 
9.2       The services of the dye houses are also being availed by major exporters engaged in this sector for dyeing and
bleaching of coir yarn. Small scale manufacturing sector is also availing the facilities of the modern dye house
functioning under the S&T programmes of the Board.
 
10.0     Developmental activities undertaken by the Coir Board for coir and coir products
 
10.1     The machinery manufacturers engaged in the designing and development of coir processing machinery's have
availed the services of Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bangalore for designing and developing of coir processing
machinery's in brown coir fibre sector. Major machinery manufactures have availed the services of Central Institute of
Coir Technology, Bangalore for developing brown coir fibre processing machineries.
 
11.0     Development of coir processing machinery
 
11.1     Coir Board under the Mahila Coir Yojana scheme has distributed about 20000 motorised  and motorised
traditional ratts to women entrepreneurs for the production of quality coir yarn under the women self employment
programme. Basically, the scheme is for the strengthening of the weaker gender engaged in the coir industry and also to
generate employment by providing equipments for production of coir yarn in the traditional coir industrial sector.  This
was an achievement for the coir industry especially through the R&D programmes undertaken by the Board. 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 11.2    The Central Coir Research Institute developed  semi automatic loom and fully automatic loom for the production
of quality matting.  The concept technology was introduced for the reduction of drudgery involved in the production of
coir mattings on traditional handlooms.  For the sustainable growth of the industry and to meet the challenge the
economic scale of production it was highly essential to introduce an intermediate contrivance for production of coir
mattings required for export and domestic market.   The scientists engaged in the development of the machinery under
the various R&D programmes of the Board were successful in developing a semi automatic loom for the production of
matting without much displacement of labour.  The equipment was well received by the Industry and a no. of units have
fabricated and installed the equipment for the production of matting in coir industry with the technical support of Coir
Board.
12.0     Product Development and Diversification
12.1     Product Development and diversified uses of coir are the major thrust area for R&D programmes.
 
12.1.1  Major areas of projects
 
(i)
                  Product Development.
(ii)                Development of new designs for coir products.
(iii)               Diversified uses of coir.
(iv)              Extraction of valuable compound from coir and coir pith.
(v)                Utilisation of coir pith.
(vi)              Development of fire retardant & stain retardant coir products.
(vii)             Production of wood substitutes, MDF Boards, Packaging materials, fire retardant corrugated sheets.
(viii)           Use of coir in green house applications.
 
12.2     Economic Research
           
12.2.1  Coir Board has undertaken studies on the production, domestic market and export of coir and coir products for
formulating strategies for the development of the coir industry.  Studies were organised engaging reputed organisations
such as M/s. A.F. Ferguson & Co., M/s. APITCO Ltd., Hyderabad, M/s. Tata  Consultancy Services, Chennai and
consultants engaged in various specialised  areas such as reduction in cost of production, logistics for reducing the cost
of transportation of coir and coir products in the domestic market, containerization and value addition that can be
achieved in coir industry, the wages structure and possibilities for enhancing the wages of the workers engaged in this
sector, the employment opportunities in the coir industry etc.
 
  12.2.2            The branding of Indian coir is the work in hand for creating an awareness among the buyers in the
international market regarding the Indian coir products.  Steps were taken for to create awareness among the producers
of coir geotextiles for  economizing the production techniques adopted in this sector.  The cheapest logistics modalities
were evaluated for the benefit of the parties engaged in the domestic market in order to make the coir product
competitive and to reduce the transportation cost with the maximum extent possible.  Studies were organised for
assessing the market potential for coir and coir products in the North-Eastern region in order to prepare a strategy for
developing a market for coir and coir products in the North-Eastern region. 
 
12.2.3  The export of coir pith and coir geotextiles have improved due to the implementation of the strategies developed
on the line of the studies organised by the Board.  The IGC/FAO organised studies for market development and
promotion of selected coconut products from India and Sri Lanka such as Geotextiles , Needled Felt and Coir pith.  The
strategy evolved is considered as a guide line for the preparation of a strategy for development of international market.  
The entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad  organised studies for promoting cluster development
programmes in coir industry especially in the export oriented production sector.  The strategy formulated under the
study is being implemented by various organisations engaged in this sector.  The main aim under cluster development
programme in coir cluster is the reduction in the cost of production of coir products intended for export for making the
products competitive in the international market.
 
12.3     Developmental Activities
           
12.3.1  Coir Board has been implementing various developmental programmes for the development of coir industry in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
the coir producing states of India.  The Regional Offices functioning under the Board are Regional Office,
Visakhapatanam, Andhra Pradesh, Regional Office, Bangalore, Karnataka, Regional Office, Pollachi, Tamil Nadu,
Regional Office, Bhubaneswar, Orissa    which act as  the nodal centres for the implementation of the developmental
programmes undertaken by the Board.  The production of coir was mainly concentrated in Kerala due to the
environmental conditions prevailing in the State.   The modernisation of the industry especially in the fibre extraction
sector by the introduction of mechanical contrivances for the production of coir fibre from dry/semi dried coconut husks
has improved the production manifold during the last two decades.   The production of Brown Fibre during 2003-2004
in India was estimated to the tune of 2,52,000 MTs.  The conversion of the fibre into value added products such as
rubberised coir, coir yarn, coir rope, coir geotextiles , coir mats, mattings  etc. have generated employment as well as
income for the rural folk engaged in this sector.     The development of production infrastructure in the coir sector is
another developmental activity undertaken by the Board.
 
13.0     Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  signed  between Coir Board and National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC)
 
13.1     A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was entered between Coir Board and National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC) on 15
th of April 1998 to popularise and commercialise the inventions/technologies/ processes
developed by Coir Board including patents for licensing and commercialisation by NRDC.  The MoU was renewed for a
further period of 5 years w.e.f. 15-04-2003.  M/s. NRDC will provide expert assistance to license the inventions and
technology developed by Coir Board.  The NRDC will also give wide publicity of the available technology developed
by Coir Board for effective licensing and commercialisation.  M/s. NRDC will provide 50% of the entire fees received
by the them for transfer of technology.   NRDC provide all possible assistance for filing of patent applications both in
country and abroad on inventions/process/technologies developed by Coir Board and Coir Board will assign these
patents to NRDC for commercial exploitation.  M/s. NRDC will bear all the expenses for obtaining  patents in India and
the expenses for obtaining patents/copy rights in foreign country will be met by Coir Board and NRDC in the ratio
50:50.  NRDC agrees to protect the patents assigned to Coir Board. 
 
13.2     During the period October 2002, M/s. NRDC has transferred the technology of developing instant cocolawn  and
conversion of Pith into Organic Manure using Pithplus to two parties viz., 1) M/s. CADILA Pharmaceuticals India Ltd.,
Ahmedabad 2) M/s. Esscom (India) Ltd., Kochi, Kerala.
 
"Key Areas of Action"
 
14.0     Restructuring of the Coir Industry
 
14.1     Excess production, low profitability, competition from identical products, low production technology, high
dependence on labour and trained industrial relations are some of the feature of the coir industry.  All these affect export
of coir and coir products from India warranting restructuring of the industry.
 
14.2     The Committee understands that the Low productivity of traditional technology, age old looms and
equipments, slow phase of modernisation, absence of a systematic collection of raw material, lack of adequate
credit availability, low level of capacity building, inadequate Infrastructural facilities, limited marketing skills,
lack of working capital are the bane of this industry.  The Committee, therefore, feels that  it is necessary to put
in  place  an integrated and complimentary set of measures to encourage and support coir industry so that they
become more productive  and competitive and development  and expenditure takes place in a sustainable and
sustainable  manner.
 
15.0     Creation of Utility Demand
 
15.1     There is lack of initiative  in the part of exporters for undertaking promotional efforts such as direct publicity,
brand promotion, efforts to enter  new markets etc. This is due to the poor nature of the industry.  The Committee feels
that the  Coir Board should undertake promotional campaigns in markets abroad projecting the eco-friendly
nature of coir products for which advance proposals will be given by the Coir Board and necessary approval
should be accorded by the Government even at the beginning of the financial year itself.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
16.0     Modernisation for increased  productivity to face price competition
 
16.1     The technology adopted for production in the industry is very old. Production is undertaken mainly on
handlooms.  To achieve increased productivity it is necessary to introduce large scale Modernisation in the case of
textile industry. 
 
16.2     The Committee is of the strong opinion that a Modernisation Fund may be created for extending one time
financial assistance to the exporters  for modernisation of production, importing necessary machinery and
equipments including packaging and labeling machineries and also for setting up of R&D facilities.   This would
enhance production and quality and would act as a means to meet competition.
 
 
17.0     Capturing new markets through delegation, Market missions, publicity etc.
 
17.1     Export performance is still depended upon the demand for the product in the USA and E U countries. Any policy
changes in these countries would seriously affect export. The only alternate is to develop new and new markets in the
developing countries.The exporters are of the view that Coir Board should take the initiate to develop new markets.
Once the products are introduced to a market by 3 - 4 participation in exhibitions by the Coir Board, the exporters would
venture to attend such exhibitions in new markets. Now the participation in exhibitions abroad is limited to one or two in
an year.  It is also insisted that there should be a number of exporters for participation along with the Coir Board. 
 
17.2     The Committee is of the opinion that apart from participation in exhibitions, it is also necessary to
undertake Delegations and Marketing Missions to USA and EU countries to give market education.  Release of
advertisements in leading magazines should also be resorted to regularly.
 
 
18.0     Product diversification, quality improvement  through technology development
 
18.1     To be competitive in the field, product diversification is essential.   The poor nature of the industry does not
allow  large -scale diversification. The existing schemes do not allow any assistance for diversification of production.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend a one-time assistance to the manufacturers and exporters to adopt new technology
for production either by indigenously manufacturing the machines or by importing by reimbursing a portion of the
expenditure subject to certain ceiling, Coir Board may be allowed to implement such a scheme.
 
18.2     The Committee is of the view that the Coir Board should come out with the course of action required to be
undertaken for the product diversification through technology development and forward the same to the
Ministry of ARI for executing the projects. 
 
18.3     The Committee is also of the view that the technological upgradation/automation/quality control  etc. have
to be achieved to ensure high volume production of quality products to be competitive in the export field. It is
therefore necessary to extend assistance to the trade for export production, quality, design development, product
diversification etc.
 
18.4     The Committee feels that the Government may grant the Coir Board the status of an approved agency for
quality inspection of export products which would enable the buyers to utilise the services of the Coir Board for
quality certification.
 
 
19.0     Market Survey
 
19.1     Market survey is essential to understand the market demand, market trend, market potential etc.  In the recent
past no such survey was undertaken by Coir Board.  Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a Market survey/Market study
in the developing markets like, FOCUS-AFRICA, LAC and countries in the Far East.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
19.2     The Committee is of the considered view that in a competitive market economy, market survey/study is
indispensable for exploring new avenues/horizon of market, therefore, the Coir Board should undertake
measures for exploring new market in Africa, Latin America and Third world countries.
 
 
20.0     Encouraging SSI Coir Exporters to obtain ISO certification
 
20.1     Coir Board may be allowed to implement a programme of incentive for adoption of ISO standards by the SSI
Coir Manufacturer exporters.
 
20.2     The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of ARI may examine the issue of empowering the Coir
Board to implement the programme of incentive for adoption of ISO standards by the SSI Coir Manufacturer
exporters.
 
21.0     Creation of a Guidance Cell
 
21.1     The Committee desires that there should be a creation of Guidance Cell responsible to collect, compile and
disseminate information on quality standards for entering into external markets, technology available for import,
close linkage between manufacturers, exporters and Consortiums, requirements of packaging and labeling,
import duties, sanitary and phytosanitary requirements, testing facilities, trade enquiries etc.  This cell may also
be responsible for guidance in the matters related to WTO.
 
22.0     Active participation in the Conferences of International bodies like IGG of FAO, International Erosion
Control Association
 
22.1     The Inter Governmental Group (I.G.G) on Hard fibre of the FAO assess current situation of hard fibres and
formulate plan of action for the future.  It is likely that the programmes on coir to be implemented with funding
assistance from FAO are entrusted to these countries for implementation.
 
22.2     The Committee is of the opinion that the International Erosion Control Association is a forum for worldwide
exchange of information related to issues of erosion  control and soil conservation.    The conference provides an ideal
opportunity to have maximum information on development and application of geo  textiles. The Coir Board is a
Corporate member of the IECA.
 
22.3     The Committee feels that  the Inter Governmental Group meeting of the FAO and the AGM of the
International Erosion Control Association being held regularly Coir Board may be allowed to participate on a
regular basis and get benefited out come of the conference. 
 
23.0     Participation in Exhibitions/ Fairs abroad
 
23.1     Important international fairs and exhibitions provide excellent opportunities for dissemination of information
about the end uses of coir products abroad and for display of new coir products available for export. The exporters
participating would be able to canvass business on the spot and establish new contacts.   It helps to assess market
preferences and requirements as well.
 
23.2     The Coir Board is aware of out come of the international fair viz India Home Furnishing  Fair, Tokyo, Japan;
National Hardware Show,Chicago, USA; SAITEX, Johannesburg, South Africa; Cairo International Exhibition,
Cairo,Egypt; Saudi Agri Fair, Saudi Arabia; Heimtextil  Fair/Domotex  Fair, Hannover, Germany;  Expocomer, Panama
City, Panama and Paulista Supermarket Convention, Brazil.
 
23.3     The Board may  concentrate on capturing new markets as well as expansion of existing markets.  It is also
necessary to ensure that the existing market are not lost to the competing products.  Coir Board may participate
in exhibitions depending upon the markets and targeting specified regions.  Coir Board may also organise

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
exhibitions like India International Coir Fair and Coir India. 
 
24.0     Measures Required for Promotion and Proliferation of the Coir Industry
 
24.1       Raw material
 
24.1.1  Estimated consumption of coconut husk for coir production on an average is 37% of the total production of husk
in the country.  The absence of an organised collection mechanism often makes it difficult to the coir industry in major
producing States to mobilize adequate husk for coir production.
 
24.1.2  The Committee understands the need for enhancing the harnessing of coconut husk for coir production
from existing level of thirty seven per cent.  With a view to mobilize husk available in plenty in coconut
producing States and to increase the percentage of utilization of  coconut husk, the collection mechanism will
have to be streamlined with the active participation of NGOs, Self Help Groups (SHGs) etc. through introduction
of an appropriate scheme.  It would pave way for level of utilization reaching 50% thereby facilitating
production unhindered and to increase  output of coir fibre in the country.
 
24.1.3  Quality of end products manufactured depends to a large extent on the quality of inputs/raw material as also its
price competitiveness on the availability of raw material at reasonable rates without an element of escalation of the price
on account of involvement of middle men.  .  It was in this context that the idea of Raw Material Bank in coir sector was
earlier conceived to help Small Scale manufacturers in the private as well as co-operative sector.  Although it could not
be implemented for one reason or the other, the idea gains added importance in the present context of pursuing efforts
for re-generation of the coir industry.   Suitable assistance for formation of raw material banks at cluster level may be
provided through the Coir Board. 
 
24.1.4  The Committee is in agreement with the Coir Board in regard to Constitution of Raw Material Bank in
the coir sector to assist the Small Scale manufacturers in the private as well as co-operative sector.  That is
essential because access to quality raw material at reasonable price assumes great significance in the development
of enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector. 
 
 
24.2       Technology Upgradation – R&D efforts
 
24.2.1  Slow phase of Technology adoption / upgradation in the coir industry is one of the major factors hindering the
development of the coir industry.  In some areas of production, the absence of appropriate and acceptable technology
contributing to the growth and development of the coir industry.  An element of passivity on the part of  workers and
producers to adopt new production and processing methods is another reason for inadequate influence of technology
build up in the coir sector. 
 
24.2.2  There is scope for improvement of technology in areas  like extraction and processing of coir; development of
coir machinery; product development and diversification; testing and  extension.   Presently, the Research &
Development  work in the coir sector is  mainly carried out in the  research centres of the Coir Board viz. Central Coir
Research Institute, Alleppey,( Kerala) and Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bangalore.   Besides, R & D efforts on
a limited scale at public sector undertakings of the Govt. of Kerala and some of the private companies in the coir sector.
Presently the Coir Board has collaboration with 28 Research Institutes for carrying out research on different aspects of
coir. 
 
24.2.3  It is envisaged for entering into collaborative with a few more Research Institutes having expertise in the areas of
enhancing longevity of coir, blending fibre with allied fibre/wool to produce kaaleeno, bio-softening, bio-blending, coir
polymer composites as per the specific requirement of RDSO etc.
 
24.2.4  The Committee is of the opinion that the concerted efforts have to be made towards technology
improvement in the coir sector through research and development.  Improvement of the infrastructural facilities
and strengthening manpower available in research institutes of the Coir Board is necessary to address the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
situation. Further, efforts towards areas specific collaborative research with due prioritization based on industry
needs, their better participation and that of nationally reputed R&D Organisations is called for. 
 
24.3     Development of Versatile Spinning Machine
 
24.3.1  Now coir yarn is spun throughout the coastal belt of Kerala on traditional hand-operated wheel (ratt ).  There are
a lot of limitations to this spinning system as  the contrivance used is region/quality specific requiring more man-power,
strain and characterized by low productivity.     The spinning machines available in the jute/sisal industry could be
suitably modified to process coir alone or in combination with other allied fibre.  Although a number of equipments for
spinning coir yarn have been developed and tried over the years with and without the use of power and through
improvisation of traditional ratt, the desired results could not be achieved to the best satisfaction of workers/producers. 
It may be required to source international expertise to develop such a versatile spinning system.  
 
24.3.2  The coir industry requires a versatile spinning machine compatible for production of different varieties of
coir yarn with higher productivity, less strain and  capable of undertaking commercial production.
 
24.4     Improvisation of the Existing Handloom
 
24.4.1  Different varieties of coir mats are produced on different types of looms.  One type of the loom cannot produce
the other types of mats, thereby reducing the scope of product diversification.  The CCRI is working on the development
of a versatile  handloom on which all the major four varieties coir mats can be woven.  The loom is also being provided
with pneumatic devices so as to reduce the strain of working on it. 
 
24.4.2  Popularisation of Eco-friendly dyeing and Effluent Treatment Plant
 
24.4.3  Coir yarn/fibre is dyed using chemical dye-stuffs.  The effluent arising out of this dye-stuff is also required to be
treated before letting off.  The Central Coir Research Institute of the Coir Board in collaboration with  IIT, New Delhi
has developed 16 novel shades out of natural dye stuffs. The details were disseminated to the trade.   In the next phase, a
pilot plant for production and distribution of natural dye-stuffs to the export oriented production centres of the industry
is to be set up.  This will enable the coir industry to source eco-friendly dye-stuffs locally. 
 
24.4.4  A cost effective technology for treatment of effluent arising out of retting of coir fibre and wet-processing needs
to be developed so as to meet the revised norms of the Pollution Control Board.  The  Coir Board pursues research
activities for the development of a technology using chemical treatment and also environment friendly root-zone
treatment technology. 
 
24.4.5  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of ARI should extend all possible help to the Coir Board in
envisaging strategy for popularization of eco-friendly dyeing and Effluent Treatment Plan either through in-
house experiment or transfer/acquisition of required technology.
 
24.5     Popularisation of Coirret and Pithplus
 
24.5.1  The Central Coir Research Institute (CCRI) had developed a bacterial formulation viz. Coirret which can carry
out retting of coconut husk within a period of three months and treatment of green husk Coir Fibre (mechanically
extracted) within 72 hours to make it similar to retted fibre in terms of quality and colour.  As the traditional method of
extraction of fibre after retting is becoming unpopular in view of that process polluting the lakes and lagoons where
retting is undertaken, there is the need for popularizing the application of Coirret  for processing green husk fibre as an
alternative solution.  Besides the concern for pollution, the un-hygienic nature of work involved in retting and retrieval
of retted husk from the pits also results in new generation of workers drifting away from the work.  Field
demonstrations on the use of Coirret for faster retting without affecting the quality and strength of coir fibre need  to be
organised in many more places.  Coirret  helps in reducing the pollution by degrading leachates from the fibre upto
70%.   This in turn reduces the cost of effluent treatment either. 
 
24.5.2  The Committee desires that the Coir Board should take adequate research activities and field

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
demonstration on the use of coirret for faster rating and thus improving the quality and strength of the coir fibre.
 
24.5.3  During the extraction of coir fibre about double  quantity of coir pith is generated which accumulates in the form
of hillocks in coir producing regions.  If  not managed properly for economic utilisation the accumulated coir pith will
become a pollutant  destroying the ground water during rainy season and occupying a lot of space.  The CCRI has been
popularising processing of composting coir pith by producing pithplus, and edible mushroom spawn.  An advanced
technology for composting coir pith hillocks using perforated pipes for sufficient aeration has also been developed.  The
technology is being popularized in the coir producing centres.  C-pom – the pith based organic manure – is good for
various crops and cultivation, horti and flori cultural operations.  As a soil conditioner coir pith has global acceptance
and has a fast expanding export market.
 
24.5.4  The Committee is in agreement with the Coir Board that  the intervention of coir producing State
Governments in popularizing pith based organic manure through their Agricultural Departments and
horticultural societies would result in setting up new pith processing units and generating a ready domestic
market for product.  Conversion of coir pith into an organic manure could be made a gainful economic activity to
generate additional rural employment, particularly, in coir producing regions.  Therefore, the Committee desires
that the Ministry of ARI should take up the issue with the Coir producing state government.
 
24.6     Popularisation of Coir Composites
 
24.6.1  Coir composites have proved to be ideal substitute for products made using timber.  Coir is an ideal raw material
for manufacturing wood substitute – coir composites.  The Coir Board has developed the technology.  As the fibre to be
used need not be long and medium fibre, which is otherwise in demand for production of other value added products in
coir industry.  The outlet for baby fibre will further enhance the pricing efficiencies of the fibre cost.  The Indian
standard specification have been brought out by the bureau of Indian Standards for coir medium density fibre boards. 
The material can be used as a building material.   Coir composites in moulded  form could be used for production of a
variety of articles like gift articles, trays, decorative moulding etc.  The product has been accepted by CPWD, Railways,
Defence and Road Transport Corporation etc.   Presently, there is only one unit in the private sector engaged in 
production of coir composites.  There is potential for setting up 20 such units over the next five years which can enhance
the present production capacity of 15000 mm Sq.mtr. to 4.5 lakh mm Sq.mtr. per day.  
 
24.6.2  The Committee is of the view that the Coir Board should encourage and invite the private sector units in
the production of coir composites to enhance the potential of production capacity from the present level of 15000
mm Sq.mtr. to 4.5 lakh mm Sq.mtr. per day.  Setting up of such units will have to be encouraged through
provision of capital investment subsidy, therefore, the Ministry of ARI should undertake appropriate step in this
regard.
 
24.6.3   Extension of Marketing Facilities in the country
 
 24.6.4 Small scale manufacturers of coir products in private and co-operative sector who cater to export as well as
domestic requirements of the trade, provide employment to thousands of workers in the coir industry.  They are in the
un-organised sector and lacks the marketing capabilities.  The Coir Board Showrooms, now numbering 31 in different
parts of the country are established to provide organised sales outlets to market their products who otherwise cannot
afford to have their own sales outlets in metropolitan cities on account of their financial/managerial constraints. 
 
24.6.5  The functioning of the Coir Board Showrooms and Sales Depots are to be strengthened through
appointment of Dealers/Commission Agents, opening of mini sales depots etc. to make coir products accessible to
the rural and urban consumer public throughout the country in a better way.  Further, the marketing assistance
be extended to the manufacturers of non-traditional products like pith based products, garden articles, coir
polymer composites also by bringing those products too under the product range of the Coir Board Showrooms
& Sales Depots.  This is required as an effort complimentary to promote coir products in the domestic market. 
 
24.6.6  The Coir Board has been popularizing coir products in the domestic market through advertisements in print and
electronic media and participation in national and international exhibitions in India.  The result of globalisation  and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
liberalization has been an increasing threat from a host of substitute products available locally and imported from other
countries. 
 
24.6.7  The Committee is of the opinion that in order to counter the increasing threat due to unleashing
liberalization and globalization process  and thereby to sustain and enlarge the domestic market the promotional
efforts have to be strengthened through intensification of the existing efforts and observation of special
promotional/Sales campaigns.
 
24.6.8  With the help of Coir Mark Inspection Scheme, goods sold though the Showrooms are assured quality standards
at standardized price with the enforcement of a Uniform Selling Price. 
 
24.6.9  The Committee is of the view that Requiring Government Departments and public sector undertakings of
various Ministries to go in for eco-friendly coir products for their furnishing requirements will encourage
consumption of coir products for which institutional segments.  Therefore, the Ministry of ARI may assist the
Coir Board in various department/Ministry by advocating the case of Coir Board through Governmental Inter-
Departmental Cooperation  
 
 
24.6.10            Under Market Development Assistance Scheme (MDA), Units in the co-operative and public sector are
provided 10% of their sales turnover as MDA for sales promotion.   This is shared equally between the Government of
India (GOI) and the concerned State Government.   The GOI share of the Market Development Assistance is now
disbursed through appropriation of funds earmarked for Domestic Market Development under  plan scheme of the Coir
Board.  Often the Coir Board finds it quite inadequate to settle the claims of the beneficiaries preferred by the concerned
State Governments fully.  There has been persistent demand from coir producing State Governments for providing
specific and increased outlay for disbursement of MDA sharing fifty percent of the claims fully. 
 
24.6.11            The Committee is of the view that Ministry of ARI should take up the issue of Government of India
share of the Market Development Assistance with the Ministry of Finance for allocation as per the requirement.
The GOI share of the Market Development Assistance is now disbursed through appropriation of funds
earmarked for Domestic Market Development under  plan scheme of the Coir Board.    Allocation of adequate
funds specifically for disbursement of MDA in the Annual Plan Allocation to the Coir Board to meet the entire
claim from State Governments would benefit units in the co-operative and public sector, who are committed to
promotion of minimum wages and other  obligatory benefits to the coir worker.
 
24.7     Promotion of Export
 
24.7.1  As a result of growing affinity towards environment friendly products the world over there is a favourable  edge
to coir products over other substitute materials particularly those from synthetics.  Export has been steadily increasing
and during 2003-04 it was of the order of Rs.407.50 crore.  During the current year it will exceed the target of Rs.450
crore as the export reached Rs.426 crore already during April-February, 2004-05.  The climate of coir which is 100%
natural in the global market is very favourable for the generation of new trading opportunities.  
 
24.7.2  The Committee is of the considered view that the major emphasis to be given to the promotional efforts by
way of publicity and participation in trade fairs and exhibitions and adoption of innovative promotional
programmes. The Small and new comers in the export front should be encouraged to participate in the
international trade fairs and exhibitions along with the Coir Board by providing Export Market Development
Assistance  and all professional support. Efforts should be made for building a brand image for Indian coir in the
domestic and international market, participation in product specific international trade fairs and exhibitions and
organising buyer seller meets in potential and new markets, promotion of non traditional products like coir pith,
coir geotextiles, garden articles, coir composites etc. in potential regions through various export promotion
measures and building up of a market oriented data base and market intelligence to provide continuous feed
back to the trade.
 
24.7.3  Coir being a traditional industry which still continues mostly in the cottage, dis-organised, informal sector,  its

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
export needs encouragement to achieve a better share of the global market for doormats and other floor coverings
simultaneously encouraging new enduse applications.  There are a number of products which the coir industry produces
capable of being promoted in the export market.  It is felt that export sector of the coir industry needs some support to
sustain and to expand the global market in the light of increasing competition as a result of globalisation.  The size of the
workforce this segment of the industry supports also underlines the need for its sustenance. The Coir Board has already
formulated a scheme at an estimated outlay of Rs.32.50 crore annually.    
 
24.7.4  The Committee recommends that in order to  promote export,  exporters of various products of coir may
be granted Export Market Assistance at product specific rates as in the case of jute industry. 
 
24.8     Formation of Manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common Facility Centres (CFC)
 
24.8.1  Four Manufactures/Exporters Consortia have been formed.  Nine Common Facility Centre for Dyeing and
Bleaching and three CFCs for green husks fibre treatment have been set up.  Most of the Small Scale Manufacturers in
the coir sector do not have ample facilities for wet processing like bleaching, dyeing etc. The investment required for
these facilities are beyond the financial capacity of these manufacturers.   Under various schemes, financial assistance is
provided to Coir Co-operative societies for setting up Common Facility Centres for the benefit of its members and other
small scale manufacturers.  As a result of the working of these centres , the small scale manufacturers are able to reduce
their cost of production to a remarkable extend and they are able to keep up their supply schedules.  The manufacturers
are also able to keep up the quality of their products with the facilities available in the CFCs.
 
24.8.2  There are about 100 Manufacturers’ Consortia functioning in the Alleppey District of Kerala.  Most of them are
in the spinning sector.  There are consortia in the mats and mattings  sectors also.  Consortium members are able to take
advantage their collective bargaining power both in the procurement of raw materials and sale of their products. 
Members of the consortium are able to procure orders for larger quantities of products from exporters and they are
preferred by banks and other financial institutions, for extending credit facilities, to individual manufacturers.  
Consortium members are also able to utilize each other’s manufacturing facilities because they function more or less
like a Co-operative society.
 
24.8.3  The Committee feels that the Formation of Manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common
Facility Centres (CFC) would prove instrumental in launching and promoting  cooperative  society in the Coir
Industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.9     Development of Production Infrastructure
 
24.9.1  The Coir Board extends financial assistance for setting up coir units/modernization of the existing units under
plan scheme.  This assistance is extended to the tune of 25% of the cost of machinery and other infrastructural facilities
subject to a maximum of upto Rs.1.50 Lakh for new units and Rs.50,000/- for modernization.   This is with the objective
of ensuring setting up of new and modernization of the existing units which would result in increased utilization of
coconut husk and consequent generation of rural employment.   As the quantum of assistance provided is quite
inadequate compared to the actual cost of the machinery, the takers of the assistance under the present plan scheme is far
from satisfactory. 
 
24.9.2  The Coir Board extends financial assistance for setting up coir units/modernization of the existing units under
plan scheme.  This assistance is extended to the tune of 25% of the cost of machinery and other infrastructural facilities
subject to a maximum of upto Rs.1.50 Lakh for new units and Rs.50,000/- for modernization.   However, the Committee
desires that the quantum of financial assistance needs enhancement to ensure availability of at least 25% of  actual  cost
of machineries and equipments to the beneficiary with  maximum ceiling of Rs.2.50 lakh for new units and Rs.1.00 lakh
for modernisation.. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
24.9.3  Coir yarn spinning and small scale coir products manufacturing sector are the most vulnerable linkage of coir
industry.  The Coir Board has already formulated a scheme for development of production infrastructure of household
spinning and small scale coir manufacturing units at an estimated cost of Rs.350 lakh annually for five years. 
 
24.9.4  The Committee feels that   the units in the coir sector are encouraged   for the development of base level
infrastructure for construction of loom shed, retrofitting of the existing traditional ratts by motor attachment,
replacement of the defective parts of mat/matting loom etc. 
 
24.10   Development of Cluster
 
24.10.1   The coir industry has developed through household level activities and through village and small and medium
scale industries.  It is a highly decentralized sector where substantial amount of upgradation is required. 
 
(i)
                  The clusters can effectively withstand the ups and downs in the market and bargain with their suppliers in a
better way.
(ii)                Enable setting up of Common Facility Centre and Common Effluent Treatment Plant for manufacturing
operations even for development of new products and application of new processing technologies as a result
of the R&D efforts.
(iii)               Cluster approach provides all players to jointly address common challenges and avail of common
opportunities.
(iv)              Consortia based promotional activities enables collective organization of Buyer Seller Meets, group
participation in foreign exhibitions, group purchase of specialised support services etc. 
(v)                Cluster formation can be with the funding support under Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme
(IIUS), Swarnajayanthi Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY ) of Ministry of Rural Development or other
schemes of the Government like the one contemplated for regeneration of the coir industry under  Common
Minimum Programme.
 
24.10.2   The Committee feels that upgradation in the coir industry at desired level could be achieved only if
small scale manufacturers and tiny units come together and form clusters as already experimented and
succeeded in the coir sector as well as other industrial sectors.
 
24.11   Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme  (IIUS)
 
24.11.1   The nature of the coir industry is such that it is not in a position to invest for general infrastructure upgradation
which is quite essential for the overall development of the industry.  Under IIUS, Government of India has approved
Alappuzha Coir Cluster Development project at a total outlay of Rs.56.8 crore – 75% (i.e. 42.6 crore) by way of grant
under IIUS and the balance by way of equity and stake holders’ contribution.  The project will be implemented by the
Special Purpose Vehicle “Alappuzha  Coir Cluster Development Society” with the active participation of all the
stakeholders.  The various sectors of the coir industry coming under the purview of development under Alleppey  cluster
includes improvement of husk collection, expansion of defibering  processing units, productivity enhancement in yarn
making, upgradation of existing handlooms and development of mechanized looms, creation of infrastructure for
common facility centre, export production of value added products like mats, mattings  etc. establishment of pith
processing, compost and compacting units, coir composites products units, technologically superior geotextile
production.
 
24.11.2   The Committee feels that the cluster based coir sector development programmes for self employment
generation through village level tiny sector units have to be replicated in other coir producing States like Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Lakshadweep  etc.  with funding support under IIUS  and SGSY. 
Therefore, the Ministry of ARI should take up the issue with the concerned State Governments which would
identify specific cluster locations. 
 
 
24.12     Assistance under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
2412.1  The coir sector was so far not eligible for the assistance under Credit linked Capital Subsidy Scheme.  The
guidelines for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS) of the small scale industries have now been modified
with a view to extending the scope of the scheme to cover the coir industry.  The coir industrial units would thus be
eligible to get 12% capital subsidy for technology upgradation.  State Governments would be involved to ensure that
coir entrepreneurs come forward to utilize Credit Linked Capital Subsidy. 
 
24.12.2   The Committee is pleased to note that the guidelines for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
(CLCSS) of the small scale industries have now been modified with a view to extending the scope of the scheme to
cover the coir industry.  The Coir Board may popularize the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy. 
 
 
24.13   Up-gradation of skill
 
24.13.1   At present,  the Coir Board runs two Training Institutes viz. National Coir Training and Design Centre in
Alappuzha District (Kerala) and Coir Research-cum-Extension Centre, Thenkasi.  The 4 Regional Coir Training and
Design Centres established and functioning in Thanjavur  (Tamil Nadu), Arsikere(Karnataka), Rajamundry(Andhra
Pradesh) and Bhubaneswar  (Orissa) for imparting training in coir activities were closed in March, 2001.  With the co-
operation of NGOs/societies/voluntaryorganizations, field training programmes are undertaken for the benefit of women
workers through the Coir Board’s Regional Offices at Pollachi (Tamil Nadu), Bangalore (Karnataka), Visakhapatnam
(Andhra Pradesh) and Bhubaneswar (Orissa).  Under Mahila Coir Yojana a Plan Programme of the Coir Board, training
in spinning coir yarn on motorized/motorized traditional ratts is provided to rural women with monthly stipend during
training period.  They are also provided ratts at 75% subsidized rate subject to a maximum of Rs.7,500/- for motorized
ratt and Rs.3,010/- for motorized traditional ratt.  The training programme of the Coir Board needs to be extended to
more areas covering all coconut producing States like West Bengal, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Assam, Lakshadweep,
Tripura, Andaman & Nicobar etc. with the intervention of the concerned State Governments.  Provision of beneficiary
contribution to enable the trainees to own the equipment similar to the assistance provided by the Coir Workers Welfare
Fund Board  in Kerala will help more trained hands to adopt self employment in coir making
 
24.13.2   In the post fibre/yarn sector the production of value added product is still carried on in a commercial scale in
Kerala only.  Although States like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka have made rapid strides in the pre-yarn sector, and
production of rope, curled coir and rubberised coir and pith processing, the industries in these States is lagging behind in
the matter of production of value added production like doormats, mattings, rugs etc. 
 
24.13.3   Besides organising training for skill up-gradation in those areas with the involvement of co-
operatives/NGOs/ voluntary organizations/self help groups etc. the possibility of providing training through State
level Training Institutes also needs to be explored. The Committee is of the opinion that the Development of
skilled manpower in the coir industry through appropriate training programmes is one of the plan activities of
the Coir Board and is an essential pre-requisite for proliferation of the coir industry in non-traditional areas,
where there exist potential on account of raw material/manpower availability.  
 
25.0     Support for Modernisation of the Coir Industry
 
25.1     Inadequate influence of modern technology in the organised sectors of production of the coir industry is
identified as a problem in attaining sustainable growth.  The export oriented industry needs to be supported to adopt
modern processing technology, production of value added coir products, diversified uses of coir etc.  Adoption of the
modern technology will enable the Indian coir industry to supply products satisfying the ever changing taste and
preferences of the export market.   The Coir Board has already formulated a detailed scheme for providing investment
subsidy at a total financial outlay of Rs.24.08 crore for the remaining period of the 10
th  Five Year Plan.
 
25.2     The Committee understands that the export oriented industry like the coir industry needs to be supported
to adopt modern processing technology, production of value added coir products, diversified uses of coir etc.
because   adoption of the modern technology will enable the Indian coir industry to supply products satisfying the
ever changing taste and preferences of the export market.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
26.0     Credit – flow  requirements
 
26.1     A major portion of the coir products being sold in the domestic and external market are manufactured in
thousands of small scale units scattered in the coastal belt of the country.    It has been observed that Bank feels hesitant
in lending to small and tiny units, particularly the units in the fibre and yarn sector, although this entities have alrage
potential for employment creation. 
 
26.2     Majority of the exporters engaged in the coir sector are medium and small scale entrepreneurs.   Coir, being a
commodity marketed over 70 countries in the globe has to compete with other substitutes such as jute, sisal, hemp and
synthetic floor coverings.  The exporters engaged in the sector are also facing financial crunch. 
 
26.3     Adoption of modern technology is the need of the hour.  The financial institutions have to come forward to assist
the existing small scale products manufacturing units engaged in the production of export oriented coir products to
upgrade their production infrastructure by providing long term loans and working capital.  The coir sector faces drastic
shortage of credit flow and the perspective entrepreneurs are not able to establish coir units for want of finance.  
Separate funds may be allocated for the coir sector by the financial institutions as credit facility for the coir industry to
be extended to tiny/small and medium enterprises/ SHGs. 
 
26.4     The potential for demand for investment anticipated in the coir sector and credit flow for 5 years works out to
Rs. 2000 crore.   State-wise break up is given below:
 
 
 
State Rs. Crore
Kerala 525
Tamil Nadu 518
Karnataka 410
Andhra Pradesh 293
Orissa, Maharashtra & Lakshadweep 100
Others (Andaman Nicobar Islands, West Bengal,
Pondicherry, Goa & North Eastern States
154
                               Total 2000
 
26.5     The Committee recommends that the Coir Board in tandem with the Ministry of ARI should coordinate
with the Ministry of Finance and the financing institution asking/requesting to provide a handholding support to
the coir enterprises concerned for nourishing them at the nascent stage.   The Committee hopes that the financial
institutions would extend the financial assistance as per requirement to the coir producing states for its
promotion and proliferation.  
 
27.0     Development of the Coir Industry in Non-traditional Areas
         
27.1     The Coir Board is focusing its efforts to develop the coir industry in the non traditional areas like Tamil Nadu,
Pondicherry, Karnataka, Andhra Pradsesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar islands, Pondicherry
and Lakshadweep. The extraction of coir fibre and conversion into value added product require some degree of skill and
experience.  Realizing the fact, the Coir Board had set up Regional Coir Training Centres at Rajahmundry  (Andhra
Pradesh), Bhubaneswar (Orissa), Thanjavoor (Tamil Nadu) and Arisikere (Karnataka).   Consequent to the closing of
these centres on the directions of  the Government. of  India , number of field training centres are being operated in the
non-traditional areas as a part of skill developmental/ employment generation activities to the rural folks and Self Help
Groups. On intervention of the Coir Board, the coir industry is much developed in manufacturing of coir fibre, coir yarn,
curled rope, rope, rubberized coir products, coir ply composite boards, coir pith block, coir garden articles etc. in the non
traditional areas. The Coir Board’s Regional Offices are undertaking the developmental activities in the non-traditional
areas are as follows:                                                                      

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
1)   Regional Office, Pollachi     -           Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry, A&N                                                                      
                                    Islands,  Lakshadweep &  Kerala.         
2)    Regional Office, Bangalore            -  Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat
3)    Regional Offices, Visakhapatnam –  A.P. and other states not covered by                                                             
                         the other Regional Offices.
4)    Regional Office, Bhubaneswar    -     Orissa, West Bengal and North East  States
                                                                                                 
28.0     Potential of coir industries in non-traditional states like Uttar Pradesh, Orrisa, Bihar and Jharkhand
                       
28.1     The steps taken by the Coir Board to explore the potential of industry in the non traditional States like Uttar
Pradesh, Orissa, Bihar and Jharkhand are given below:
 
28.2     Orissa is a major coconut producing State in India and the Coir Board is  promoting the coir based units in this
State by implementing scheme for extension of financial assistance. Further  the Coir Board is also organising EDPs to
promote new entrepreneurs for setting up of coir based units. In the State of  Jharkhand also coconut cultivation is being
practiced and the production is progressively increased. The Coir Board has also commenced programme in spinning
coir yarn on motorised ratts in the State of Jharkhand initially by bringing fibre from the State of Andhra Pradesh. The
idea is that in future coir units for extraction of coir fibre will be set  up in the States with which the spinning units can
be operated.   The possibilities of blending locally available yarns with coir fibre for production of various products is
also being explored in many non-traditional coir producing states.
 
29.0     Steps taken for promotion
 
29.1     The Coir Board is providing financial assistance to the tune 25% to the  maximum  Rs.1.5 lakh for new industry
and Rs.50,000/- for modernization of   existing units to the coir industry in the non traditional areas.
 
29.2     It conducts Entrepreneur Development Programmes/Quality Improvement          seller meets which are prime
tools for developing the coir industry.
 
29.3     The Coir Board provides concentrated support to the coir pith block  manufacturing through financial assistance,
Market  Development  Assistance which results in export revenue of Rs. 25 crore by exporting   coir pith blocks , garden
articles, rubberized coir, curled rope etc. during last year.
 
29.4      Through Mahila Coir Yojana scheme, the Coir Board is providing training to the rural women in manufacturing
yarn and provides 75% assistance to the maximum of Rs.7500/- towards procurement of motorized ratts.
 
29.5       In order to make the industry into quality conscious, the Coir Board established its testing laboratory at
Regional Office, Pollachi, Regional Office, Bhubaneswar and Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bangalore.
 
29.6    The Coir Board conducts number of demonstrations to the coir industry and to Agricultural farmers in
composting of coir pith into  manure . It is also demonstrating the application of coirret  in fibre treatment to the coir
industry in the non-traditional areas.
 
29.7      Market Development Assistance to the tune of 10% is extended to the cooperative sector in the non-traditional
states   on 1:1 sharing basis.
 
29.8     The Coir Board has formulated and presented the Millennium Development Mission Document at a total project
outlay of Rs.3000  crore out of which Rs.2,000 crore will be as credit flow and Rs.1000 crore from equity and plan
investments. The scheme  aims at to set up of new value added products manufacturing units in the non-traditional areas.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
             
29.9     The Coir Board established its Research Institutes ie. Central Institute of Coir Technology at Bangalore which is
providing technological support for the non traditional areas particularly in the rubberized coir, coir needled felt, coir
yarn  spinning, coir fibre extraction coir pith, coir geotextiles , coir composites manufacturing etc. which act as an
incubator for transforming technologies. It also extends testing and extension service facilities to the industry in non-
traditional areas. Central Institute of Coir Technology is demonstrating the various coir geotextile applications to the
State Govt. agencies in non traditional states.
30.0     Institutionalization  and co-operativization  of coir industries
 
30.1     Coir industry is a traditional industry  originally  developed in the State of Kerala .  The raw-material for the
industry is coconut husk, a by-product of coconut industry.  The present utilisation of coconut is 37% and action is being
pursued to increase the utilisation of coconut husk by 50% at the end of 10 th Plan. The Board has evolved a scheme for
enhancement of utilization of coconut husks and the same is under consideration of the Ministry and the Planning
Commission.  This scheme has to be implemented on a top priority. The industry provides employment to more than
5,00,000 people and most of them are in economically backward rural areas.  Out of this, 80%  are women. There is a
felt need for State intervention for sustained development of this traditional industry through the process of
regeneration/modernisation and other appropriate measures.  The State intervention was made possible through Coir
Board which has over the years attained the professional and technical capabilities.
 
31.0     Employment Generation  in Coir Industries
 
31.1     The details of the employment generated during the last 3 years are mentioned hereunder.
Year Addl. Employment generated Employment generated in
terms of mandays
 
2002-2003 13,000 15,60,000
2003-2004 20,000 24,00,000
2004-2005 20,000 (estimated) 27,00,000
 
31.2     The coir industry being an agro based rural industry 85% of the total employment generated is in the rural areas
of the major coir producing states of India. The present utilisation  of coconut husks for the coir industry in India is
estimated around 35 per cent to the total quantity produced.  There is no well defined collection mechanism for
collecting the husk for coir industry.  It is proposed to increase the utilisation at least by 50 per cent in order to generate
more employment and also to provide more mandays employment for the existing workers in the sector.  The maximum
employment is generated in the fibre extraction, spinning and rope making sector in the industry.  The workers engaged
in the sector are mostly on part time basis as the technology involved is in the unorganised sector.  Due to the
competition faced by the industry due to the entrance of synthetic ropes and cordages for agricultural use the market
potential for coir in the agricultural sector has declined.   Therefore, the improvement of the market potential for ropes
and cordages where the employment is the highest needs to be developed for providing fuller employment for the
existing workers in the sector.  The export oriented manufacturing sector depends on the export orders from the large
scale exporters.  Due to the high competition faced by coir in the international market due to the entrance of other
natural fibres such as jute, sisal, hemp etc. and other synthetic materials, the exporters engaged in the sector are facing
great difficulties in canvassing order due to the low competitive nature of coir, competitive price for coir products. 
Therefore, fuller employment is not being provided for the workers engaged in the export oriented production sector.
 
31.3     Regarding the query as to whether there is any possibility of making the employment as regular in coir
industries, the committee was apprised that the developmental activities undertaken by Coir Board have attributed the
industry in adopting modern technology in production activities.  The higher utilisation of coconut husk for coir industry
will pave way for providing fuller employment for the existing workers in the coir sector.  The modernisation
programmes and adoption of modern technology by the coir industry will lead to setting up of coir units in the organised

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
sector and the workers engaged in the sector will come under the organised category therefore, the developmental
activities and programmes undertaken by the Board and the industry will lead to provide fuller employment to the
existing workers in the sector. 
 
31.4     The Committee observes that the Coir Board should focus its efforts for introduction and development of
coir industry to the non-traditional areas.  It should proactively interact with the State Governments  for the
promotion of coir industry and organize more and more EDPs to promote new entrepreneurs for setting up of
coir based units.  There is a need to chalk out an action plan.  The Committee, therefore, directs the Coir Board
to take initialize in this regard.
 
32.0     Formation of a Hard Fibre Board
 
32.1     There are different types of natural fibres like banana fibre, pineapple fibre, sisal, bimal, etc. available in various
parts of the country.  No concerted effort has been made for the industrial use of  the above natural fibres available in
abundance.  It is desirable to pursue formation of a Hard 
Fibre Board This will increase the employment opportunity in
rural areas in all States including North-Eastern region. 
 
33.0     Millennium Development Mission Document
 
33.1     The Coir Board has prepared a draft Millennium Development Mission Document for the development of coir
industry in India.  Till date, there was no assured credit flow to the coir sector and this  had led to the tardy growth of
coir industry.  The Millennium Development Mission envisages a total financial outlay of Rs.3000 Crores out which
Rs.2000 Crores have to come from various banks/financial institutions like SIDBI, NABARD etc.  The remaining
Rs.1000 Crores have to come by way of plan investment  from the Govt. of India and equity participation.  The MDM
document envisages an increase in utilization of coconut husks from the present level of 34% to 50% over a period of 5
years and the exports to reach Rs.1000 Crores recording 25% growth.  It is also envisaged that it will be possible to
generate additional employment to  more than 5 Lakhs workers by implementing the programmes besides increasing
export turn over to Rs.1000 Crores.  The draft document has been disseminated to the major coconut producing states
for their comments and preparation of state-wise proposals. 
 
33.2     The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Coir Board in drafting the Millennium Development Mission Document
and hopes that vision and mission enshrined in the document would be translated in to practice for accelerated
promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries in India.  It is, therefore, required that the proper strategy should
chalked out realize the mission of the document through adopting/undertaking the required course of action to
accomplish cherished objectives set and the Millennium Document.  Need is to go by Management by Objectives
(MBO) as advocated in the Document and not merely by Management by Activities. (MBA).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Role of  Coir Board in the overall development of coir industry
 
            The Committee appreciates the role of  Coir Board in the overall development of coir industry in India
characterized by increased production, increased consumption, export and  employment in rural sector.
 Development of Coir Industries in India has led to  Women empowerment and welfare of workers. The role of
the Coir Board in the field of  R&D in coir sector has  strengthened, new products like coir ply, packaging
material and geotextiles .  Coir Board as a national organization has been  committed  to the sustainable
development.  The Committee hopes that the Coir Board would continue to make its lasting contribution in the
promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries not only in the Coir producing states but the non-traditional
zones also.
(Para: 1.8)
 
SWOT –analysis of Coir Industries
 
 
            The Committee recommends that the Coir Board would make a serious assessment of SWOT analysis of
Coir Industries.  Strength of the Coir industries must be capitalised and the opportunities ahead must be availed
of.  Similarly, strategy should be chalked out to combat the threats and overcome the weaknesses of the Coir
Industries.  The Committee has commended   contribution of the coir board in its 141
st  Report to chalk out
action plan for promotion and proliferation of coir industries in West Bengal and Andman and Nicobar Islands. 
Similar action plan may be chalked out for other states  on the local logistics.  
 
                         (Para 2.2)
Cost reduction of coir products
 
            The Committee takes note of the basic characteristics and  problems of coir industries and the action
taken or be envisaged to be taken by the Coir Board and the Ministry of ARI.  The Committee is of the view that
with massive efforts and implementation of financial assistance scheme to encourage setting up of new units
would result into higher utilisation of husk from the present level of thirty seven per cent.    The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of ARI and the Coir Board to undertake cost management programme in the coir
manufacturing units with the assistance of Research Institute like Entrepreneurship Development Institute of
India, Ahmedabad and the others. Due impetus may also  be given to cluster development activities and
consortium approach to reduce the cost of production.
                         (Para 4.2)
 
 
Empowerment of women
 
The Committee understands the Coir Industries is labour intensive industry and major components of the
labour force are the women.  Therefore ,  promotion and furtherance of coir Industries would lead to
empowerment of women besides enhancing the economic prosperity of the States.   Action plan may be chalked
out for enhancing the economy of scale so that cost of production may come down and avenues of employment
generation may further be explored.  
                         (Para 4.5)
Coir industry  as export oriented industry
 
            The Committee understands that the coir exporters face competition in markets abroad from other
natural products like Chinese Grass Mats, Rubber, Sisal and coir products being exported by Srilanka, Taiwan,
Philippines etc. Synthetic products manufactured using improved technology and supported by publicity also
pose great threat to the coir exports. The Coir Geotextiles  are facing competition from Srilanka and synthetic
geotextile materials which dominate the market.  Therefore, the Committee feels that the Government should

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
provide assistance by reimbursing a portion of the expenditure incurred on brand based publicity abroad
projecting the eco-friendly nature of the coir geotextiles to meet this competition.  
                         (Para 5.8)
Marketing Strategy
 
            The Committee is of the view that steps being contemplated by the Coir Board to promote the marketing
and sales of coir products in the domestic market which interalia include intensification of promotional measures
like publicity through print and electronic media;    increased participation in trade fairs and exhibitions;
organisation of Buyer –Seller Meets in potential regions;  organisation of special sales campaign and festival
discount offer to promote sales; organising collective participation of manufacturers in selected trade fairs and
exhibitions;  popularisation of new products like coir geotextiles, garden articles, coir pith based products
through awareness creation programmes etc. would go a long way in the promotion and furtherance of the Coir
Industries in India and would inject competitive resilience to face the global competition wherein China is
becoming a great threat to the India's monopoly in the Coir Industries
                        (Para 7.2)
 
Liberalized and globalized market structure
 
The Committee is of the opinion that in the liberalized and globalized  market structure since the
consumer is the king, all marketing and sales strategy should be based on the plank of the actual need and taste
of the consumer therefore, the marketing research should be conducted accordingly and efforts should be made
for introducing modification in products.   This would lead to widening of product range and suitably meeting
the demand of the consumer as per specification.   Popularization of value products through buyer-seller meet
and seminar would definitely lead to product promotion, cooperative Coir marketing strategy, and public private
partnership would lead to encouragement to coir industries. 
                         (Para 7.3)
 
Restructuring of the Coir Industry
 
            The Committee understands that the Low productivity of traditional technology, age old looms and
equipments, slow phase of modernisation, absence of a systematic collection of raw material, lack of adequate
credit availability, low level of capacity building, inadequate Infrastructural facilities, limited marketing skills,
lack of working capital are the bane of this industry.  The Committee, therefore, feels that  it is necessary to put
in  place  an integrated and complimentary set of measures to encourage and support coir industry so that they
become more productive  and competitive and development  and expenditure takes place in a sustainable and
sustainable  manner.
                         (Para 14.2)
 
Creation of Utility Demand
 
            There is lack of initiative   in the part of exporters for undertaking promotional efforts such as direct
publicity, brand promotion, efforts to enter  new markets etc. This is due to the poor nature of the industry.  The
Committee feels that the  Coir Board should undertake promotional campaigns in markets abroad projecting the
eco-friendly nature of coir products for which advance proposals will be given by the Coir Board and necessary
approval should be accorded by the Government even at the beginning of the financial year itself.
                         (Para 15.1)
 
 
            The Committee is of the strong opinion that a Modernisation Fund may be created for extending one time
financial assistance to the exporters  for modernisation of production, importing necessary machinery and
equipments including packaging and labeling machineries and also for setting up of R&D facilities.   This would
enhance production and quality and would act as a means to meet competition.
                         (Para 16.2)
Capturing new markets through delegation, Market missions, publicity etc.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
             The Committee is of the opinion that apart from participation in exhibitions, it is also necessary to
undertake Delegations and Marketing Missions to USA and EU countries to give market education.  Release of
advertisements in leading magazines should also be resorted to regularly.
                          (Para 17.2)
 
 
Product diversification, quality improvement  through technology development
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Coir Board should come out with the course of action required to be
undertaken for the product diversification through technology development and forward the same to the
Ministry of ARI for executing the projects. 
                         (Para 18.2)
 
            The Committee is also of the view that the technological upgradation/automation/quality control  etc. have
to be achieved to ensure high volume production of quality products to be competitive in the export field. It is
therefore necessary to extend assistance to the trade for export production, quality, design development, product
diversification etc.
                         (Para 18.3)
 
            The Committee feels that the Government may grant the Coir Board the status of an approved agency for
quality inspection of export products which would enable the buyers to utilise the services of the Coir Board for
quality certification.
                         (Para 18.4)
 
Market Survey
 
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that in a competitive market economy, market survey/study is
indispensable for exploring new avenues/horizon of market, therefore, the Coir Board should undertake
measures for exploring new market in Africa, Latin America and Third world countries.
 
                         (Para 19.2)
 
 
Encouraging SSI Coir Exporters to obtain ISO certification
 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of ARI may examine the issue of empowering the Coir
Board to implement the programme of incentive for adoption of ISO standards by the SSI Coir Manufacturer
exporters.
                         (Para 20.2)
 
Creation of a Guidance Cell
 
            The Committee desires that there should be a creation of Guidance Cell responsible to collect, compile and
disseminate information on quality standards for entering into external markets, technology available for import,
close linkage between manufacturers, exporters and Consortiums, requirements of packaging and labeling,
import duties, sanitary and phytosanitary requirements, testing facilities, trade enquiries etc.  This cell may also
be responsible for guidance in the matters related to WTO.
 
                         (Para 21.1)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
Meeting of the FAO and the AGM of the International Erosion Control Association     
 
The Committee feels that  the Inter Governmental Group meeting of the FAO and the AGM of the
International Erosion Control Association being held regularly Coir Board may be allowed to participate on a
regular basis and get benefited out come of the conference. 
                         (Para 22.3)
 
Participation in Exhibitions/ Fairs abroad
 
            The Board may  concentrate on capturing new markets as well as expansion of existing markets.  It is also
necessary to ensure that the existing market are not lost to the competing products.  Coir Board may participate
in exhibitions depending upon the markets and targeting specified regions.  Coir Board may also organise
exhibitions like India International Coir Fair and Coir India. 
                         (Para 23.3)
 
Measures Required for Promotion and Proliferation of the Coir Industry
 
 
            The Committee understands the need for enhancing the harnessing of coconut husk for coir production
from existing level of thirty seven per cent.  With a view to mobilize husk available in plenty in coconut
producing States and to increase the percentage of utilization of  coconut husk, the collection mechanism will
have to be streamlined with the active participation of NGOs, Self Help Groups (SHGs) etc. through introduction
of an appropriate scheme.  It would pave way for level of utilization reaching 50% thereby facilitating
production unhindered and to increase  output of coir fibre in the country.
 
                         (Para 24.1.2)
 
            The Committee is in agreement with the Coir Board in regard to Constitution of Raw Material Bank in
the coir sector to assist the Small Scale manufacturers in the private as well as co-operative sector.  That is
essential because access to quality raw material at reasonable price assumes great significance in the development
of enterprises in the unorganized/informal sector. 
 
                         (Para 24.1.4)
 
 
 
Technology Upgradation – R&D efforts
 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that the concerted efforts have to be made towards technology
improvement in the coir sector through research and development.  Improvement of the infrastructural facilities
and strengthening manpower available in research institutes of the Coir Board is necessary to address the
situation. Further, efforts towards areas specific collaborative research with due prioritization based on industry
needs, their better participation and that of nationally reputed R&D Organisations is called for. 
                         (Para 24.2.4)
 
Development of Versatile Spinning Machine
 
 
             The coir industry requires a versatile spinning machine compatible for production of different varieties of
coir yarn with higher productivity, less strain and  capable of undertaking commercial production.
                         (Para 24.3.2)
 
Popularisation of Eco-friendly dyeing and Effluent Treatment Plant

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
 
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry of ARI should extend all possible help to the Coir Board in
envisaging strategy for popularization of eco-friendly dyeing and Effluent Treatment Plan either through in-
house experiment or transfer/acquisition of required technology.
                         (Para 24.4.5)
 
Popularisation of Coirret and Pithplus
 
            The Committee desires that the Coir Board should take adequate research activities and field
demonstration on the use of coirret for faster rating and thus improving the quality and strength of the coir fibre.
                         (Para 24.5.2)
 
            The Committee is in agreement with the Coir Board that  the intervention of coir producing State
Governments in popularizing pith based organic manure through their Agricultural Departments and
horticultural societies would result in setting up new pith processing units and generating a ready domestic
market for product.  Conversion of coir pith into an organic manure could be made a gainful economic activity to
generate additional rural employment, particularly, in coir producing regions.  Therefore, the Committee desires
that the Ministry of ARI should take up the issue with the Coir producing state government.
                         (Para 24.5.4)
 
Popularisation of Coir Composites
 
 
             The Committee is of the view that the Coir Board should encourage and invite the private sector units in
the production of coir composites to enhance the potential of production capacity from the present level of 15000
mm Sq.mtr. to 4.5 lakh mm Sq.mtr. per day.  Setting up of such units will have to be encouraged through
provision of capital investment subsidy, therefore, the Ministry of ARI should undertake appropriate step in this
regard.
                         (Para 24.6.2)
 
 Extension of Marketing Facilities in the country
 
            The functioning of the Coir Board Showrooms and Sales Depots are to be strengthened through
appointment of Dealers/Commission Agents, opening of mini sales depots etc. to make coir products accessible to
the rural and urban consumer public throughout the country in a better way.  Further, the marketing assistance
be extended to the manufacturers of non-traditional products like pith based products, garden articles, coir
polymer composites also by bringing those products too under the product range of the Coir Board Showrooms
& Sales Depots.  This is required as an effort complimentary to promote coir products in the domestic market. 
                         (Para 24.6.5)
 
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that in order to counter the increasing threat due to unleashing
liberalization and globalization process  and thereby to sustain and enlarge the domestic market the promotional
efforts have to be strengthened through intensification of the existing efforts and observation of special
promotional/Sales campaigns.
                         (Para 24.6.7)
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that Requiring Government Departments and public sector undertakings of
various Ministries to go in for eco-friendly coir products for their furnishing requirements will encourage
consumption of coir products for which institutional segments.  Therefore, the Ministry of ARI may assist the
Coir Board in various department/Ministry by advocating the case of Coir Board through Governmental Inter-
Departmental Cooperation  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
 
                         (Para 24.6.9)
 
 
            The Committee is of the view that Ministry of ARI should take up the issue of Government of India share
of the Market Development Assistance with the Ministry of Finance for allocation as per the requirement. The
GOI share of the Market Development Assistance is now disbursed through appropriation of funds earmarked
for Domestic Market Development under  plan scheme of the Coir Board.    Allocation of adequate funds
specifically for disbursement of MDA in the Annual Plan Allocation to the Coir Board to meet the entire claim
from State Governments would benefit units in the co-operative and public sector, who are committed to
promotion of minimum wages and other  obligatory benefits to the coir worker.
                         (Para 24.6.11)
 
Promotion of Export  
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that the major emphasis to be given to the promotional efforts by
way of publicity and participation in trade fairs and exhibitions and adoption of innovative promotional
programmes. The Small and new comers in the export front should be encouraged to participate in the
international trade fairs and exhibitions along with the Coir Board by providing Export Market Development
Assistance  and all professional support. Efforts should be made for building a brand image for Indian coir in the
domestic and international market, participation in product specific international trade fairs and exhibitions and
organising buyer seller meets in potential and new markets, promotion of non traditional products like coir pith,
coir geotextiles, garden articles, coir composites etc. in potential regions through various export promotion
measures and building up of a market oriented data base and market intelligence to provide continuous feed
back to the trade.
                         (Para 24.7.2)
Export Market Assistance
 
            The Committee recommends that in order to  promote export,  exporters of various products of coir may
be granted Export Market Assistance at product specific rates as in the case of jute industry. 
 
                         (Para 24.7.4)
Formation of Manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common Facility Centres (CFC)
 
            The Committee feels that the Formation of Manufacturers Consortia and the setting up of Common
Facility Centres (CFC) would prove instrumental in launching and promoting  cooperative  society in the Coir
Industry. 
                         (Para 24.8.3)
Development of Production Infrastructure
 
            The Committee feels that   the units in the coir sector are encouraged   for the development of base level
infrastructure for construction of loom shed, retrofitting of the existing traditional ratts by motor attachment,
replacement of the defective parts of mat/matting loom etc. 
                         (Para 24.9.4)
 
Development of Cluster
 
The Committee feels that upgradation in the coir industry at desired level could be achieved only if small
scale manufacturers and tiny units come together and form clusters as already experimented and succeeded in
the coir sector as well as other industrial sectors.
                         (Para 24.10.2   )
 
Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme  (IIUS)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
The Committee feels that the cluster based coir sector development programmes for self employment
generation through village level tiny sector units have to be replicated in other coir producing States like Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Lakshadweep  etc.  with funding support under IIUS  and SGSY. 
Therefore, the Ministry of ARI should take up the issue with the concerned State Governments which would
identify specific cluster locations. 
 
                         (Para 24.11.2)
 Assistance under Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the guidelines for Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS )
of the small scale industries have now been modified with a view to extending the scope of the scheme to cover the
coir industry.  The Coir Board may popularize the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy. 
                         (Para 24.12.2   )
 
Up-gradation of skill
 
Besides organising training for skill up-gradation in those areas with the involvement of co-
operatives/NGOs/ voluntary organizations/self help groups etc. the possibility of providing training through State
level Training Institutes also needs to be explored. The Committee is of the opinion that the Development of
skilled manpower in the coir industry through appropriate training programmes is one of the plan activities of
the Coir Board and is an essential pre-requisite for proliferation of the coir industry in non-traditional areas,
where there exist potential on account of raw material/manpower availability.  
                         (Para 24.13.3   )
Support for Modernisation of the Coir Industry
 
            The Committee understands that the export oriented industry like the coir industry needs to be supported
to adopt modern processing technology, production of value added coir products, diversified uses of coir etc.
because   adoption of the modern technology will enable the Indian coir industry to supply products satisfying the
ever changing taste and preferences of the export market.
                         (Para 25.2)
Credit – flow  requirements
 
            The Committee recommends that the Coir Board in tandem with the Ministry of ARI should coordinate
with the Ministry of Finance and the financing institution asking/requesting to provide a handholding support to
the coir enterprises concerned for nourishing them at the nascent stage.   The Committee hopes that the financial
institutions would extend the financial assistance as per requirement to the coir producing states for its
promotion and proliferation.  
                         (Para 26.5)
 
 
Employment Generation  in Coir Industries
 
            The Committee observes that the Coir Board should focus its efforts for introduction and development of
coir industry to the non-traditional areas.  It should proactively interact with the State Governments  for the
promotion of coir industry and organize more and more EDPs to promote new entrepreneurs for setting up of
coir based units.  There is a need to chalk out an action plan.  The Committee, therefore, directs the Coir Board
to take initialize in this regard.
                         (Para 31.4)
 
Millennium Development Mission Document
 
            The Committee  appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Coir Board in drafting the Millennium Development Mission Document
and hopes that vision and mission enshrined in the document would be translated in to practice for accelerated
promotion and proliferation of Coir Industries in India.  It is, therefore, required that the proper strategy should

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/172treport.htm[04-07-2016 12:57:39]
chalked out realize the mission of the document through adopting/undertaking the required course of action to
accomplish cherished objectives set and the Millennium Document.  Need is to go by Management by Objectives
(MBO) as advocated in the Document and not merely by Management by Activities. (MBA).
 
                         (Para 33.2)
 
 
 
 