            
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  275 TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)  
 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22 nd  November, 2016) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 nd  November, 2016) 
278  
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247 TH   REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON 275 TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
 PERTAINING TO  
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
      
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22 nd  November, 2016) 
( LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22 nd  November, 2016) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………(i)  
 
2. INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………(ii) 
  
3. REPORT …………………………………………………………………….  1 
 
(i) CHAPTER-I 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by 
the Ministry…………………………………………………………     2-4 
 
(ii) CHAPTER-II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………………………   5-18 
 
(iii) CHAPTER-III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry 
to review its replies…………………………………………………    19-58 
 
(iv) CHAPTER-IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Ministry have not been received…………………………………       59-97 
 
 
 4. *MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………… 
                  
  
 __________________________________________________ ______________ 
 * To be appended at printing stage 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri Sharad Yadav   _       Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania  
3. Shri Ram Narain Dudi 
4. Shri Vivek Gupta  
5. Shri Shwait Malik   
6. Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7. Shri Vivek K. Tankha  
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari    
9.   Shri T. G. Venkatesh  
10. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary 
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda    
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
17. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
18. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
19. Shri Tapas Paul 
20. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao 
21. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
22. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
23. Shri Raj Kumar Saini 
24. Shri B. Senguttuvan  
25. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
26. Shri Y. V. Subbareddy 
27. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
28. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
29. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
30. Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
31. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 Smt. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
 Shri J.K. Mallick, Joint Director 
 Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Deputy Director 
 Smt. Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer 
 Shri D.S. Bisht, Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
Seventy Eighth Report on Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained  in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Seventy Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2016-17).  
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred 
Seventy Fifth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 24 
th  October, 2016 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
  
Sharad Yadav 
                                               
Chairman                                                                                   
                Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing  Committee   on    Industry  
 
New Delhi 
24 
th  October, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the 
Committee’s Two Hundred Seventy Fifth Report on Dem ands for Grants (2016-17)  
pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises in respect of the recommendation s contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter –I   The recommendations/observations, which have bee n accepted by the 
Ministry. 
 
 The Committee is pleased to observe that the Minis try has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter -II   The recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and 
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore  do not want to pursue them for the 
present. 
 
Chapter -III    The recommendations/observations in respect of w hich the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-i mplementation of 
recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desi res that the Ministry should furnish 
logical explanations therefor. 
 
Chapter -IV    The recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received. 
 
 In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its langua ge in vague terms like noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desir es that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations c ategorized in Chapter-IV in detail and 
to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages. 
 
 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
It  is  evident  that  every  year  since  2013-14  the  Planned  allocation  has 
remained significantly under utilized by every wing  of the Ministry. And 
considering the expenditure norms prescribed by the  Ministry of Finance that not 
more than 33% of BE can be spent in last quarter of  FY and not more than 15%  
of  BE  can  be  spent  in  the  month  of  March  of FY,  it is  unlikely  that 
Ministry can stick to these norms this year (2015-1 6) as well and, therefore, 
unlikely to utilize the available resources prudent ly.  In the financial year 2015-16 
too,  as  per  the E-lekha  of  Controller  General   of  Accounts,  only  67%  of 
Planned allocation was spent by the end of January 2016, however, as per the 
above information provided  by the Financial  Advis or of the Ministry, about 
96% of Planned BE was likely to be spent by the end  of FY 2015-16 and around 
29% of the Planned BE was spent in last two months.     
   
  (Para 14) 
Action Taken :  
 
  It is true that expenditure of Plan allocation was relatively less during 
the year 2015-16 but it has considerably improved in 2016-17. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee considers these Schemes a reflection of inadequate planning 
and poor implementation. Norms of Schemes are delay ed and schemes are  
modified  the  mid-way  and  till  the  modified  n orms  are  finalized  and 
approved by the competent authority, the allocation  remains frozen. 
(Para 22) 
 
Action Taken :  
 
The observations of the Committee are noted. All th e schemes are 
implemented as per the schemes guidelines, which ar e reviewed from time to time. 
 
 
 

-3- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
In view of 345 lakh unregistered units in the count ry as per Fourth Census 
conducted in 2006-07, registration of mere 4 lakh u nits is rather slow and tardy 
progress. The very fact that of 4 lakh registration s majority are micro and small 
entrepreneurs, shows great demand among these entre preneurs to register to 
avail of possible benefits of Government schemes.   It is also evident that in 
certain smaller, hill and remote States, the regist ration has not picked up. Even in 
larger States the progress in registration is slow compared to the scope and 
extent of this Sector. The Committee recommends tha t it will require a sustained 
campaign to register all the MSMEs under UAM and th at the registration must be 
linked with benefits.  
(Para 40) 
Action Taken:  
 
For utilization of the Udyog Aadhaar Programme, the  notifications issued in this 
regard has been uploaded in the website of this Min istry. A national web portal 
namely, http://udyogaadhaar.gov.in has also been la unched for enabling e-filing of 
Udyog Aadhar Memorandum.  States have been requeste d to issue instructions to 
the concerned Directors of industries and General M anagers of DIC for expeditious 
implementation of UAM.  In the regional meetings, S tates were requested to 
undertake steps to encourage UAM registration. The benefit of Udyog Aadhar 
Memorandum registration is ease in registering the unit and getting benefits from 
the scheme/programme run by the Government.  As of now, the registration has 
crossed 11 lakhs and, on an average, more than 4000  MSE units are getting 
registered every day. The process was, so far, slow  because of systemic  issues 
which technology has resolved.     
  
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee apprehends that even the ASPIRE may m eet the same 
fate  as  other  entrepreneurship  development  pro grammes  being  run  by  the 
Ministry. The Committee notes that ASPIRE too is fo llowing the set stereotypes 
of considering MSMEs as low cost low technology ent erprises, that may not 
independently survive the market competition   in l onger run. The Committee 
was surprised to note that as per the Fourth Census  of MSME 2006-07, out of 
the 15 lakh registered MSME units, about 5 lakh bec ame sick. And the trades 
that are offered under ASPIRE may not improve the s ituation. ASPIRE needs to 
break this stereotype and consider MSMEs as technol ogy intensive sector that 
can survive the market competition. 
(Para 159) 
 

-4- 
 
Action Taken :  
 
 The suggestion is noted and would be followed up. However, it is the 
intention of the ministry to break the stereotype u nder the ASPIRE scheme. The 
scheme provides the much needed space for technolog y innovation and rapid 
prototyping option, which could bring the technolog ies to the market through 
commercialization under the TBI component.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-5- 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Also, Infrastructure Development and capacity build ing includes Tool  
Rooms that are essentially training institutions an d must not be clubbed with Office 
construction. Tool Rooms and Technology Centers can  be clubbed with Skill 
Development Programmes. And the Cluster Development  may be clubbed with 
SFURTI. 
(Para 8) 
Action Taken :   
 
 It is true that Tool Rooms have separate functions and their monitoring needs 
to be more regular. That is what is happening also.   Technology Centres are being 
monitored separately and construction of office bui lding is monitored separately.  
As far as cluster development is concerned, the ind ustrial cluster development is 
different form SFURTI cluster development because u nder SFURTI, the Ministry 
promotes only artisan cluster. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  notes  that  while  all  the  wings   have  under-utilised  the 
available  resources,  the utilization  by SME Divi sion and the DC-MSME  has 
been particularly alarming. 
(Para 15) 
Action Taken:  
 
 The issue of underutilization of the available reso urces has been brought to 
the notice of the Ministry.  The Ministry has taken  it in the right earnest and it has 
improved its performance during the year 2016-17. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The   Committee   notes   a   marginal   increase   in   overall   Non-Planned 
allocation in RE 2015-16 and would like to know the  reasons as to why Non- 
Planned allocation for DC-MSME was reduced and that  of ARI and SME was 
increased. 
(Para 17) 

-6- 
Action Taken:  
 
 The Non Plan RE allocation is done by Ministry of Finance keeping in view 
of expenditure done by each Division on pro-rata. The Expenditure figures of 
DC(MSME) for Non Plan up to Sep 2015 (six months) w as Rs. 65.67cr, so 
accordingly the RE was fixed at RE Rs. 116.61 cr.  BE was Rs. 124.33 cr. And 
expenditure was Rs. 115.92 cr.  
 
BE for Non Plan for Ministry was Rs. 394.91cr where as expenditure was Rs. 
398.50 cr. Which is within RE of Rs. 400.86 cr.   
 
The Non-Plan RE for 2015-16 in respect of ARI & SME  was enhanced on 
account of (i) number of Pensioners increased, (ii)  Two D.A. installments of 10% 
each announced and (iii) implementation of MACP. No t all these factors can always 
be guessed/ estimated correctly.  DC(MSME), because  of its large workforce could 
estimate the figures in a better manner.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes massive gap between Planned Rev enue and Capital 
sections. While Total of Revenue section Planned an d Non-Planned is Rs 3140 
crores and that of Capital Section is mere Rs 10.55  crores.  However, these figures 
change dramatically in terms of Planned and Non-Pla nned allocations. Whereas 
total Planned allocation is Rs 3000 crores, the tot al Non Plan is Rs. 464.77 
crores.  The  Ministry  may  explain  how  does  it   reconcile  these  four 
different sets of figures that convey diametrically  opposite scenario. 
(Para 28) 
Action Taken:  
 
Planned Revenue, Capital, Plan and Non Plan allocat ion, all the four are 
different allocation. Plan allocation comprises of Plan Revenue and Capital 
expenditure for meeting the expenditure under vario us object heads of schemes of 
the Ministry of MSME. Non Plan allocation is meant for meeting the establishment 
expenditure of the organization under Ministry of M SME. There is no relation 
between Planned Revenue and Capital Section and als o Plan and Non Plan 
allocation.  This Department does have mostly GIA a nd Subsidies rather than 
Loans.  All the GIA & subsidies are taken in revenu e side so Expenditure on capital 
side is less.  Most of the plan expenditure is done  in Revenue Section because of 
GIA & Subsidies. Plan expenditure has no one-to-one  relation/mapping with either 
capital or revenue. And, a Ministry dealing with MS ME sector cannot have much 
requirement of capital expenditure. The Total Provi sions under GIA & Subsidies 
was Rs.1484.13 crore & Rs.1479.01crore respectively in this year. 

-7- 
 
However, under the Micro Units Development & Refina nce Agency Ltd. 
(Mudra) Yojana, the maximum loan amount is Rs. 10 l akhs which is less than the 
Bank loan component of unit under PMEGP Scheme so i t might not be possible for 
financing bank loan component of a PMEGP project un der MUDRA Yojana. 
However, MUDRA authorities have been provided with the web-link of KVIC, 
wherein the data pertaining to Trainees of various skill development programme and 
beneficiaries under PMEGP have been uploaded. The r equired data can be accessed 
and downloaded by the SIDBI for providing financial  assistance to projects of upto 
Rs.10 lakhs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The  Committee  wonders  that  a  scheme  for  MSME   start  ups  is  not 
assigned to the Ministry of MSME and is being imple mented through SIDBI.  As 
the Committee had sought to know the details and st ructure of SMILE Scheme for 
start ups being implemented by the SIDBI, same was not provided. The Committee 
seeks details of structure and performance of SMILE  Scheme. The Committee 
notes that the Ministry has been asking for more al location for PMEGP. The 
Committee may be informed if the schemes like PMEGP  and incubators under 
ASPIRE could be linked to SMILE.  
(Para 52) 
Action Taken:   
 
SIDBI has formulated SMILE Scheme with an objective  to provide soft loan, 
in the nature of quasi-equity and term loan on rela tively soft terms to MSMEs to 
meet the required debt-equity ratio norm for new un its as also for pursuing 
opportunities for growth by existing MSMEs. The sch eme is to take forward GoI’s 
‘Make in India’ campaign and to help MSMEs take part in the campaign.  
• All new as well as existing MSME units covered unde r 25 sectors covered under 
‘Make In India’ Programme of Government of India an d few other sectors are 
eligible under SMILE. 
Special features of SMILE: 
• It is a project finance scheme; wherein, MSMEs are assisted by way of soft loan, 
which is a quasi-equity assistance to meet the requ ired debt-equity ratio and term 
loan on relatively soft terms.  
• Maximum eligible quantum under soft loan is 10% of the project cost subject to a 
maximum of Rs. 20 lakh. A higher soft loan of up to  15% of the project cost will 
be considered for the enterprises promoted by Sched uled Caste (SC) / Scheduled 
Tribe (ST) / Persons with Disabilities (PwD) and wo men, subject to a maximum 
of  Rs. 30 lakh.     

-8- 
 
• Minimum term loan size is Rs. 25 lakh.                     
• While the interest rates are fixed based on rating of the proposal, the scheme 
provides concession in interest rate during the fir st 3 years from the date of first 
disbursement. Presently, the applicable interest ra te for initial period of three 
years is 9.35% p.a. for soft loans and interest rat es for term loan under SMILE 
ranges from 9.45% to 9.95% p.a., depending on the i nternal rating of the 
borrower.  
• The soft loan is converted into term loan after 3 y ear period and would carry rate 
as per the internal credit rating of term loan assigned at the time of sanction.   
• Longer moratorium period of upto 2 years will be provided for soft loan. 
• The scheme had benefitted 419 MSMEs with cumulative  sanctions of Rs. 1323 
crore till May 31, 2016. 
1. SIDBI operates Startup Assistance Scheme out its ow n resources, wherein startup 
ventures with revenue traction of at least 6 months  and subject to compliance of 
the norms under the Scheme are extended financial assistance by way of loans. 
As on March 31, 2016, SIDBI has assisted 57 Startup s with aggregate sanctioned 
amount of  Rs. 57.48 Crore under Startup Assistance  Scheme. The Scheme does not 
cover PMEGP whereas ASPIRE is meant for rural startups by way of equity through 
AIFs. 
 
The objective of SMILE Scheme  of SIDBI is to provide soft loan, in the 
nature of quasi-equity, and term loan on relatively  soft terms to MSMEs to meet the 
required debt-equity ratio for establishment of an MSME as also for pursuing 
opportunities for growth for existing MSMEs.  The minimum term loan will be Rs.50 
lakh for new enterprise and Rs.25 for existing ente rprises going for additional 
investment.  The minimum contribution of the promot er is 15% of the project cost 
for projects upto Rs.1 crore and 20% for the rest.  Term loan will be 75% for 
enterprises with total project cost upto to Rs.1 crore and 2/3 of the project cost for the 
rest, Soft loan will be 10% of the project cost sub ject to a minimum of Rs.20 lakh 
and upto 15% for enterprises promoted by SC/ST/PwD and women subject to a 
maximum of Rs.30 lakhs.  
Whereas the objectives of PMEGP  is aimed at generating self-employment 
opportunities through establishment of micro-enterp rises in the non-farm sector by 
helping traditional artisans and unemployed youth. General category beneficiaries 
can avail of margin money subsidy of 25% of the pro ject cost in rural areas and 15% 
in urban areas. For beneficiaries belonging to spec ial categories such as scheduled 
caste/scheduled tribe /women the margin money subsidy is 35% in  rural  areas  and  

-9- 
 
25% in urban areas. The maximum cost of projects is  Rs.25 lakh in the 
manufacturing sector and Rs.10 lakh in the service sector.  The assistance under 
PMEGP scheme is available only to new projects. 
The objectives of ASPIRE  scheme is to accelerate entrepreneurship and to 
promote start-ups for innovation and entrepreneursh ip in agro-industry through 
setting up of Incubators by providing one-time gran t of cost of Plant & Machinery.  
Whereas SMILE is for promoting individual enterprises. 
 
Similarly, on comparing PMEGP with SMILE, following observations may be 
drawn: 
 
1. The project cost under SMILE is from Rs. 50-100 lak hs whereas under 
PMEGP the project cost is limited to Rs.25 lakh only. 
2. Under SMILE, assistance of Rs.25 lakh is available for existing enterprises for 
upgradation whereas PMEGP scheme is available for new enterprises. 
In view of the above, PMEGP, ASPIRE and SMILE schem es are catering to 
different segments and hence cannot be linked or inter-linked. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee e x p r e s s e s   concern  over  financial  management  in  the 
Ministry. The Scheme had BE of Rs 80 crores that wa s reduced to Rs 75 crores 
though the amount released by the end of February, 2016 was Rs 65 crores, that 
included Rs 31 crore arrear of 2014-15.   So effect ively, only Rs 34 crore was 
spent on training in 2015-16, whereas above figures  show a release of Rs 42 
crores. 
(Para 95) 
Action Taken:   
 
During the year 2015-16, amount of Rs.72.87 Crores was released out of the 
RE of Rs.75.00 Crore as on 31.03.2016. This include s an amount of Rs.31.15 Crore 
for training completed during 2014-15.  The balance  amount of Rs.41.72 Crores was 
released for scheme activities undertaken during 2015-16. 
 
 
 

-10- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
The  Committee  is  surprised  to  note  that  the  difference  in  allocation 
between Planned and Non-Planned allocations conside ring that these trainings are 
expected to   generate revenue, yet these instituti ons are being supported with 
enormous Budgetary grants every year. The utilizati on of Non Planned allocation is 
healthy as compared to the almost anemic Planned al location and its utilization. 
Though the Ministry is hopeful that the utilization  will increase towards end of the 
year when the final bills are sent for settlement b y MSME- DIs, and other 
Planned Schemes. The Committee finds that annual No n Plan Budgetary support 
indicates the inability of these skill development institutes to generate sufficient 
resources to support their establishment  costs. And considering the low 
employability of trainees, it is only obvious that the courses offered in these 
institutions are neither aligned with the demand fo r skill sets in the job market  nor 
are they recognized by any accreditation agency lik e NSQF and, therefore, not in 
demand  among  the  targeted  groups which  is  evi dent from underachievement  of   
trainee  targets.  Yet  the  Ministry  keeps  incre asing  the targets and inter alia its 
demands for budget allocations. 
 
(Para 114) 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
 
Non Plan Budget is allocated for establishment expe nditure of MSME-DIs 
and has no link with the schemes. MSME-DI Offices / Field Officers are engaged in 
implementing a number of schemes/programmes of the Ministry and providing 
guidance and rendering informatory/ techno-manageri al services to existing and 
prospective entrepreneurs. There is no mandate for generating establishment costs 
by levying charges for providing guidance and rende ring informatory/ techno-
managerial services to existing and prospective ent repreneurs. Very nominal token 
charges are charged only for a few selected activit ies like Physical verification visit 
for Single Point Registration of MSEs for Govt. Pur chase Programmes or Rs.100/-, 
Rs.200/-  or Rs.400/- are charged for participation  in EDPs/ESDPs/MDPs from 
Non -SC and Non -ST participants etc. For NSQF issue kindly refer to  reply question  
no. 42 
 
 
 
 

-11- 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that the Tool Rooms/ Technical Centres and other 
training institutions are expected to generate inte rnal resources and yet their IEBRs 
are not reflected in the Demands for Grants. The Co mmittee does not find any 
rationale in not reflecting the internal earning of  these Tool Rooms/ Technical 
Centres just because they are Registered Societies.   In this regard, the Committee 
recognizes the submission made by the Financial Adv isor of the Ministry during her 
presentation as she said that she will take the observations of the Committee to the 
Ministry of Finance, so that they can take final view. 
(Para 129) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
As regards reflecting the IEBRs of Tool Rooms in th e Demands for Grants, 
it may be stated that in the Demand of Grants, ther e is a column to show the 
investments to be made by the Public Sector Underta kings during the year, 
including separately the investment to be made out of IEBRs and out of budgetary 
support. 
Tool Room & Technology Development Centers are Auto nomous Bodies 
substantially funded by Government Grants. The surp lus funds, if generated by 
them are not distributed among the promoters of the  society, but are utilized for the 
purpose for which the society has been formed. The surplus finds are added in the 
Capital Fund of the society given in the annual aud ited accounts laid on the tables 
of both Houses of Parliament.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee may also be informed of selection and  screening criteria 
of 
SIDBI to support incubates. 
(Para 148)   
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
SIDBI does not operate any separate scheme to support incubates and eligible 
incubatees can seek assistance under Startup Assist ance Scheme (SAS) of SIDBI. 
The brief criteria and process of SAS is also enclosed at Annexure. 
 

-12- 
 
Annexure.  
Brief Criteria and Process for Startup Assistance Scheme (SAS)  
 
SNo Particulars Parameters 
1. Eligibility  /circle4 Early stage units where revenue has commenced after  
product acceptance by  
o At least one corporate customer with repeat orders, 
or 
o In case of retail consumers, a trend of revenue for  6 
months.  
/circle4 Early stage Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
(MSME)  as defined in the MSMED Act,2006 
(Constitution of the units to be Private Limited 
Companies): 
o Generally not in existence for more than 5 years; or 
o not received adequate and regular bank credit facil ities 
(except under Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro & 
Small Enterprise or Over Draft against Fixed 
Deposits); or 
o Could have incurred losses in past years. However, a 
clear plan for profitability (EBIDTA, cash and net 
level) should be in place over next 2 years  
2. Process (i) Start-up entrepreneurs submit profile/preliminary 
application both directly and through various indus try 
bodies like NASSCOM/iSPIRT/other Venture Funds 
which have provided them equity. 
(ii)  Initial discussions are held with promoters based on 
two page format received.  
(iii) After the SIDBI is satisfies itself internally on t he 
eligibility of the application for assistance under  SAS, 
detailed application is issued to the company. In o ther 
cases, a mail conveying the reasons for not conside ring 
such cases is sent to the company. 
(iv)  On receipt of the detailed application, the Startu p 
processing Cell, HO processes the same and puts 
 up to 
Investment Committee-SAS for sanction.  
(v)  After sanctioning of the proposal, the sanction de tails 
are forwarded to the nearest BO for documentation, 
disbursement and follow up. 
  

 
-13- 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee is concerned over the fact that even after three years of 
Budget announcement, there is hardly any progress o n ground in this ambitious 
scheme. Going by the statement made by the then Sec retary and the information 
provided by the Ministry, the Committee draws infer ence that the   Budget 
announcement of Rs 200 crores for District-wise Net work of Incubators and 
Accelerators was made without any in-depth planning  or survey. Despite 
Committee’s conviction and recommendations that the  Budget announcements are 
solemn assurance to the Parliament and should be im plemented within that 
Financial  Year,  only  broad  guidelines  could  b e  framed  by  March  2015, 
obviously the stakeholders, mostly the State agenci es with resources, took half 
the FY 2015-16 to put 19 proposals. 
(Para 162) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 The observations have been noted by ARI Division i n M/o MSME. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee notes that two sets of figures emerge  from the discussion 
above. By January 2016, the Banks sanctioned PMEGP loans involving Margin 
Money worth 102% of BE but actual disbursal of Marg in Money by the KVIC was 
only 65% of BE. Similarly in February, 2016, the Ba nks sanctioned PMEGP loans 
involving Margin Money worth 116% of BE but actual disbursal was only 71% of 
BE. Ministry has stated having disbursed Rs 725 cro res by February, 2016,  that  
was  short  of  BE  allocation  by  some  Rs  300  crores.  Also,  the Committee 
observed that by the end of February 2016, the KVIC  was left with Rs 525 crores 
(inclusive of Supplementary Demand). In addition to  existing gap between 
sanctioned loan and the disbursed Margin money,   f urther loans involving another 
Rs 200 crores of Margin money would have been sanctioned by the Banks in 
March, 2016. The Committee observes significant gap  between the sanctioned 
loans and actual disbursal of Margin money by the K VIC. The Committee may 
be explained the reasons for such huge gap between the two figures and how does 
the Ministry cover this gap in absence of additiona l funds from  Supplementary 
Demands.  It is also clear that while Banks  have  been meeting their target, the 
bottlenecks in disbursal of margin money occurs at the KVIC’s end in promptly 
disbursing the margin money. The Committee noted there was time gap between 
sanctioning and actually disbursing the margin money. The Committee recommends 
that this  is  a  procedural  issue  which  impinges upon the clearer figures of quarter- 

-14- 
 
wise utilization of funds. 
The Committee recommends that Ministry, KVIC and the 
Banks should address this issue immediately. To address this issue the Commit tee 
had recommended that DLTFC may be replaced with Committee of Banker head ed 
by lead Bank which may streamline the disbursal process. The Committee  may be 
informed of the action taken in this regard. 
(Para 188) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
  The funds from nodal banks are transferred to fin ancing banks on receipt of 
margin money claims from the financing bank branche s. The delay takes place since 
the claim papers are forwarded by post to and fro a nd the nodal banks also take time 
in processing the claims of the financing bank. In many cases, the claims are returned 
to financing bank for shortcomings like lack of enc losure of caste certificate, 
sanction letter or other discrepancies. It has been  observed that the delay ranges from 
one month to 3 months in settlement of claims and r elease of margin money from 
nodal bank to financing bank. To address this issue , the Ministry of MSME has 
decided to set in place a mechanism for direct tran sfer of funds to the financing bank 
branches and doing away with the system of nodal banks.  
 With a view to streamline the process of applicati on flow and fund flow and to 
bring in transparency and better financial manageme nt and prevent parking of funds 
at Nodal bank level, it has been decided to introdu ce online process flow of 
application and disbursement of Margin Money direct ly to financing bank branches 
through Corporation Bank by adopting Direct Benefit  Transfer (DBT). KVIC has 
developed an elaborate PMEGP  MIS on-line Portal. 
 The Ministry has taken with account the suggestion s/guidance of the Hon’ble 
Committee and these have been incorporated into the  new guidelines. In order to 
ensure that project are not rejected by banks after  clearance by DLTFC, a proposal 
for developing a Uniform Credit Scoring System has been proposed which will be 
worked out by IBA for PMEGP scheme. 
  Further, the LDM of the bank as well as in-charge s of RSETI are already 
made member of DLTFC to bring proper evaluation of the project. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee in its previous Reports too has repea tedly remarked over low  
utilization  of  PMEGP  funds  and  crowding  of  e xpenditure  towards  last months 
of FY despite applications remaining un-processed. The Ministry too had 
acknowledged for action. The Committee noted that s till no progress has been 
made apart  from  usual  requests and advises given  by CEO, KVIC  to  the State  

-15- 
 
agencies. The Committee had made suggestions regard ing modifying 
the 
structure/architecture of the Scheme, yet no action  has been taken. The Committee 
sought the reasons for acknowledging the observatio ns of the Committee and yet 
not acting to improve the performance. 
(Para 191) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
 The Ministry has taken with account the suggestion s/guidance of the Hon’ble 
Committee and these have been incorporated into the  new guidelines. In order to 
ensure that no crowding of expenditure towards of l ast months of the financial year 
and to streamline the process of application flow a nd fund flow and to bring in 
transparency and better financial management and pr event parking of funds at Nodal 
bank level, it has been decided to introduce online  process flow of application and 
disbursement of Margin Money directly to financing bank branches through 
Corporation Bank by adopting Direct Benefit Transfe r (DBT). KVIC has developed 
an elaborate PMEGP MIS on-line Portal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee noted that in BE 2015-16, the Coir Bo ard was 
allocated 
Rs. 44 crores as Planned and Rs. 26.75 crores as No n-Planned allocation which 
were reduced to Rs. 31 crores and Rs. 24 crores as Planned and Non-Planned 
locations respectively in RE 2015-16. The Committee  asked the reasons for 
reducing the allocation at RE stage. 
(Para 220) 
Action Taken:  
 
BE 2015-16 for Coir Board was Rs. 49.37 crore under  Plan and Rs. 26.75 
crore as Non-Plan allocation which were reduced to Rs.34.90 crore under Plan and 
Rs. 23.95 crore under Non-Plan at RE stage.  Due to  slow pace of expenditure and 
reluctance on the part of the Bank to release loans  to the applicants resulted in slow 
progress of the scheme and non-receipt of viable pr oposals.  Accordingly, the Plan 
allocation was reduced from Rs.20 crore to Rs.8.38 crore under Coir Udyami Yojana.  
Under Grant-in-Aid Salaries (Non-Plan) Head, actual  expenditure upto September 
2015 was Rs. 11.10 crore against the budget allocat ion of Rs.22.20 crore, and the 
utilization was 50% of the BE 2015-16.  As per M/o Finance’s norms, 7 months 
salary  should  have  been  disbursed  upto  September  whereas 6 months salary was  
 

-16- 
 
released upto September.  On the basis of this, M/o Finance reduced the budget under 
Grant-in-Aid Salaries (Non-Plan) Head on pro-rata basis. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
However, the Committee during its earlier study vis it in January 2016, to 
examine the Mid-term performance in utilization of funds by Coir Board, was 
informed  about  much  better  utilization  of  all ocations  by  Coir  Board  as 
compared   to   other   divisions   like   DC-MSME   whose   allocation   has  been 
increased. The Committee was informed the following  expenditure pattern of 
Coir Board by end of third quarter in December, 2015.  
(Para 222)  
Sl.  
No. 
Head BE 
propose 
d for 
the 
year 2015 
-
16 
Sanctioned 
BE 2015- 
16 
Opening 
balance 
as on 
Releases of 
funds from 
Ministry 
during 
2015-6 
(Upto31.12.
2015) 
Expenditure
 
upto 
31.12.201
5 
(including 
opening 
balance) 
1. Plan Scie nce  & 
Technology 
800.00 30 0.00 0.10 149.90 150 .00 
2. Coir Vikas 
Yojana  
56 75.00 263 7.00 23 7.73 972.52 1081 .10 
i.  Sill Upgradat ion 
and Mahila Coir 
Yojana 
11 00.00 98 7.00 13.81 332.97 362 .11 
ii. Devel opment of 
Production 
Infrastructure 
500.00 50.00 18.00 22.50 23 .14 
iii Dom est ic Market  
Promotion 
32 61.00 1100 .00 19 6.77 423.90 407 .39 
iv  Export Market  
Promotion 
350.00 250 .00 0.00 87.10 215 .89 
v Tr ade and Ind ustry 
Related & other 
Functional Support 
Service 
450.00 200 .00 9.15 106.05 72 .58 
vi Welfare Meas ures  14.00 50 .00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
3. Coir Udyami 
Yojana (CUY) 
20 00.00 2000 .00 36 0.08 10 1.00 377 .55 
4. SFURTI  4000.00 0.00 3.25 497.86* 39.58 
*No separate allocation for Coir Sector. Borne under  the common Budget of the 
Ministry. 
1st  installment received on 30.09.2015 

 
-17- 
 
Action Taken:  
 
 Regarding Plan S&T and Coir Vikas Yojana (CVY), the  Board could utilize 
the entire amount including opening balance and the  fund releases.  The Board has 
sufficient programmes to utilize the amount earmark ed under these schemes.  
However, the utilization under CUY has not picked u p due to reluctance on the part 
of the Bank to release loans to the applicants and under the component SCSP & TSP 
there is a slow pace of expenditure due to lesser i ntakes from the SCSP and TSP 
category. Since the utilization under these compone nts is not utilized at the desired 
level, the funds have been reappropriated from CUY to CVY.   
 
The allocation was reduced due to slow pace of expe nditure and reluctance on the 
part of the Bank to release loans to the applicants  resulted in slow progress of the 
scheme and non-receipt of viable proposals.  Accord ingly, the Plan allocation was 
reduced from Rs.20 crore to Rs.8.38 crore under Coi r Udyami Yojana. Similarly, 
under Grant-in-Aid Salaries (Non-Plan) Head, budget  allocation of Rs.22.20 crore 
was reduced to 19.40 crore owing to the fact that t he utilization was 50% of the BE 
2015-16 upto September 2015.  As per M/o Finance’s norms, 7 months salary should 
have been disbursed upto September whereas 6 months  salary was released upto 
September.  On the basis of this, M/o Finance reduc ed the budget under Grant-in-Aid 
Salaries (Non-Plan) Head on pro-rata basis. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee takes serious note of the observation s made by the CAG in 
its Report (1 of 2015) on Financial Audit of Union Government Accounts 2013- 
14.  The  CAG  says  that  Ministry’s  Budget  is  prepared  without  adequate 
proposals from the prospective grantees. Grants are  released without taking into 
account unspent balance. There is a deficient inter nal oversight. Contrary to General 
Financial Rules, the details of grants are not disc losed to Parliament through Annual 
Reports. And yet, the demand for allocation keeps increasing every year.  The 
Committee notes that the Audit observations were no t duly reflected in the Annual 
Report (2015-16) of the Ministry. The Committee therefore requires that Ministry 
should include its point wise reply/action taken note in the Annual Report. 
 
(Para 248) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
-18- 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
  Observations of the Committee are noted for complia nce.  In so far as SME 
Section is concerned, funds under Performance & Cre dit Rating Scheme and 
Marketing Assistance Scheme are being released to NSIC on receipt of the utilization  
certificates of previous years. Under International  Cooperation Scheme, funds are 
released to applicant on reimbursement basis. 
 
With regard to the reflection of audit observation in the Annual Report, it is 
submitted that the observation of the Committee has  been noted. From the next 
financial year, however proposals for each scheme a re made based on previous year 
expenditure. Grant are issued by taking into accoun t unspent balance and utilization 
certification as per the strict  guidelines issued by CCA. The full details of grant are 
mentioned in  Detail Demand for Grant (DDG)  the pe nding paras of CAG will be 
included in the Annual Report of the Ministry. 
 
Office of DC(MSME) has written a letter dated 09.05 .2016 to CAG 
requesting them to conduct the Performance Audit of  Tool Room & Technology 
Development Centres, under Audit Regulations 2007 ( Chapter 7) of CAG Act, 1971 
The list of all the 18 Institutes has also been forwarded to CAG. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-19- 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e Committee has either 
not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has ask ed the Ministry to review its 
replies 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee feels that CLCSS and NMCP should be s eparated. As per the 
current practice, the CLCSS which draws much larger  budget is clubbed with 
six components of NMCP that draw meager budget. CLC SS is essentially an 
interest subvention scheme like ISEC and should be kept as a credit support scheme 
whereas the NMCP is technology upgradation scheme. 
(Para 7) 
Action Taken :  
 
 As per the budgetary provisions, CLCSS and NMCP ar e implemented as 
distinct Schemes/Programmes.  However, for the purp ose of grouping/classification, 
CLCSS and NMCP have been placed in one broad group named as “Technology 
Up-gradation and Quality Certification”.   It is further submitted that the purpose 
of CLCSS is to provide subsidy for technology up-gr adation of SMEs through credit 
support from banks/financial institutions. The obje ctive of the NMCP component is 
to enhance competitiveness of the MSMEs. However, e ach component of the NMCP 
has distinct objectives. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 As funding under two Schemes is different, the allo cation too should be 
indicated separately even under same group of Tech.  Upgradation and Quality 
Certification.  Rather Committee has suggested that  all the six components of 
NMCP should be indicated as separate allocation for  better monitoring. The 
Committee reiterates its recommendation in view of dismal performance in all 
the six components.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee has always believed that multiplicity  of schemes scattered 
the allocated resources of the Ministry. The Commit tee is also of the view that in 
absence of specific Non-Planned allocations for the  respective schemes, it was 
difficult to assess the performance of the Scheme i n terms of funds allocated for a 
specific scheme.  As  per  practice, a lumpsum Non- Planned allocation is made  

-20- 
 
towards the implementing agency that may be impleme nting several other 
Schemes. For example the DC-MSME implements around 25 schemes but had a 
Non Planned allocation of Rs 21 crores only to impl ement these Schemes 
throughout the country, resulting which several Sch emes  repeatedly performed 
poorly in terms of under-utilisation of Plan Funds or crowding of Planned 
expenditure.  The Committee while supporting ration alization of Schemes also 
suggests that Ministry must see that Schemes which are clubbed together should 
get equal importance rather than to carrying one or  two Schemes at the cost of 
others.  
(Para 11) 
 
Action Taken :   
 
The multiplicity of schemes to some extent is requi red because of the types 
of industries the Ministry is dealing with.  There are several schemes and all are 
being monitored. Because DCMSME is one office and t herefore non-plan allocation 
is only made at one level and it cannot be segregated. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The allocation of Non-Planned expenditure for indi vidual Scheme 
indicates the cost of implementing a Scheme.  The C ommittee believes it to be 
essential for cost benefit analysis of any Scheme.  It is good management 
practice to work out cost of exceeding a Scheme. By  subsuming all the Non-
Planned expenditure in the Non-Planned allocation m ade to an agency 
implementing several Schemes defeats the very purpo se of budgeting Non-
Planned expenditure.  The Committee is convinced th at multiplicity of Schemes 
without commensurable budget previous to implement at grass root level, is the 
cause of poor performance of most of the Schemes.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
However, the Committee finds contrast in the expend iture of Non-Planned 
expenditure. While by January 2016 the Planned expe nditure was 67% of the 
BE, the Non Planned expenditure had reached 88%. Pa ttern of Quarter-wise Non-
Planned expenditure is also fairly even. The Commit tee do not appreciates the 
sluggish implementation of Planned schemes. The Com mittee considers it 
imperative that there should be proportionate incre ases both the expenditures to 
ensure the efficient use of money.  
(Para 16) 

-21- 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
 The observations made by the Hon’ble Committee are well taken.  The 
Ministry has already embarked upon the journey for improving its 
performance during the year 2016-17. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 As per E-lekha till July, 2016, the Ministry had u tilized only 28% of 
Planned allocation as compared to 32% last year by July, 2015.  Similarly, 38% 
of Non-Planned allocation was used as compared to 4 0% last year.  The 
Committee therefore concludes that utilization is s till sluggish despite higher 
Planned allocation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted that every wing has asked for e nhanced allocation 
but it is particularly concerned over proposed allo cation for DC-MSME, which 
sought more than two fold increase during 2016-17 d espite utilizing only about 
half the BE allocation in 2015-16 and which has bee n a recurrent annual feature 
with DC-MSME. 
                                                                                       
(Para 18) 
Action Taken:  
 
 The expenditure during the year 2015-16, in respec t of O/o DC(MSME) was 
Rs. 661.42 cr. against, BE  of Rs. 832.01 cr. and R E of  Rs.732.00 cr. 
 
 
During the year 2016-17,O/o DC (MSME) incurred expe nditure (Qr.1) as 
Rs.303.57cr against BE of Rs. 864.00 cr.  
 
  Visualizing the increased expenditure of flagship  schemes like CLCSS, CDP, 
Tool Room, of DC(MSME) increased annual Plan of Rs. 2061.00cr. was proposed 
and for Ministry annual Plan was proposed as Rs. 49 83.08 cr. However the Ministry 
was allocated Rs. 3000cr as BE for FY 2016-17, whic h comprise of Rs.1825.00cr 
for ARI, Rs. 864.00cr. for DC(MSME) & Rs.311.00cr f or SME. The expenditure 
under various schemes will be toned down accordingl y. Some of the schemes of the 
DC(MSME) (like the CLCSS) have a very high acceptab ility amongst beneficiaries 
and that is why such an estimate was made. The incr ease in the budgetary 
provisions, had it been there, would have been allo cated amongst schemes as per 
their performance.    

-22- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee has observed that Planned expenditur e by the Ministry 
remain sluggish vis-à-vis the corresponding period last year i.e., 2015-16.  The 
Committee may be informed quarter-wise utilization of planned allocation by 
all the three wings of the Ministry viz. ARI, SSI a nd O/o DC-MSME  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is distressed to note that above sixt een schemes of the M/o 
MSME could not utilize even 67% of BE allocated to them. Some key Schemes like 
SFURTI and ASPIRE could not be implemented due to l ate receipt of proposals. 
Technology intervention Schemes like NMCP are deman d driven thereby implying 
lack of demand for such schemes. Expenditure in sch emes like Assistance to 
Training Institutions, MDAP and Promotional Service s Institution and Programme 
that include skill and entrepreneurship development programmes have been below 
par and likely to increase towards the end of financial year upon receipt of bills. 
 
(Para 20) 
Action Taken :   
 
The Quarter wise expenditure of Ministry of MSME du ring the financial year 
2015-16 has already been given in the reply to recommendation no (4) above. It may 
kindly be noted that expenditure made  by Ministry of MSME till December 2015 is 
67% of BE , as detailed above. 
 
 
 The reason of slow pace of expenditure under ASPIR E was owing to the fact 
that formulation of the scheme had to be done in co nsultation with various stake 
holders since this scheme was based on the budget a nnouncement of the Finance 
Minister for 2014-15 budget.  The consultation with  Stake Holders and formulation 
of the scheme took time.  The approval of the compe tent authority was obtained 
during March, 2015.  Since the delay was unexpected  and the proposals were 
received late from the Nodal Agencies, the funds co uld not be fully utilised.  As the 
scheme has become operational, it is expected that the amount of Rs. 100 crore 
earmarked for the FY 2016-17 would be fully utilized. 
 
 
 
 
 

-23- 
 
After the formation of the new Government in May, 2 014, the approval of the 
Hon’ble Minister, MSME on the Modified SFURTI Schem e for 71 clusters with an 
outlay of Rs.149.44 crore and the guidelines of the  scheme was obtained on 
30.07.2014. Under the revamped SFURTI, three kinds of clusters were proposed 
with financial assistance varying between Rs. 1.50 crore to Rs. 8.00 crore as against 
less than Rs.1.00 crore under the old SFURTI Scheme , the nodal agencies, namely 
KVIC and Coir Board, were required to bring revised  proposals for approval before 
the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) as per the revised scheme guidelines.  
For expediting the scheme, review meetings were hel d regularly.  Besides 
KVIC and Coir Board, 3 more nodal agencies have bee n included for expediting the 
scheme.  The guidelines were revisited in the light  of difficulties faced by Nodal 
Agencies and issues raised by different stakeholder s during SSC Meetings and on 
other forums.  The revised guidelines were accordin gly issued on 30.06.2015 along 
with template for SFURTI clusters.  Adequate propos als were not received during 
2015-16 and could not be placed before the SSC meet ing and other forums.  In the 
current financial year 2016-17, a target to develop all clusters has been envisaged and 
the funds earmarked for the year 2016-17 would be fully utilised.  
       The expenditure made under Performance & Cre dit Rating Scheme, 
Marketing Assistance Scheme, International Cooperat ion Scheme and Rajiv Gandhi 
Udyami Mitra Yojana during FY 2015-16 upto January 2016 are as under: 
 
 (Rs. crore) 
Scheme  BE 2015 -16  Act ual  
Performance & Credit Rating Scheme 28.00 27.24  
(97.28%) 
Marketing Assistance Scheme 14.00 12.22  
(87.28%)  
International Cooperation Scheme 4.00 2.79  
(69.75%) 
Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana 1.00 0.67  
(67%) 
 
 
All the components of NMCP are demand driven  and t he expenditure is made 
as per the actual requirements of the beneficiaries (units).  
BE under the “EDPs Scheme” was Rs. 3.00 Cr, this am ount having been 
further reduced to Rs. 2.65 Cr at RE Stage. Final e xpenditure reported by the field 
Institutes (DIs) was Rs. 2.23 Cr. which comprises 84% of the RE. 
 
 
 

-24- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The reply only convey the procedural constraints i n implementing the 
Planned Schemes and not causes for poor performance .  An important Scheme 
like NMCP has performed poorly but Ministry appears  to blame lack of 
demand. Yet the B.E. has been retained almost at th e same level despite 
supposed lack of demand.  Even after two years, ASP IRE is still being discussed 
with stake holders.  SFURTI is perennially modified  despite lowering of 
Planned target.  The Committee may also be informed  if DC(MSME) has made 
any effort to create demand for NMCP to justify budget allocations.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Scheme like India Inclusive Innovation Fund which w as launched towards 
beginning of current Five Year Plan with an  initia l corpus of Rs 500 crores to 
promote and finance grass root level innovations, w as allocated modest amount 
which remained unspent and now towards the end of F ive Year Plan, the Fund is 
being reconsidered. The Committee may be informed o f the reasons as to why this 
Scheme could not be operationalised throughout the current Five Year Plan and 
under what conditions it is being reconsidered.  Th e Ministry may also inform the 
Committee of efforts made by it to operationalise t he Scheme. 
(Para 21) 
Action Taken :   
 The Cabinet had approved the creation of an India I nclusive Innovation Fund 
(IIIF) Scheme in November-December, 2013. As per th e Cabinet decision, oversight 
of the Fund would be by a Governing Council (GC) an d an Asset Management 
Company (AMC). 
The Governing Council and Asset Management Company mainly constituted 
of members/experts from National Innovation Council  under erstwhile Planning 
Commission which ceases to exist and NITI Aayog is a “successor in interest” of 
Planning Commission and Department of Financial Ser vices (DFS). This  office  has 
requested on several occasions to both DFS and NITI  Aayog to nominate the 
members for GC and AMC, as per the decision of Cabi net. However, no nomination 
of members/experts has been made from both DFS and NITI Aayog. 
 

-25- 
In the meantime, NITI Aayog has obtained the approv al of the EFC for the 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) and Self Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU). 
Also launch of other schemes like Start-up India, S tand-up India and the 
establishment of the Fund of Funds, being operated by SIDBI overshadowed the 
objectives of IIIF. In view of this, Ministry of Mi cro, Small, and Medium 
Enterprises, with the approval of Hon’ble Minister of MSME, has decided to close 
the IIIF Scheme. In this regard, a draft Cabinet No te, with the approval of Hon’ble 
Minister of MSME, has been circulated to related Mi nistries, for their views, on the 
13 th  July, 2016.   
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee expresses its serious reservation th at a promising Scheme 
with such large allocation was allowed to be wasted  due to lack of oversight by 
bodies. Subsequently, parallel Schemes emerged.  As  a result despite 
Committee’s repeated caution in previous reports, the Scheme was wasted  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also notes that as against proposed P lanned Budget of Rs 
4983.08 crores, the Ministry is allocated Rs 3000 c rores for BE 2016-17. Despite 
underutilization for larger part of FY 2015-16, yet  again the Ministry has been 
liberally given enhanced allocation. 
(Para 23) 
 
Action Taken :  
  
In view of the BE of Rs. 3000crore for financial ye ar 2016-17 Ministry of 
MSME has planned for incurring  and review the expenditure Quarter wise.  
 
 For ARI Division of the Ministry, a requirement of Rs.2650.26 crore was 
projected for the year 2016-17 against which Rs.182 5 crore has been allocated to 
ARI Division.  BE 2015-16 for ARI Division was Rs.1 651.22 crore which was 
enhanced to Rs.1754.18 crore at RE stage.  Actual e xpenditure during 2015-16 was 
Rs.1655.02 crore and the utilization was 100.23% w. r.t. BE and 94.35% w.r.t. RE.  
This shows that there was no underutilization during 2015-16. 
 
 
 
 

-26- 
 
Funds allocation and expenditure made under Perform ance & Credit Rating 
Scheme, Marketing Assistance Scheme, International Cooperation Scheme and Rajiv 
Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana of SME Division during FY 2015-16 are as under: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Scheme BE/RE 2015-16 Actual 
Performance & Credit Rating Scheme 37.00 37.00 
Marketing Assistance Scheme 16.52 16.52 
International Cooperation Scheme  4.00  3.60  
Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana  1.00  0.99  
 
Fund allocated under General Category of Internatio nal Cooperation Scheme 
was fully utilized. Fund allocated under SCSP, TSP and NER Components of 
International Cooperation Scheme were under utilize d as no proposal was received 
under these sub-heads from the Industries Associations.  
 
 Utilization of funds under O/o DC (MSME) for main scheme is as under: 
                          (Rs. in Crore) 
Name of Schemes BE 
2015-16  
RE 
2015-16  
Actual 
Exp.2015-16  
Credit Support Programme               24.75 71.00 70.99 
Quality of Technology Support Institution 
& Programmes 360.50 345.00 298.66 
Promotional Services Institutions and  
Programmes 32.50 33.00 27.50 
Infrastructure Development & Capacity 
Building (Erstwhile MSME Clusters 
Development Programmes and MSME 
Growth Poles) 
300.00 232.00 221.76 
Marketing Development Assistance 
Programme  19.26 15.00 13.05 
Upgradation of Database  60.00 26.50 20.18 
Collection of Statistics of Small Scale 
Industries 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Technology Upgradation and Quality 
Certification  0.00 0.00 0.00 
Construction of Office Accommodation-
Village and Small Industries  10.00 9.30 9.28 
other schemes of DC(MSME)    India Inclusive Innovation Fund 25.00 0.20 0.00 
Total  DC (MSME) 832.01 732.00 661.42 
 

-27- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
 There has been serious under-utilization of funds by DC/MSME and yet 
allocation was enhanced?  The Committee may be info rmed quarter-wise of the 
utilization of Planned allocation under respective Schemes/components by    
DC-MSME for year 2016-17.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee also wants to know the rationale for keeping Rs. 2690 
crores under Schemes for Village and Small Industri es in Revenue Section under 
Planned expenditure and keeping the Non Planned all ocation of Rs 464.22 
crores in Revenue section and Rs 55 lakhs in Capita l section.   The details may 
be elaborated. 
(Para 29) 
Action Taken:    
 
In addition to the reply given in response to quest ion no 14 above, it is also  
informed that this Department does have mostly GIA and Subsidies rather than 
Loans.  There are two  Major Heads i.e. 2552 for NE R and 2851 for ONER for 
Revenue and 6851 for Capital are exists. Under Vill age & Small Industries,  out of 
Rs. 2690.00 crore under Plan Fund, Rs.464.22 crore and Rs.55.00 lakhs in Capital 
Section under Non-Plan are elaborated in the Statement of Budget Estimates.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee had sought from the Ministry to dis- aggregate these 
figures in terms of individual allocations made in the Budget estimates which 
has not been provided.  The Committee may be inform ed how these random 
figures are obtained.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
It is evident that every year, the actual Planned u tilization has been 
significantly below the BE. As against Plan Outlay of Rs 24124 crores, the Ministry 
would have allocated only Rs 14752 crores i.e. only  61% by the end of 12
th  Plan 
leaving Rs 9400 crores as surplus.  Going by actual  expenditure which on the 
average has been 80% of the BE, the balance Outlay would be much higher at 
50% at the end of 12
th Plan. It  is  also remarkable that barring 2012-13, every  year   

 
-28- 
 
the actual  Non  Planned  expenditure  overshot  th e  BE.  Even  
the quality  of  
utilization  of  Planned  has  been  repeatedly  qu estioned   by  the Committee. 
Larger part of the Planned allocation was spent in the last months of Financial 
Year contrary to provision of GFR. 
(Para 32) 
 
Action Taken:    
 
Most of the budgets provisions are kept under Grant s-in-Aids & Subsidies 
and the expenditure incurred depends on Demands rai sed by the Implementing 
Agencies.  The relaxation for spending more than 15 % ceiling in the last month was 
obtained from Ministry of Finance wherever required . The various schemes of the 
Ministry were periodically  reviewed on year to yea r basis and according to the 
funds allocated, the expenditure was planned.    As  against the plan outlay Rs.24124 
crore for twelfth five year plan, Ministry of MSME was allocated the funds (BE) 
mentioned as under:  
 
Financial 
Year 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
BE (Rs. 
In crore) 
2835.00 2977.00 3327.00 2612.51 3000.00 14751.51 
 
Hence, outlay won't be the proper measuring rod aga inst which utilisation is to be 
judged.  The requirements of Non-Plan expenditure a rise on account of entirely 
different reasons, as already explained salary is t he most important  component of 
Non-Plan and this component  increasing regularly b ecause of DA and increment 
payments. DC(MSME) has more than 1,500 sanctioned posts all over the country.     
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 While the Committee does take serious note of the trend of higher Plan 
Outlay when actual annual allocation are much lower , it reads the persistent 
trend of under utilization of Planned funds during larger part of Financial Year 
by the Ministry.  The Ministry can’t claim full Pla n Outlay, if it can’t utilize the 
allocation during the larger part of Financial Year.  The Committee’s comments 
on excess utilization of Non-Planned allocation sho uld be seen in context of 
under utilization of Planned expenditure meant for Ministry’s programmes.  
The Committee expects that Ministry will maintain a  healthy ratio of Planned 
and Non-Planned expenditure.  
 
 

-29- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
Rs. 205 crores were allocated to Lean Manufacturing  Competitiveness 
Scheme for the 12 th  Five Year Plan. The Committee may be informed of annual 
allocation and its utilization during the current P lan period. The Committee 
may also be informed of physical target in terms of  Units assisted   and its 
achievement during this period. 
(Para 71) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement and its utilization during the current Plan period in respect of Lean 
Manufacturing Competitiveness Scheme is as under: 
Year BE 
(Rs. Crore 
No. of MSE 
Beneficiaries 
Financial achievement 
(Rs. Crore) 
 
2012-13  15.00 18 2.75 
 
2013-14  15.00 140 4.11 
 
2014-15  15.00 1326 14.64 
 
2015-16  12.00 1056 11.46 
 
2016-17  14.00 44 0.00 
 
Total 71.00 3484 32.96 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Of Rs. 205 crore Plan Outlay for current Plan, onl y Rs. 71 crore was 
Budget allocation of which only Rs. 33 crore could be spent.  This speaks 
volumes about poor performance of this important Sc heme.  The Committee 
finds figure incredible that Rs. 2.75 crore were sp ent to assist 18 units in 2012-
13 thorough.  The Ministry could assist 140 units w ith Rs. 4.11 crore and 1300 
units with Rs. 14.64 crore.  Even without spending,  44 MSMEs  have already 
benefitted in 2016-17.  
 

-30- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee wonders that only Rs 68 crores were a llocated for 
12th 
Five Year Plan for Promotion of ICT Tools in MSME s ector. The Committee 
may be informed of annual allocation for this Schem e and its utilization during the 
current Plan period. The Committee may also be info rmed of physical target in 
terms of clusters assisted and its achievement duri ng this Plan period. 
(Para 72)  
 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement and its utilization during the current Plan period in respect of ICT Tools 
in MSME sector is as under: 
 
Year BE No. of MSE 
Beneficiaries 
Financial achievement 
(Rs. Crore) 
2012-13  20.00 - 0.08 
2013 -14  18.00  - 0.07  
2014 -15  18.00  - 0.63  
2015-16  5.50 - 0.04 
2016-17  5.00 - - 
Total 66.50 - 0.82 
 
The ICT scheme was modified and approved in 2015-16 . Accordingly, MoU 
with TCIL has been signed in March, 2016. Efforts a re being made to deliver benefit 
of the modified scheme to MSMEs during 2016-17. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Scheme is to assist MSME units to avail ICT to ols like cloud 
computing.  Of Rs. 68 crore Plan outlay for 12 
th  Plan, Rs. 66.50 crore have been 
allocated through annual Budgetary allocations.  Ho wever, utilization of Rs. 82 
lakhs is a meager amount over the last five years.  The Committee is unable to 
appreciate the rationale of making higher allocatio n in successive years when 
utilization was dismal.  So far no MSME unit has be nefitted from the Scheme in 
12 th  Plan.  The Committee must be explained such gross misuse of Budget 
allocation.   

-31- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  noted  that  Rs  141  crores  was  the  Plan  Outlay  for 
Technology and Quality Upgradation Support for the 12 th   Five Year Plan. The 
Committee may be informed of   annual allocation fo r this Scheme and its 
utilization during the current Plan period. The Com mittee may also be informed of 
physical target in terms of clusters assisted and i ts achievement during this Plan 
period. 
(Para 73) 
 
Action Taken:    
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement and its utilization during the current Plan period in respect of 
Technology and Quality Upgradation Support scheme is as under: 
Year BE 
(Rs. Crore 
No. of MSE 
Beneficiaries 
Financial achievement 
(Rs. Crore) 
2012-13  26.00 1371 6.14 
2013-14  20.50 194 1.59 
2014-15  20.50 1945 2.89 
2015-16  20.00 5117 14.27 
2016 -17  20.00  7 0.42  
Total 107.00 8634 25.31 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Technology and Quality Upgradation Support Scheme provides 
maximum Rs. 10 lakh subsidy for a Rs. 40 lakh proje cts towards energy 
efficient technology.  Also, it provides Rs. 1.5 la kh assistance for obtaining 
product certification licenses.  Of Rs. 141 crore P lan Outlay for 12 
th  Plan, only 
Rs. 107 crore were allocated though Budget support during five years of which 
only Rs. 25 crore were spent to assist some 8600 un its.  The performance 
continues to be dismal.  Further while reply shown 5000 units benefitted in 
2015-16 under this Scheme, in the presentation befo re the Committee, the 
Ministry informed that only 245 units were assisted  at a cost of Rs. 10.81 crore.  
The Committee finds such difference of figures of M inistry unacceptable which 
needs to be explained.    
 
 

-32- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee noted that only Rs 92 crores was the Plan outlay for the 
Support for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Developm ent of SMEs through 
Incubators for the 12 th  Five Year Plan.   The Committee may be informed of 
annual allocation for this Scheme and its utilizati on during the current Plan period. 
The Committee may also be informed of physical targ et in terms of incubators to be 
established and its achievement during this Plan pe riod and whether these incubators 
have been financially viable. 
(Para 74) 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement and its utilization during the current Plan period in respect of Support 
for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of S MEs through Incubators is as 
under: 
Year BE (Rs. In  
Crore) 
No. of HI/BI 
approved 
Financial achievement  
(Rs. Crore) 
2012-13 12.00 25 2.30 
2013-14 10.50 16 2.51 
2014 -15  10.50  35  2.68  
2015-16 7.00 47 5.99 
2016 -17  10.00  11  0.74  
Total 50.00 134 14.22  
 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 Of the Plan Outlay of Rs. 92 crore for 12 th  Plan, only Rs. 50 crore Budget 
allocation has been provided during five years of c urrent Plan of which only Rs. 
14 crore have been utilized for a Scheme to support  10 innovative ideas/Host 
institutions or business incubators and also to sup port Business incubators/Host 
institutions with infrastructure assistance.  Ever since 2012-13, 134 HI/BI (Host 
Institution/Business Incubator) have been assisted.   The Committee may be 
informed if each of these institutions have support ed 10 innovative ideas into 
commercially viable enterprises. The Committee finds the financial and physical 
performance of the Scheme dismal. The Committee won ders why high 
allocation was retained every successive year despi te dismal utilization of funds 
under the Scheme.  
 
 

-33- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
  The Committee may also be informed as to how this s cheme is 
different 
from TBIs under ASPIRE of the same Ministry. 
 
(Para 75) 
Action Taken:    
 
 
Under the scheme of ASPIRE the main objective of Li velihood Business 
Incubator (LBI) is to create jobs at local level an d reduce unemployment by creating 
a  favourable eco system for entrepreneurial development which inter alia promotes  
new low end technology / livelihood based enterpris e, whereas scheme on Support 
for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of S MEs through Incubators is to 
promote emerging technological and knowledge based innovative venture that seek 
the nurturing of ideas from professionals beyond the traditional activities of MSME. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The Committee finds difference too nuanced. The Co mmittee considers 
that Ministry has devised similar Schemes with diff erent allocation instead 
Ministry should consolidate its Schemes for better implementation.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted that Rs 120 crores was the 12 th   Five Year Plan 
Outlay  for  Design  Clinics  for  MSME.  The  Comm ittee  may  be  informed  of 
annual allocation for this Scheme and its utilizati on during the current Plan period.  
The  Committee  may  also  be  informed  of  tangib le  physical  target  in terms of 
units assisted  during this Plan period. 
 
(Para 76) 
 
 
 
 
 

-34- 
Action Taken:    
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement  and  its utilization during the current Plan period in respect  of  Design 
Clinics for MSME is as under: 
 
Year BE (Rs. In  
Crore) 
No. of MSE 
Beneficiaries 
Financial achievement  
(Rs. Crore) 
 
2012-13 14.00 2077 6.70 
 
2013-14 14.00 7863 7.51 
 
2014-15 14.00 5406 9.60 
 
2015-16 10.00 867 0.00* 
 
2016-17 10.00 000 0.00* 
 
Total 62.00 16213 23.81 
 
* No funds were allocated during 2015-16 & 2016-17 due to revised / up-scaled 
guidelines approved by Ministry of Finance in March , 2016 and MoU under signing 
stage with implementing agency. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee expresses reservation about underutil ization and 
consequent underallocation of Plan Outlay.  The Com mittee expresses dismay 
on retaining higher BE despite persistent underutil ization.  It is stated that 
during 2015-16 and 2016-17, no funds were allocated  though the BE in both 
years show allocation of Rs. 10 crore.  Please expl ain.  Kindly also inform the 
status of Design Clinics  structure and regional centres.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted that only Rs 88 crores was the 12th  Five Year Plan 
Outlay for the Scheme for Enabling Manufacturing Se ctor to be Competitive 
through  Quality  Management  Standards (QMS) and  Quality Technology Tools  
 
 
 

-35- 
 
(QTT). The Committee may be informed of annual allo cation for this 
Scheme 
and its utilization during the current Plan period.  The Committee may also be 
informed of tangible physical target in terms of un its assisted during this Plan 
period. 
(Para 77) 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
The annual allocation, physical target in terms of units assisted and its 
achievement and its utilization during the current Plan period in respect of Quality 
Management Standards (QMS) and Quality Technology Tools (QTT) is as under: 
 
Year BE (Rs. In  
Crore) 
No. of MSE 
Beneficiaries 
Financial achievement  
(Rs. Crore) 
2012 -13  10.00  3750  1.11  
2013-14 10.00 3102 0.77 
2014-15 10.00 3180 1.43 
2015-16 6.00 5012  2.13 
2016-17 20.00* 58 0.79 
Total 56.00 15102 6.23 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 Of Rs. 88 crore Plan Outlay for 12 th  Plan, Rs. 56 crore was allocated 
through Budget allocation over last five years, how ever, only Rs. 6.23 crore was 
utilized in organizing awareness programmes. The co mmittee finds it 
inexplicable as to why higher allocations were reta ined despite repeated under 
utilization of allocation.  Also, the Committee fin ds the performance of the 
programmes intangible yet Ministry has stated that 15000 units have benefitted.  
The Committee may be informed of the tangible benefits to these units.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
It is evident that under NMCP, CLCSS is the dominan t scheme which 
cornered about Rs 280 crores out of RE of  Rs.345 C rores for 2015-16, whereas the 
six technology components of NMCP and Bar Code were  allocated Rs 60 crores in 
total. While overall allocation for this Scheme was  increased from Rs 300 crores 
to Rs 345 crores in RE, the RE for NMCP was actuall y reduced from Rs 60 crores 
to Rs 55 crores of which only Rs 36 crores were spe nt till February 2016. Going 
only by the 42utilization of allocated funds, it is dismal performance. Going by the  

-36- 
 
 
figures in Outcome Budget, the Committee finds that  the 
Scheme that was launched 
in 2008 was still in approval stage or in the proce ss of identifying and locating the 
partners/stakeholders. It has not been able to make any mark among the targeted 
MSMEs. Ministry is still holding awareness programmes and workshops which 
ideally should  be  concurrent  to  actual implementation of Scheme. There is almost  
no actual beneficiary of the Scheme in the Outcome Budget. The project 
deliverables are either vague or intangible. There is no assessment of actual 
beneficiaries  or tangible benefits.  The Committee finds the situation unacceptable. 
Having expressed its reservations repeatedly, in view of importance of this Scheme 
the Committee is inclined to recommend a comprehensive Performance Audit as per 
Chapter 7 of the Audit Regulations 2 0 0 7  and not usual financial audit, of all the 
Six components of NMCP for the 12th  Five Year Plan period.  
 
(Para 
82)  
Action Taken:    
 
It may be mentioned that the CLCSS is not a compone nt of NMCP. The 
NMCP schemes were introduced in 2008 with  a view to sensitize the enterprise for  
being competitive through adoption of energy effici ent technologies, lean 
manufacturing practices, design intervention etc. T hese schemes are being reviewed 
for their continuation and / or clubbing into bette r schemes based on experiences 
gathered from implementations of these schemes. The  observations of the committee 
are noted for future guidelines.  
 
The scheme of NMCP is demand driven. In order to po pularize and raise the 
demand of NMCP schemes, some components of NMCP wer e simplified and up-
scaled into Design Clinic Scheme, Lean Manufacturin g Competitiveness Scheme, 
Marketing assistance & Technology Up-gradation Sche me, etc. The revised / up-
scaled / simplified guidelines have 
been approved by Hon’ble Minister (Finance / MSME).  Further, this office is also in 
process for evaluation studies of various schemes of NMCP. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The reply evades the issue raised by the Committee  responding rationale 
of clubbing it with CLCSS for which separate alloca tion is made.  The reply 
does not address the core issues regarding performa nce.  The Committee 
reiterates that performance of NMCP must be evaluat ed under comprehensive 
Performance Audit by CAG.  The Committee may be inf ormed of reasons for 
not accepting its specific recommendation.  

 
-37- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
Even last year, the Committee had asked that alloca tions for technology 
upgradation scheme like NMCP should be separated fr om interest subvention 
scheme like CLCSS under the umbrella Quality of Tec hnology Support Institutions 
and Programme. The Committee had asked that separat e allocation should be made 
for each distinctive  component of NMCP for better parliamentary scrutiny.  
This was reiterated in the Committee’s 271
st  Report and the Committee 
had asked the Ministry to share its views with the Ministry of Finance. However, 
previous arrangement was retained this year too. Instead, the Financial Advisor 
found merit in clubbing an interest subvention sche me for technology upgradation 
like CLCSS with the six components of NMCP, which are essentially Grants.  
(Para 86) 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
The schemes of NMCP as well as CLCSS were kept unde r one umbrella 
Quality of Technology Support Institutions and Prog rammes as both envisage the 
improvement in quality and technologies through var ious activities. both these 
schemes are being reviewed for their continuation a nd / or transformation into better 
schemes based on experiences gathered from implementations of these schemes. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The reply does not address the assertion made by t he Committee in its 
recommendation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee wonders can the interest subvention s cheme be clubbed 
with Grant, even if the objective is technology upg radation? Considering that 
bulk of allocation under this umbrella scheme is  m eant for CLCSS and the 
allocation and utilization for six segments of NMCP  remain hidden from 
Parliamentary scrutiny, the Committee requires that  the NMCP should get separate 
allocation from CLCSS. 
(Para 87) 
 
 
 

-38- 
 
Action Taken: 
   
 
As per the budgetary provisions, CLCSS and NMCP are  implemented as 
distinct schemes/programmes.  However, for the purp ose of grouping/classification, 
CLCSS and NMCP have been placed in one broad group named as “Technology 
Up-gradation and Quality Certification”.   It is further submitted that the purpose 
of CLCSS is to provide subsidy for technology up-gr adation of SMEs through credit 
support from banks/financial institutions. The obje ctive of the NMCP component in 
larger interest is to enhance competitiveness of th e MSMEs. However, each 
component of the NMCP schemes have distinct objectives to meet the requirement of 
MSMEs. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
The Committee is not convinced.  The two can be gro uped together but 
how can interest subvention and great Schemes be br ought under one Major 
Head. The Committee reiterates that such clubbing c onceals the actual 
performance of NMCP which is poor, from Parliament scrutiny.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
Having observed that DC-MSME has failed to deliver on the objectives 
and targets of the Scheme, the Committee may also b e informed as to how does the 
Ministry intend to implement this Scheme at the loc al level and what will be cost 
of implementing this scheme and whether such cost h as been provided in the 
Budget. 
(Para 89) 
 
Action Taken:    
 
From the physical and financial achievements of the  schemes stated in reply 
of the above paras (28 to 34), NMCP schemes are bei ng reviewed for their impact at 
the local level along with the budgetary support. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee reiterates that performance of NMCP must be 
Performance Audited by CAG for the 12 
th  Plan period.  There is a need to 
include in B.E., the cost of implementing the Schem e through a network of 
agencies.  
 

 
-39- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee notes significant under achievement o f training targets, 
yet the target for 2016-17 has been doubled for sam e BE. The Committee considers 
such targets unrealistic in context of present achi evement and shows failure on 
the part of the Ministry to make realistic assessme nt of its estimates. 
(Para 98) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
   
During 2015-16, the amount of Rs.31.15 Crore was re leased towards the 
expenditure incurred on training programmes already  completed by Apex Institution 
in 2014-15.  Thus, the total amount of Rs.71.97 Cro res including the arrears of 
Rs.31.15 Crores was spent for training in 2015-16.  Taking into account the average 
cost of Rs.10,000/- per trainee in the ATI Scheme, the total number of trainees 
covered at the cost of Rs.71.97 Crores is 72000.  S ince the same amount was 
indicated for BE:2016-17, the target was initially fixed at 80000 . 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 If Rs. 31.15 crores pertained to training complete d in the year 2014-15, 
only Rs. 40 crores were available for fresh trainee s in 2015-16.  The Ministry 
should calculate the performance accordingly @ Rs. 10,000 per trainee.  As such 
the targets look unrealistic. As per the informatio n provided by the Ministry till 
February, 2016, 40,700 trainees were trained agains t target of 48,000 at a cost of 
Rs. 42 crores.  The Committee reiterates its observation. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
It is evident that almost 3 / 4 of the trainees tra ined in 2014-15 and 2015-
16, remained unemployed. This is a telling comment on the quality of training 
and the employability of trainees. The Committee re iterates its concern over efficacy 
of training programmes run by Training institutions. 
(Para 103) 
 
 
 
 
 

-40- 
 
Action Taken:  
 
According to reports submitted by the Apex Institut ions, 44,450 number of 
persons were able to get wage/self-employment, out of total 1,85,935 persons trained 
under the ATI Scheme during 2014-15 and 2015-16. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Only about 24% trainees are either self-employed o r wage-employed.  
The Committee considers the Scheme to be colossal w aste of financial and 
human resources.  The Committee recommends Performa nce Audit of the 
Scheme by CAG.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed about annual allocati on and utilization of 
this Outlay during the 12 th  Plan period. The Committee may also be informed 
about the annual targets and achievements in terms of trainees and about their 
employability. 
 
(Para 108) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
The details are as under:- 
 
* Data under compilation   
 
 
Year 
Rs. In Crore 
 
 
BE/RE Expenditure  Targets Persons participated 
 
2012-13 119.88 89.2839 572000 551309 
 
2013-14 161.67/201.67 133.3381 687000 607253 
 
2014-15 188.67/135.42 111.5287 825000 837417 
 
2015-16 *    

-41- 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee notes that every year there has been  significant under 
utilization of resources.  Further, in 2013-14 desp ite raise in RE, the target was 
underachieved while in 2014-15 despite reduction in  RE and under utilization 
vis-à-vis 2013-14, the training target was surpasse d.  The Committee doubts the 
credibility of figures and therefore, recommends a proper audit by CAG to get 
true and fair picture of performance. 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
In terms of employability of the trainees trained i n the Tool Rooms and 
Technical Centers, the performance is dismal. For s hort term courses out of 1.34 
lakh trainees, only 15000 could be placed and anoth er 2000 were self employed. 
More  than  a  lakh  trainees  remained  unemployed .  In  terms  of  longer  term 
courses, only 6300 got  wage employment and another  300 got  self  employed  and  
remaining 24000 remained unemployed. The Committee wonders if any serious 
assessment has at all been made of such colossal fa ilure of this Scheme. The 
Committee therefore, reiterates its recommendation of a comprehensive 
Performance Audit of the training programmes run by  these Tool Rooms/TCs by 
the competent authority for the entire Plan period till 2015-16. And the Ministry 
must not obfuscate it with routine annual financial  audit. 
 
(Para 127) 
 
The Committee takes note of the fact that in most o f the Tool 
Rooms/Technical Centres in the Short term courses t hat draw the maximum 
candidates, the no one opted for self employment is  Nil. Even in wage employment, 
only a fraction of trainees get wage employment. Th e Committee also observes 
that while employability was better in long term co urses in comparison to 
employability in medium and short term courses is p oor in most of the Tool 
Rooms/ Technical Centres. 
 
(Para 128) 
 
Action Taken on Para 127 & 128):    
 
 
The trainees of short term training programmes are mainly students pursuing 
their  higher  education  and  employees  of  MSME for enhancement of their skills. 

-42- 
 
Most of them do not opt for placement. The details of placement provided to 
trainees during 2015-16 is annexed at Annexure-A.   
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 Even for the training courses more than six month d uration, rate of 
placement is just about 1/3 which is far from being  satisfactory. The Committee 
reiterates that performance of training provided in  Tool Rooms and Technical 
Centres should be Performance Audited by CAG.  The Committee may be 
informed of the outcome of proposed Performance Aud it of Tool 
Room/Technical Centres 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee expresses its reservation over such t ardy pace of 
implementation of externally aided scheme that was launched in the beginning of 
the 12 th  Five Year Plan with a Plan outlay of Rs 2200 crores  for the current Plan 
for new   Tech. Centers. The Committee may be infor med of annual allocation and 
actual expenditure.  The Committee has been informe d that lower utilization has 
been due to external aid component. However, it has  not been informed that 
despite an understanding with World Bank, why did t his Scheme take so long to 
commission? The Committee may also be informed of t he salient features of the 
MoU signed with the World Bank regarding this Schem e and if there have been 
points of  divergence or dis-agreements. 
(Para 133) 
Tool Rooms/Technical Centres 
Trainees Trained and Placement Details 2015-16  
Duration of Course Total 
Number of 
Trainees 
Trained 
No of 
Trainees 
Opted for 
Placement 
No of Trainees  
Placed* 
No of Trainees 
Opted for Self 
Employment 
Trainees  trained in 
course duration less 
than 6 months 
146704 30281 18613 2337 
Trainees  trained in 
course duration more 
than 6 months 
33456 11695 8761 270 
Total  180160 41976 27374 2607 
* Placement activity is continued  

-43- 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The project being a new and complex scheme involvin g a number of 
stakeholders took larger time during its design pha se, which caused delay in actual 
implementation causing less expenditures. 
The provision of land for new TC by States free of cost has also caused delay since a 
number of State Governments are taking too much tim e to transfer land free of cost, 
due to which activities / DPRs for construction of building of these sites could not be 
initiated causing unspent budget under the project. 
The BE & Expenditure year wise are: 
(Rs in Lakh) 
Financial Year BE Exp. 
2014-15 15000 503.06 
2015-16 10000 3009.42 
 
2016-17 7500 147.28                                         
(upto 14 th  June 2016) 
 
   
           The salient features of the MoU signed with World Bank are as follows: 
 
(i) Procurement of various consultancy goods / works to  be held as per World Bank 
norms. 
(ii) Funding pattern is 50:50 by World Bank & Govt. of India. 
(iii) Funding is on reimbursement basis, i.e. first expen diture would be done through 
BE provided by GoI and then reimbursement can be cl aimed from World Bank 
as loan. 
There is no point of divergence or disagreements with the World Bank. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The reply re-affirms Committee’s assertion that im portant Planned 
Schemes are approved without adequate planning and linkages with relevant 
stakeholders.  Costly resources that are allocated remain unutilized due to lack 
of coordination and poor planning and design of Sch eme.  If Ministry is not 
able to implement the Scheme, it may consider devol ving funds to concerned 
States to execute the Scheme or set up TRs/TCs in a ssociation with existing 
NITs or IITs.  The Ministry may also consider setti ng up these TCs/TRs on the 
extra land of CPSEs as the case may be.  
 

-44- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The  Committee  notes  that  while  ASPIRE’s  manda te  is  to  promote 
innovation and entrepreneurship in agro-rural indus try, however, most of the trades 
offered in the two LBIs are essentially non-agro tr ades. The Committee is of the 
view that the Ministry should identify exclusive ag ro-rural trades in agriculture and 
allied vocations, to be included in the LBIs. 
(Para 150) 
Action Taken:   
 
The aims of the ASPIRE is to promote entrepreneursh ip in rural areas so that 
people get employment there.  People in rural areas  also need to use non-agro 
innovations available in cities and metros like mob ile phone repairing, auto repair, 
health and beauty etc. Accordingly non-agro enterpr ises are coming up in rural areas.  
To support these, non-agro trades are being support ed in LBIs. Agriculture related 
value addition and modules for imparting the traini ng on the same has been adopted 
under nine LBIs of Manipur. The incubators focus on  stevia processing, citronella oil 
extraction, lemon grass drying and mushroom spawning and packaging activities.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee’s observations were made on the basi s of trades being 
offered in two LBIs.  The Committee is convinced th at to relive agriculture of 
burden, there is a need to promote and innovate agr o and agro based industry 
in rural areas instead of only setting up non-agro industry in rural areas.  
ASPIRE should include more agro based trades and innovations.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Considering that incubation entails prolonged handh olding and mentoring 
which involves cost, the Committee is surprised wit h the conceptual ambivalence 
of the Ministry on the critical issue of what const itutes incubation and handholding, 
what is the tenure of such mentoring and whether th e Ministry in view of limited 
allocation, has fixed cost of incubation and mentor ing per entrepreneur. The 
Ministry  also  does  not  have  any  convincing  c larity  of difference between 
incubation and entrepreneurship development programmes. The two concept are 
used inter-changeably. The Committee thus recommends that Ministry must 
decide and define the contours and tenure of mentor ing and accordingly calculate 
the cost of mentoring per incubate. 
(Para 155) 
 

-45- 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 
It is true that incubation entails prolonged handho lding and mentoring which 
involves cost. There is no conceptual ambivalence i n the Ministry on the critical 
issue of what constitutes incubation and handholdin g, what is the tenure of such 
mentoring and whether the Ministry in view of limit ed allocation, has fixed cost of 
incubation and mentoring per entrepreneur. Even tho ugh the concepts of incubation 
and entrepreneurship development programmes are dif ferent, there is fair bit of 
overlapping. Under ASPIRE what is important is that  under the Livelihood Business 
Incubator, the incubates after the designated train ing are encouraged to become 
entrepreneurs by setting up their own enterprises r ather than go in for wage 
employment. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 While the Ministry agrees that handholding and mon itoring involves cost, 
yet is has not given any reply to Committee’s speci fic query regarding tenure 
and cost of handholding per incubate and whether av ailable budget allocation is 
adequate to meet such obligation under ASPIRE.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
Considering that the Scheme is dealing with traditi onal craftsmen and 
artisans to facilitate them with ease of doing rewa rding business, the Committee had 
felt that the structure and procedures of the Schem e are complex and protracted.  
The  Committee  notes  that  there  are  at  least  ten  stakeholders agencies that 
are involved in the decision making and implementat ion of this Scheme. The 
Committee feels that for efficient implementation t he structure and procedures of the 
Scheme needs to be simplified. 
(Para 166) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The scheme has been simplified a number of times ba sed on the difficulties 
experienced at the field/implementation level.  Sim plification of the scheme is a 
continuous process.  Further suggestions in this re gard may be considered as and 
when received.   
 
 
 
 

-46- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
 The Committee has on a previous occasion too had c autioned about complex structure of the Scheme.  The Scheme has un dergone time consuming modification process that has left annual allocatio n under-utilized and target under-achieved. The Committee feels that Scheme has  suffered due to procedural inefficiencies, poor design and planning.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  is  distressed  to  note  that  the   53utilization  pattern  of  a 
running Planned Scheme, whose structure and procedu res though complicated, are 
settled. There was almost Nil 53utilization in the first quarter of the FY 2015-16. 
While the M/o Finance does not permit more than 33%  in the last Quarter and 
15% of BE to be spent in the month of March, the Mi nistry however spent only 
some Rs 20 crores in first three Quarters and propo ses to spend Rs 20 crores 
out  of the BE of Rs 50 crores in last twenty days of the FY against the ceiling 
prescribed by the M/o Finance.  The  Committee  may   be informed  the  groundson  
which the Ministry proposes to breach the M/o Finan ce’s prescribed ceiling.   The 
Committee may be informed the rationale of retainin g high RE 2015-16 despite 
poor utilization of funds during the first three quarters. 
 
(Para 169) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 
There is no breach of any ceiling of Ministry of Fi nance. As far as the releases  
of ASPIRE are concerned, in the 2015-16, in the sec ond quarter Rs.60 crore was 
released to the SIDBI to set up Fund of Funds. Furt her, an amount of Rs.4.59 crore 
was released in the last quarter.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
        
 The Committee’s observation pertained to Planned a llocation made for 
SFURTI and were based on information provided by th e Ministry and not 
about ASPIRE as responded by the Ministry.  The Min istry may amend its 
reply accordingly.  
 
 
 

-47- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee noted that the Scheme has gone throug h series of time 
consuming  modifications,  merger/clubbing  of  sma ller  schemes  with  SFURTI 
and splitting of SFURTI into KVIC and Coir. This ha s made the monitoring of 
scheme  against  set  benchmarks, difficult. Every  modification  has  taken  time for  
approval and consequently derailed the time lines. As a result towards the end of 
12th Plan none of the 71 SFURTI Cluster are actually com missioned and 
operationalised. The Committee may be informed of a nnual Fund allocation and 
utilization during the 12 th Plan period. 
(Para 179) 
 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The current SFURTI under the 12 th  Plan period has been approved with a 
budget of Rs.149.44 crore to set up 71 clusters wit h a target of benefitting 44000 
artisans. Out of the funds allocated in 2015-16, Rs .30.29 crore has already been 
disbursed to different Nodal Agencies. Another Rs.2 0 crore is planned to be released 
in the month of July to different Nodal Agencies. T he entire BE allocated under 
SFURTI is planned to be utilized for assisting the setting up of clusters.  
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry has not provided information specific ally sought.  Out of 
Plan outlay of Rs. 149 cores for SFURTI, please pro vide details of annual 
allocation and their utilization during 12 
th  Plan and progress in commissioning 
of 71 clusters.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The  Committee  finds  SFURTI  to  be  a  represent ative  case  of  
poor 
management and poor monitoring of any Planned Schem e of the Ministry. 
 
(Para 180) 
 
 
 

-48- 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
SFURTI is not at all a representative case of poor management and poor 
monitoring. The time in the initial one year has be en completely deployed in 
stakeholder  consultation, framing  of  the  guidelines  and  soliciting   good  project  
proposals. However, currently the entire machinery is geared up to take on the 
challenge and fulfill Government’s target to set up  clusters for traditional industry. It 
is to be noted here that the ministry has within a short span of about 18 months has 
been able to approve 38 clusters. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates its impression that SFURT I suffered due to 
poor management and poor monitoring for larger part  of 12 
th  Plan.  The 
Ministry could not commission a single cluster duri ng larger part of the current 
Plan due to repeated changes in Scheme details. Pro posals for clusters are still 
in approval stage.  The Committee recommends audit of this Scheme.  The 
Committee’s impression is based on utilization of allocated funds.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 However, the Committee noted that in reply to Rajya  Sabha 
Unstarred 
Question 878 (3.3.16), it was informed that for FY 2015-16 Rs 1265 crore were 
allocated   for   PMEGP,  upto  31.1.16   only   Rs   658  crores  margin  money  was 
utilized. The Committee probed if this amount has b een sanctioned or actually 
disbursed. And with such low utilization of allocat ed funds in first 10 months of the 
FY, what was the need for seeking an additional fun d of Rs 811 crores in 
Supplementary Demands? 
(Para 185) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The Ministry was initially allocated Rs.1019 crore at BE stage under Margin 
Money Subsidy for the year 2015-16 and the said all ocation was enhanced to Rs. 
1285.68 crore (Rs.1254.68 MM + Rs.31.00 crore under B&F).  
         
 
 

-49- 
 
 Further it is stated that the MM utilization as on  31.01.2016 was Rs. 658 
crore against the set target of 2015-16. In this re gard it is observed from the previous 
years that funds utilization of MM subsidy takes pl ace mainly in the last quarter i.e. 
Jan to March, now the actual utilization reached Rs . 1020.06 crore during the year 
2015-16.    
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry appears to justify crowding of expend iture in last quarter 
of Financial Year, something which Ministry themsel ves have agreed to 
amend.  The Committee is of the view that for a run ning Scheme the 
expenditure should be evenly distributed instead of  crowding in the last 
quarter of Financial Year. Yet Ministry has been se eking additional 
supplementary demand.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The   Committee   observes   that   lesser   number    of   applications   being 
sanctioned  and  actually  disbursed  by  the  Bank s  in  the    year  2015-16  as 
compared  to  previous  year.  In  both  the  years   the  gap  between  sanctioned 
Margin Money and its actual disbursal  has been sig nificant.  The Committee 
may be informed as to how does the Ministry propose  to meet the shortfall in 
Margin Money for sanctioned loans. 
 
(Para 190) 
Action Taken:   
 
YEAR  Sanctioned by bank  Di sbursed by bank  % of    projects 
disbursed against 
sanctioned by 
bank in terms of 
MM utilization 
MM  
(Rs. In 
Crore) 
Project   
(in Nos.) 
MM  
(Rs. In 
Crore) 
Project   
(in Nos.)  
2014 -15  1685.95  79471  1122.54  48186  66  
2015-16 1494.51 67839 1020.06 44340 68 
 
The above table depicts that there is a very small gap between sanctioned MM 
and actual disbursal by banks during 2014-15 and 20 15-16. The previous pending 
sanctioned MM claims can be settled from the target of next financial year.  
 

-50- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee had cautioned against the practice o f spilling over 
expenditure to subsequent Financial Year, while ret aining money for larger 
part of Financial Year.  Contrary to Ministry’s rep ly, there is significant gap 
between sanctioned and disbursal of Margin Money and number of projects.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The C o m m i t t e e  during its study visit(s) also noted that most of State 
Governments had launched their own employment gener ation schemes that are 
flexible and offer better terms. As those Schemes a nd the PMEGP are implemented 
by the same State agencies, people find State Schem es better, convenient and allow 
greater flexibility in terms of vocations, whereas KVIC has to depend on the State 
agencies to implement PMEGP. The Committee therefore wonders the relevance of 
having two parallel schemes run  implemented by same State agency.  
(Para 202) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 State scheme is being implemented by the mostly in  every State Government. 
Perhaps the state scheme involves interest subventi on of 4% p.a. However, the 
project  ceiling is up  to  Rs. 10.00 lakh  only as  compared to Rs. 25.00 lakh  ceiling  
under PMEGP.  State scheme is being implemented by the mostly in every State 
Government. Some of the state govt. schemes is given below: 
 
(i) Chief Minister Rojgar Yojana is being implemented b y the State Government 
of Uttar Pradesh. The scheme involves interest subv ention of 4% p.a. 
However, the project ceiling is upto Rs. 10 lakhs o nly as compared to Rs. 25 
lakhs ceiling under PMEGP. 
(ii) The scheme at Goa called Chief Minister’s Rojgar Yo jana and now renamed 
as Dr. Verghese Kurien Rojgar Yojana provides loan assistance to maximum 
of Rs.20.00 lakhs including 50% interest free share  capital under DITC 
scheme (80% in case of SC/ST applicant) for an indi vidual with professional 
degree /diploma/I.T.I., including those undergoing special training 
programmes conducted by authorized Government Depar tments 
/Corporations. Maximum Rs.15.00 lakhs including 50%  (80% in case of 
SC/ST applicant) share capital under DITC scheme, f or others. The rate of 
interest is 8% p.a. for male and 6% p.a. for female  beneficiary.  The interest 
charged by banks under PMEGP ranges from 10.75 % to 12.75%. 
 

-51- 
 
(iii) State Government of Gujarat is also running a n employment generation 
subsidy scheme namely Shri Vajpayee Bankable Yojana . A tabular 
comparison between the two schemes is given: 
Sl. 
No  
Components of 
the Scheme  
PMEGP SVBY 
1. Project Cost Max. 25 lakhs Max. 8  lakhs 
2. Individual 
Contribution 
5-10% - 
3. In terest Free 
Loan 
Component/Sub 
sidy 
25-
35% of the Project 
Cost(Rs. 6.25-8.50 lakhs) 
20-50% of the Project 
Cost(Max. limit of 
assistance is Rs.0.6 lakhs)  
4.  Rate of Interest  Bank Rate  Bank Rate  
5. Collateral No collateral for loan upto 
10 lakhs 
No collateral. 
6. Penal Interest As per Bank Norms. As per Bank No rms. 
7.  Moratorium  As per Bank Norms.  As per Bank Norms.  
8. Repayment 
Period 
As per Bank Norms. As per Bank Norms. 
 The above features show that PMEGP Scheme is more favorable in the State. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee observes that States’ Schemes provid e assistance on 
more convenient and liberal terms compared to PMEGP  and are therefore 
more popular.  Despite Ministry’s assertion that th ey cover higher cost 
projects under PMEGP, the fact remains that on an a verage the actual cost of 
a project under PMEGP is Rs. 8-10 lakh which is sam e as State’s Schemes.  
The Committee recommends that Ministry may have a r elook on PMEGP in 
comparison with states’ Schemes.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The  Committee  is  dismayed  to  note  that  after   eight  years  of  being 
launched, despite setting ambitious target of 100 P MEGP units per District per year, 
the facts are disconcerting. 175 Districts in the c ountry do not have aggregate 100 
PMEGP units ever since the scheme was launched. In reduction of target per 
district to 75 units, the Committee finds a candid admission of failure  to  meet  

-52- 
 
even the modest targets. However, there were 359 Di stricts in the country who 
could set up only 50 PMEGP units in 2014-15,. In pr evious year 2013-14 the 
figure was 339. The Committee  expresses its seriou s reservation over such 
dismal performance where despite enhanced annual ta rgets and commensurate  
enhancement  in allocation,  the actual achievement s  are stark. The fact remains 
that half the Districts in country could not set up  even modest target of 75 PMEGP 
units.   The Committee seeks a detailed comment fro m the Ministry on such dismal 
performance at the District level.  
 
(Para 
206) 
Action Taken:   
  
The overall target in each state has been allocated  to 75 projects per district. 
The target and performance for the year 2014-15 sho ws that the in terms of the No. 
of projects about 55% of target is achieved. Howeve r in terms of Margin Money 
utilization about 103% of target achieved.  
  The reasons for the lesser projects are  
 
(i) Many States sanctioned projects larger in size, the  scope for creating 
employment opportunities was less due to lesser ava ilability of Margin 
Money. 
 
Targets under PMEGP are set in terms of Margin Mone y allocation. Targets 
for the no of Projects are indicative. However focu s will be made by KVIC for 
generating more employment. The base of trend of pa st performance it is observed 
that the average Margin Money of Rs. 2.33 lakh and Rs.2.30 lakh have been 
distributed per project during the year 2014-15 and 2015-16 respectively.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee finds rationale given by Ministry un acceptable.  If 
Districts were given a target of 100 PMEGP units pe r year the allocation would 
have been made accordingly.  However, as per the re ply given in Rajya Sabha, 
175 Districts have not achieved aggregate 100 PMEGP  units ever since it was 
launched 9 years ago.  And yet Ministry is trying to justify its performance.  
 
 
 

-53- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
During the study visits particularly to smaller Sta tes and Uts like A&N 
and Pudducherry, the Committee recognized that loca l entrepreneurs felt constrained 
due to negative list prescribed in the PMEGP. The C ommittee is of opinion that the 
scheme should facilitate the entrepreneurs to exerc ise their free choice of vocation 
depending upon local resources, skill sets, market opportunities, instead of unduly 
constraining them. That a similar scheme is run by another Ministry should not be 
a consideration while deciding the negative list.  Accordingly  agro  based or para  
agro  vocations  like floriculture, horticulture, fishery etc. should be allowed in 
the Scheme. The Committee is inclined to state that the negative list should be 
prepared after due consultation with the concerned State Government/ UT 
administration. 
(Para 208) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 Any Industry/business connected with cultivation o f like Tea, Coffee, rubber 
etc., Sericulture (cocoon rearing), Horticulture, Floriculture comes under the negative 
list of PMEGP activities. Value addition of these a ll however allowed under 
PMEGP.  
  Since the scheme of PMEGP is approved by Ministry  of MSME, any 
modification in the scheme can be carried by the Ministry only.  
In order to expand the scope of PMEGP, negative lis t of the PMEGP Guidelines has 
been modified. Now following activities have been allowed: 
◊ Ceiling of 10% on the extent of projects to be fina nced for transport activities is 
imposed in the states/Uts except in specific region s (hilly region, NER,  A&N 
Island, Goa, Puducherry, Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu, Dadra Nagar Haveli, 
J&K and LWE affected districts). 
◊ Industries such as Khadi, processing of Pashmina Wo ol, handloom and power 
loom units are now eligible for funding under PMEGP . However, the 
subsidy/benefits for setting up of such units can b e claimed from one scheme of 
Govt. of India only.  
Value added products for Tea, Coffee and Rubber etc . Sericulture, Horticulture, 
Floriculture. 
 
 
 
 

-54- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Considering the popularity of States’ Schemes, the Committee suggests 
that Ministry should prepare negative list for ever y State in consultation with 
the State Government or leave this task for State K VIB.  The Ministry may 
only provide broad general guidelines.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee expresses its serious  reservation  o ver  current Performance 
Audit of PMEGP. The Committee feels that the concurrent performance audit of 
the scheme for a small part of current Financial year cannot present the true and 
fair picture of the status of the Scheme that was launched in 2008. The Committee 
wonders whether this is a standard audit practice to conduct performance audit for 
such a short period of current FY. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the 
scope of Performance audit of the PMEGP should be expanded  since the beginning 
of 12th Plan. 
(Para 219) 
 
Action Taken:  
  
CAG has already commenced performance audit of the scheme and is 
collecting relevant information from KVIC at the He ad office and field office level, 
same is in process. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee re-affirms its view that current Per formance Audit must 
cover the period from the beginning of 12 
th  Plan.  Auditing only small part of 
current Financial Year will not give true and fair picture that is intended of 
Performance Audit.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee may be informed as to how unspent bal ance of CUY was 
allowed  to  be  carried  forward  after  FY  2014- 15  ended.  Whether  the  M/o 
Finance norms were followed or the unspent money sh ould have been surrendered.   
Should   not  such  unspent  funds   be  re-appropr iated   by  the Parliament 
through  a  separate Appropriation Bill? The  Commi ttee  has  always  cautioned 
against the Planned money being parked with subordinate offices/statutory 
organization even after the FY. As a result of dela yed partial release and consequent  

- 5 5 -  
 
under-utilisation of allocated Funds in BE, the RE 
was substantially reduced. As a 
result the target of assisting 825 units was grossly under achieved to mere 424 
units. The Ministry has blamed Bank’s lukewarm response for underutilization of 
Funds of CUY. Instead the Ministry should look to its own financial 
mismanagement. 
(Para 235) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
 There was an unspent balance of Rs. 3.60 crore und er CUY which was carried 
forward to the year 2015-16.This opening balance wa s adjusted by the Ministry in 
the releases for 2015-16 and the entire releases fo r that year and the opening balance 
could be utilized by the Board. 
The release of fund by the Ministry and retention o f unspent balance by the 
Coir Board at the end of 2014-15 was done in utmost  good faith of avoidance of a 
situation where the implementation of the Plan prog ram is not badly hit. At the 
closing stage of the year 2014-15 the Board was exp ecting the clearance of more 
loans by the banks.  
The performance of CUY during the year 2015-16 coul d pick up momentum 
and entire funds available could be utilized. As ag ainst the target of assisting 825 
units for the year 2015-16, the Board was able to provide assistance to 611 number of 
units. The trend in the current year is also encouraging.  
The Committee may therefore consider the bonafide c ircumstances under 
which the unutilized balances of 2014-15 were carried forward to the year 2015-16. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
 The Ministry has not replied to the Committee’s qu ery whether unspent 
money needs re-appropriation by Parliament after th e end of Financial Year.  
Whether unspent funds occurred due to delayed devol ution of funds to Coir 
Board by the Ministry?  And despite retaining unspe nt funds, the Ministry has 
been blaming Banks for lukewarm response.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee having seen the fate of India Inclusi ve Innovation Fund, is 
justifiably  apprehensive  of  the  fate  of  such  Schemes  where  no  planning, 
discussion or guidelines have  been  done  proper  to  making  any allocation in the  

-56- 
 
Budget.  The  Committee  has  repeatedly  cautioned   the  Ministry  against  the 
practice of launching new schemes before details of  mandate, procedures, 
stakeholders   and   have   been   decided.   Howev er,   there   is   a   tendency   of 
announcing multiple schemes without having clearer vision, structure to implement 
and capacity to monitor. As a result such allocatio ns remain idle for years before 
being dropped. The Committee therefore recommends t hat the Ministry should 
ensure that the mandate, structure, procedures and the cost of this MSME Fund 
may be decided expeditiously by the competent autho rity, so that the Fund 
become operationalised within the current  FY 2016- 17.  Also, the Committee may 
be informed if Ministry proposes to seek further Fu nds in the Supplementary 
Demands or the scheme will be Funded by diverting t he savings of other Schemes. 
(Para 239) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
   Creation of MSME Fund under section 12 of MSMED is under process. 
Token provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh has been made in t he budget 2016-17. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee expresses reservation that proposed M SME fund is yet 
not been set up.  A token provision of Rs. 1 lakh h as been made for the 
purpose.  The Ministry has not replied if it requir es further funds.  The 
Committee reiterates its view that such Planned all ocation may be made only 
after details have been finalized.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee reiterates its serious reservation ov er persistent lack of 
regard for allocations and targets by the Ministry and its organizations. The 
Ministry continues to disregard its own estimates. 
          (Para 246)  
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
M/o MSME through its various Divisions review the t argets vis-à-vis funds 
allocations for its various schemes periodically fr om time to time.  However, the 
observations  of the committee in this regard have been noted.  
 
 
 

-57- 
 
Allocation and targets are being made under Perform ance & Credit Rating 
Scheme, Marketing Assistance Scheme and Internation al Cooperation Scheme 
keeping in view of the past performances under thes e schemes. However, funds 
allocated in BE are being reviewed at RE stage and enhancement/reduction in budget 
allocation are being made accordingly in RE stage. 
 
 In case of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme(CL CSS) during the XII 
Plan, the achievements were even more than the targ ets set by the Ministry of MSME  
(2012-13 , Target- 2500 units and Achievement- 5713  units, 2013-14 , Target- 5000 
units and Achievement- 6279 units, 2014-15 , Target - 5500 units and Achievement- 
7246 units ). For  the FY 2015-16, the budget  allo cation was in sufficient  so far as 
demand is concerned, hence slight shortfall in phys ical target set by the Ministry has 
been achieved (2015-16 , Target- 5700 units and Achievement- 5047 units). 
 
  Under the Credit Guarantee Scheme there are no fi xed targets. However, 
during the 12 
th  plan, the scheme performed well as per the details given below: 
 
FY No. of 
applications 
approved 
Amount of 
Guarantee Cover 
approved (in 
Crore) 
BE 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Funds 
released 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
2013-14 348475 18188.12 74.99 74.99 
 
2014-15 403422 21274.82 74.99 74.99 
 
2015-16 398162 16113.67 70.99 70.99 
 
 
The funds allotted under most of the heads have bee n utilized. However 
funds under the head SCSP,TSP could be utilized to certain extent, remaining funds 
have been transferred to tool Room as both are under the same head(FY 2015-16) 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee does not accept the reply given by t he Ministry.  The 
figure do not support reply.  Every year, the Minis try has sought ever higher 
allocation despite inability to use allocated RE fu nds.  Every year inflated BE 
figures are substantially reduced at RE stage.  Sho wing Ministry’s inability to 
spend even on Planned Schemes like NMCP.  Most impo rtantly the allocation 
for  Planned  Schemes  remain  unspent  till  the  very  last months of Financial  

 
-58- 
 
Year.  There is a crowding of expenditure in last m onths.  The Committee 
concerns have been shared by the Secretary of the M inistry during 
Committee’s meetings.  The Committee may be informe d of Quarter-wise 
Planned expenditure by the three divisions of the Ministry.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation  contai ned in its previous 
264 th  and 271st  Reports regarding Performance Audit by CAG of its select Schemes.   
The Committee also recommends that Ministry may get  the performance its 
remaining scheme for the 12 th  Plan period internally audited. 
(Para 249)  
 
Action Taken:  
 
   Noted for compliance by ARI Division.   The Offi ce of DC(MSME) have 
written a letter dated 09.05.2016 to CAG requesting  them to conduct the 
Performance Audit of Tool Room & Technology Develop ment Centres, under Audit 
Regulations 2007 (Chapter 7) of CAG Act, 1971 The l ist of all the 18 Institutes has 
also been forwarded to CAG. 
     The annual financial audit of the autonomous b ody viz. National Institute for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (Ni-MSME), Hyde rabad for the last three 
years was conducted by the CAG appointed Auditor i. e. Swamy & Seshadri, 
Hyderabad, as per the Rule 50 of Memorandum of Association of Ni-MSME.     
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation regard ing Performance 
Audit of PMEGP and NMCP and other select Schemes as  mentioned in its 264 
th  
& 271 st  Reports.  The Committee requires that finding of a udit of autonomous 
bodies must be reflected in Ministry’s Annual Report too.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-59- 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which fi nal replies of the Ministry 
have not been received 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The  Committee  has  observed  the  background  not   furnished  by  the 
Ministry  that  there  was  under-utilisation  of  Planned  Funds  allocated  under 
SCSP, TSP and NE Region. These funds are earmarked under the stated policy of 
Government of India for the marginalized sections o f the society and remote areas 
of NE but could not be utilized due to lack of prop osals/demand not only 
indicates inefficiency on the part of Ministry but also shows  insensitivity. These 
Sections have traditional skills which need to be r efined, trained and 
commercialized, and the Ministry has utterly failed  to upscale their enormous 
skill pool. As an indicator in the success of MUDRA  Scheme, it is the Shishu 
loans meant largely for such marginalized sections,  are the biggest contributor. 
Yet the Ministry of MSME has not been able to reach  out to these sections. The 
Committee recommends that utilization of SCSP, TSP and NER should be 
monitored regularly at the highest levels in the Mi nistry and that the Financial 
Advisor must periodically report the Ministry of Fi nance in case of under- 
utilisation of these Funds. The Ministry must launc h special campaigns for these 
sections. 
            
    (Para 24) 
Action Taken:   
 
   The allocation of BE, RE and Expenditure in resp ect of SCSP TSP and NE 
Region for Ministry is as under: 
                                 (Rs. in Crore) 
Division/ 
Category  
SCSP TSP NER 
BE RE Exp. BE RE Exp. BE RE Exp. 
ARI 198.22 212.30 197.88 135.44 145.07 136.38 165.1 2 178.20 163.47 
SME 15.52 15.52 10.51 10.60 
 
10.60 13.94 13.93 8.95 7.77 
DC 
(MSME) 
99.87 83.18 81.51 68.23 52.17 50.94 83.27 27.37 26. 56 
Total 313.61 311.00 289.90 214.27 207.84 201.26 262 .32 214.52 197.80 
Exp. % 
w.r.t BE 
  92.44   93.93   75.41 
 
Exp. % 
w.r.t RE 
  93.22   96.83   92.21 
 
 

-60- 
 
The observations of the Committee in Ministry of th e expenditure have been 
noted for future compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may be informed of utilization of SCS P, TSP and NER 
under various Planned Schemes of the Ministry.  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
Regarding Ease of Doing Business for MSMEs, the Com mittee reiterates 
that if Union could bring a MSMED Act to develop an d regulate the MSME sector 
in the country, it may well take legislative initia tive to facilitate ease of doing 
business among MSMEs despite being a State subject,  by amending the MSMED 
Act for making necessary standard provisions. The C ommittee recalls that on an 
earlier occasion, the Ministry had made detailed an d forceful argument to convince 
that it had inalienable locus in the affairs regula ting and development of small and 
cottage industries. The Central Government as the administrator of this Act can 
not absolve itself mid way and leave the onus to respective States. To build 
necessary consensus on the issue the National MSME Board has already held 
discussions but the Committee is constrained to note that  the  Ministry  has  not  
followed  up  these  discussions  with  the  actionable policy. The Committee 
therefore recommends that Ministry must comprehensively discuss the issue in the 
National MSME Board and prepare an actionable policy for the implementation by 
the States, within six months. 
 
(Para 41) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
To provide impetus to the growth of MSME sector it was felt that a National 
Policy needs to be finalized expeditiously and acco rdingly a One Man committee 
with Shri Prabhat Kumar, Former Cabinet Secretary, Govt. of India and also former 
Governor, Jharkhand Shri Parbhat Kumar. (who had al so served as Development 
Commissioner (SSI))  has been constituted. The Comm ittee has already started its 
work and is likely to submit its report by October,  2016 end. 
 
 
 
 

-61- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 What is the mandate of yet another Committee on MS ME.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the contents of Nation al Policy that is being 
drafted by Prabhat Kumar Committee and whether such policy or  its  elements  
will need legislative support.  The Committee belei ves that Ministry must 
assume the ownership of Central Govt. Act and Schem es being implemented by 
it instead of merely requesting the State Governmen ts to implement.  The 
Ministry can assume locus for monitoring the perfor mance only when it takes 
the ownership.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee a p p r e h e n d s   that  such  a  mechanism  though  facilitate 
urgent cash flow and liquidity to the MSME supplier s but will also expose them to 
speculative dynamics of money market. The Committee  wonder after all what will 
be the incentive for financers to acquire Bills and  invoices? They may  tend to 
seek deeper and predatory discounts to the peril of  hapless MSME supplier. The 
Committee may be informed of   success of this sche me in terms of participation, 
volumes and value of trade receivables traded in th e Exchange. The  Committee  
also  recommends  the  Ministry  to  evolve  a  mec hanism  to monitor so that 
discounting rates do not become too deep and perilously predatory and inform the 
Committee of such mechanism.   
(Para 47) 
Action Taken:   
 
In order to solve the problem of delayed payment to  MSMEs, RBI had  come 
out with the guidelines for setting up and operatin g the Trade Receivable e-
Discounting System  (TReDS )  in December, 2014 (av ailable on RBIs website 
https://rbi.in/scripts/BS  _PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=32664).   As per the 
guidelines, TreDS shall have an online surveillance  capability which monitors 
positions, prices and volumes in real time so as to  check system manipulation. 
 
In-principle” approvals have been given to three en tities viz. NSE Strategic 
Investment Corporation Limited (NSICL) and Small In dustries Development Bank 
of India (SIDBI), Mumbai: Axis Bank Limited, Mumbai  and Mynd Solutions Pvt. 
Ltd., Gurgaon, Haryana for setting up and operating  TreDS, with the approval of 
Board for regulation and Supervision of Payment and  Settlement Systems ( BPSS). 
These entities are in the process of setting up the  TreDS.  
   
 

-62- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed if the three entities  have actually 
started functioning.  And also, about the participa tion, volume and value of 
receivable trades.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 
Though Committee recognized the progress made in MU DRA Yojna, it 
found that lending Banks were not coming forward to  avail re-finance from 
MUDRA Bank.  Of the first tranche of Rs 5000 crores  to MUDRA, till the first 
week of February, 2016 only Rs 2184 crores were san ctioned for refinancing of 
which  only  Rs  1364  crores  were  disbursed.   T he  Committee   found  that 
refinancing  of MFIs  and  NBFCs  have  been  rathe r  sluggish  as  compared  to 
Scheduled Banks. The Committee is of the opinion th at MFIs have scarce funds and  
need  cheap  and  prompt  refinance  and  should  b e  natural  partners  in MUDRA 
Yojna instead of cash-rich Banks whose RIDF forms t he corpus for the MUDRA  
Yojna.  Also,  the  Committee  would  like  to  kno w  the  reasons  for sluggish 
refinancing under MUDRA Yojna. The Committee appreh ends that perhaps Banks 
find the interest cap prescribed under re-financing  conditions, too restrictive. The 
Committee would like to know the assessment of Mini stry in this regard. 
 
(Para 55)  
 
Action Taken:   
 
Availment of refinance by Banks, RRBs and MFIs had picked up in last part 
of FY 2016 viz. during February/March 2016.  As on March 31, 2016, MUDRA had 
sanctioned refinance assistance amounting to Rs. 37 83.20 crore, out of which 
Rs.3337.20 crore has been disbursed to 16 PSU Banks , 3 RRBs and 21 Micro 
Finance Institutions.  Although RBI has allowed exe mption from Credit 
Concentration norms in respect of refinance assista nce to Scheduled Commercial 
Banks, the same is not exempted in respect of other  partner institutions.  Hence, 
MUDRA’s refinance to MFIs/NBFCs are subject to sing le party exposure norm of 
15% of Owned Fund, which works out to Rs.112.50 cro re.  Similarly, MUDRA is 
also subject to group exposure norm of 25% of Owned  Fund, which works out to 
Rs. 187.50 crore.  Moreover, Rs.250 crore sanctione d to 3 NBFCs could not be 
disbursed, as  MUDRA’s  assistance  to  NBFCs  is  subject to an interest cap of 6%  

-63- 
 
 
over MUDRA’s refinance rate and hence MUDRA’s refin ance was not availed of 
by NBFCs.  Like-wise, MUDRA’s refinance assistance to PSU/Private Sector 
Banks is available only in respect of PMMY loans ex tended at their Base Rates, as 
prescribed by RBI.   Similarly, in respect of RRBs and Co-operative Banks, RBI had 
stipulated that interest rate charged by RRBs/Co-op erative Banks shall be not more 
than 3.5 per cent above MUDRA’s lending rate to the m. Also MUDRA refinance is 
not exempted for the purpose of computation of CRR and SLR and same will 
enhance the cost of funds for Banks. These conditio ns have restricted banks from 
availing of more refinance. The concentration norms  (single party exposure norms) 
and not meeting MUDRA norms for sanction of loan by  many MFIs affected off 
take of assistance to MFIs in FY 2016. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of rationale of putt ing such restrictive 
limits like credit concentration and group exposure  for MFIs/NBFCs only.  The 
reply corroborates Committee’s apprehension that ba nks and partner 
institutions find the interest cap restrictive unde r PMMY.  What was the 
rationale of sudden surge in refinance in last two months?   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The  Committee  also  finds  that  while  the  MFIs   have  the  advantage  of 
outreach and minimal paperwork, the actual interest  rate permissible to MFIs 
under MUDRA Yojna was around 19%, which is too high . Whereas the interest rate 
permissible for Scheduled Banks  under Mudra Yojna is at around 8-9% which was 
lower than the prevailing interest rate charged by Banks. The Committee therefore 
recommends that interest rates for MFIs should be capped at a reasonable rate. 
(Para 56) 
Action Taken:  
 
 As per RBI guidelines on Priority Sector Lending an d Classification dated 
April 23, 2015 issued to Banks, in order to classif y an advance to MFIs as Priority 
Sector Lending, Banks have to ensure that MFIs comp ly with the caps on margin as 
also other ‘pricing guidelines’.  Accordingly, the margin should not exceed 10 
percent for MFIs, with loan portfolio exceeding Rs. 100 crore and 12 per cent for 
others, over and above their average cost of funds.    Further, interest rate on 
individual loans will not exceed the average of bas e rate of five largest commercial 
banks, by assets, multiplied by 2.75 per annum or c ost of funds plus margin cap, 
whichever is less.    The cost  of  lending  by MFIs  is  higher  mainly because of the  

-64- 
 
mode of delivery of credit which includes door step  service, higher interest rates for 
borrowers are charged by MFIs to cover high operati onal costs.  Thus, interest rate 
charged by banks and MFIs under PMMY are as per the banking practice and within 
the prescribed norm of RBI. It is different to say whether the interest rates for MFIs 
can be capped without taking with reasons the economies of the MFI loan market, as 
recommended by the committee. However, the subject is under the preview of the 
DFS and the RBI.     
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed about the outcome of  review by 
DFS/RBI on high interest rate charged by MFIs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
  
As such the Committee recommends the Ministry to ex plore the possibility to 
finance the Bank loan component of a PMEGP  project  under MUDRA Yojna that 
will reduce the aggregate interest incident, substantially.  
(Para 57) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 An Income generating activity under manufacturing,  services or trading and 
whose loan requirement is less than Rs. 10 lakh, ha s been classified as MUDRA 
loans. Accordingly, the activities taken up under P MEGP, being income generating 
activities, are eligible to be financed under MUDRA . We have already written to all 
Chief Secretaries of the States, vide letter no. 10 79/ MUDRA dated January 14, 
2016 to consider all enterprises creation programme s under state/ central Govt to be 
financed under MUDRA. This will apply to PMEGP also. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry’s own reply states that the average c ost of a PMEGP 
project is Rs. 8 to 10 lakh which is well within MU DRA limit.  The Ministry 
must specify in their guidelines that loan pertain to the PMEGP project is 
covered under MUDRA, if within the limits.  
 
 

-65- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The  Committee  expresses  its  reservation  over  the  fact  that  even  after 
passage of one year, the NITI Ayog had nothing to s how as performance. After a 
year only partial   guidelines   have   been framed .   There   is  no  specialized 
manpower to implement this very important Scheme. T he Committee reiterates its  
view  that  Budget  announcements  should  be  made   only  after  thorough 
planning of details and finalizing the milestones f or implementation. A Budget 
announcement is an assurance to the Parliament and has to be honored within the 
Financial Year. The Committee may be informed that of the Rs 1000 crores 
announced in the Budget speech, how much was actual ly spent during 2015-16 
and how? 
(Para 62) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
The Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2 015-16 announced the 
Government’sntention to establish the Atal Innovati on Mission (AIM) and Self 
Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) a mechanis m to be known as SETU in 
NITI with an initial sum of Rs. 150 crore and Rs. 1 000 crore respectively. The 
objective of these schemes is promoting Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the 
country. 
Soon after Budget announcement, NITI Aayog constitu ted an Expert 
Committee on Innovation and Entrepreneurship under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
Tarun Khanna, Director, South Asia Institute, Harva rd University, USA to work out 
detailed contours of AIM and SETU. The Committee he ld several meetings with 
Government Departments, academicians, venture capit alists, angel investors and 
other stakeholders. The Committee submitted its fin al report in October 2015 
spelling out specific interventions required to pro mote innovation and start-up 
culture in the country. Subsequently, AIM and SETU were combined into a single 
scheme “AIM Including SETU” as recommended by the E xpenditure Finance 
Committee on August 28, 2016 and approved by the Ca binet on February 24, 2016.  
It may be submitted that no allocation was made for  AIM and SETU at BE stage in 
2015-16. However, an amount of Rs. 2 crore was allo cated at RE stage in 2015-16 
which could not be  tilized in the absence of detailed guidelines and c onsultations 
with a wide spectrum of stakeholders. A Budget allo cation of Rs. 150 crore has 
been made in 2016-17 for Atal Innovation Mission. 
The first meeting of the Mission High Level Committ ee (MHLC) of AIM was held 
on January 8, 2016 wherein  the  following  compone nts were identified for funding  

-66- 
 
under Atal Innovation Mission: 
 (i)  Support for setting up Atal Incubation Centre s (AICs), 
(ii) Support for Scaling up of Established Incubati on Centres, 
(iii) Launch of Atal Grand Challenge (AGCs) Award p rojects, 
(iv) Support for Establishment of Atal Tinkering La bs (ATLs), 
(v) Pre-incubation Training programmes to Innovatio n/Start-ups, and 
(vi) Training programmes for Incubation Managers / Tinkering Lab heads 
 
The MHLC of the AIM in its second meeting held on A pril 19, 2016 
approved the guidelines for setting up Atal Incubat ion Centres (AIC), scaling up 
Established Incubation Centres, and establishment o f Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs). 
At present NITI Aayog is inviting the applications for these programmes. The last 
date for applications in respect for incubation cen tres is June 30, 2016 and ATLs is 
July 17,2016. During the current year, it is propos ed to set up 100 new Atal 
Incubation Centres, provide  scale  up support to 1 0 established Incubation Centres,  
and establish 100 Atal Tinkering Labs in schools. T he recruitment of Mission 
Director and 5 Managers for the Mission is underway . 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
  
 
The reply only re-affirms Committee’s view that Bud get announcements 
should be made after through Planning of details an d finalizing milestones for 
implementation.  The Committee expresses reservatio n that even after Budget 
announcement, no allocation was made for SETU in BE  2015-16 and only Rs. 2 
crores were given in RE 2015-16 out of Budget announcement of Rs. 1000 crores 
Scheme.  The Committee has been informed that Rs. 1 50 crores have been 
allocated for the new combined SETU-AIM Scheme for BE 2016-17.  The 
Mission High Level Committee has identified six com ponents under the Scheme.  
The Committee may be informed how the allocation is  to be used for these 
components.  The Committee may also be informed mon ey spent on each of six 
components and actual achievement against the targe t of setting 100 AICs, state 
up support to 10 established Incubation Centres and  setting 100 Atal Tinkering 
Labs.  How are the targeted beneficiaries selected?  
  
 
 
 
 
 

-67- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may also be informed that how does th is Scheme define  
“Incubation” and how different is it from routine sk ill training. What will incubation 
entail and what will be the tenure of incubation un der this scheme. Whether the 
scheme has set any limit as per incubate cost? The Committee apprehends that the 
two terms are being used interchangeably and casual ly. The Committee may also be 
informed about the difference between Atal Innovation Scheme and the TBIs under 
ASPIRE of the Ministry, since the objective of two Schemes is largely the same.  
The Committee requires the Ministry to obtain the replies from NITI Ayog and 
furnish the same to the Committee. The Committee may also be informed of annual 
target of this Scheme in terms of achievements of objectives set out in the scheme. 
(Para 63) 
Action Taken:  
 
  A typical incubation center provides pre-incubati on facilities, common 
infrastructure and services such as technology deve lopment assistance, networking 
and mentoring, funding access, training and development, business support services  
(entrepreneurship development, marketing, finance a nd accounting, research, legal, 
regulatory) amongst others to start-up businesses. Thus an Incubation Centre 
provides all the required support and mentorship to  start-ups, rather than just 
providing skill training. 
 
During the year 2016-17, it is proposed to set up 1 00 new Atal Incubation 
Centres, provide scale up support to 10 established  Incubation Centres, and establish 
100 Atal Tinkering Labs in schools. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 No response is provided regarding difference betwe en Atal Innovation 
Scheme and TBI under ASPIRE.  The Ministry has not provided inputs from 
NITI Aayog in this respect.  The Ministry must info rm about tenure of 
incubation and cost of incubation per incubator.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may  be informed  of  screening  proc edure  and  funding 
process under Atal Innovation Mission and what is t he revenue model of the 
AIM   independent   of   Budgetary   support.   The    Ministry   may   obtain   the 
information from NITI Ayog and provide. 
(Para 64) 

-68- 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
The Atal Incubation Centres (AIC) can be set up in academic or non-academic 
institutions with a 10,000 square feet built up are a for AIC. AIM will provide Rs. 10 
crore for setting up an AIC over a period of 5 year s. The AICs can be set up by 
public funded or private funded institutions also. The applications for setting up 
AICs would be evaluated based on a Selection Matrix  by an Expert Committee duly 
constituted for this purpose. 
 
Similarly, AIM will provide a scale up support of R s. 10 crore to established 
Incubation Centres (public or private) over a perio d of two years for augmenting 
their capacities to world class. Such Incubation Ce ntres should have been in 
operation for the last three years. The proposals f or scaling up support would be 
evaluated based on merit by an Expert Committee dul y constituted for this purpose. 
The performance review of the selected Established Incubation Centers would be 
undertaken by a professional third party agency. 
 
To foster creativity and scientific temper in stude nts, AIM will provide one 
time establishment grant-in-aid of Rs. 10 lakh for establishing Atal Tinkering 
Laboratories (ATL) in schools (grade VI – XII) acro ss India. Further, an amount of 
Rs. 10 lakh would also be provided for each ATL ove r a period of 5 years for 
operational expenses of ATLs. Young children will g et a chance to work with tools 
and equipment to understand the concepts of STEM (S cience, Technology, 
Engineering and Math). Competitions at regional and  national scale will also be 
utilize to showcase the innovations developed by th e children. The proposal for 
setting up ATLs would be screened through a competitive process. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Committee may be informed that how Rs. 10 cror es is to be spent by 
an AIC and what are the indices included in the sel ection matrix to select 
eligibility for AIC?  What activities are permitted  with Rs. 10 crores assistance?  
On what parameters the success of AIC and ATL will be measured and what is 
the monitoring mechanism.  The Committee may be inf ormed that how the 
incubation centre has been defined in the document for the proposes of this 
Scheme.  The Ministry may obtain inputs from NITI Aayog.  
 
 
 

 
-69- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee finds it ironical that the Ministry w hich is not able to 
spend its SCSP and TSP funds has been given the res ponsibility of SC/ST Hub, 
under the supervision of DC-MSME which has grossly under  tilized its allocations 
for years. The Ministry did not give the details  o f  programme it  proposes to attain  
the objectives of this Hub i.e. to make available t he benefits of Government’s 
procurement policy to SC/ST entrepreneurs.  Despite  such paradoxes, the 
Committee cautions the Ministry to meet this onerous responsibility, the Ministry 
must devise a strategy to reach out to the identified groups instead of waiting for 
proposals. As indicated in the success of MUDRA Yojna where Shishu loans are the 
largest segment, these groups have traditional and inherent entrepreneurial skills that 
need to be aligned with the market requirements. The Committee doubt whether the 
requisite funds have been allocated in the  Budget  for  such  Hub.  The Mini stry  
must  set  milestones  to monitor the implementation of this Scheme and 
benchmarks of performance. The Ministry may inform the Committee 
accordingly. The Committee proposes to monitor the progress of this Scheme. 
(Para 69) 
 
Action Taken:    
 
Para 57 of the Budget Speech for FY 2016 has propos ed to constitute a  
National Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Hub in  the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises in partnership with industri es association. Ministry of 
MSME, to implement the above decision, undertook co nsultation with all the 
stakeholders. Letters were written to the State Gov ernments seeing their suggestions 
on the SC/ST Hub. States were also requested to pro vide details of existing schemes 
for benefit of SC/ST entrepreneurs in their states.  
 
A meeting was held by Secretary (MSME) on 13 May, 2 016 with various 
stakeholders including DICCI, various industry asso ciations including MSMEs, 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Tribal Affairs, NITI Aayog and 
representatives of States. Based on these consultat ions, a background paper was 
prepared on constituting SC/ST Hub. Intensive consultations were held with Ministry 
of Social Justice & Empowerment, Tribal Affairs, NI TI Aayog and Cabinet 
Secretariat. The Ministry of MSME is in the process  of finalizing funding, structure 
and shape of SC/ST Hub in consultation with NITI Aayog.  
 
 
 

 
-70- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 No reply has been given to Committee’s apprehensio n if requisite funds 
have been allocated for SC/ST Hubs.  And if, Minist ry has set mile stones and 
benchmarks to monitor the performance of the Scheme , the Committee may be 
informed about the expenditure and performance of S C& ST sub Plans.  The 
Committee may also be informed of the outcome of co nsultation with Ministries, 
States and Industry Associations in operationalising the Hub.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee notes steep rise in allocation for NM CP despite repeated 
failures to utilize annual grants. The Committee is  informed that steep increase is 
due to upscaling of schemes. The Committee may be i nformed what does such 
upscaling entail. Whether there is any tangible cha nge in the Scheme structure or 
processes or is it merely notional upscaling.  
(Para 88) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The allocation of NMCP was upscaled for upscaling o f schemes like lean 
manufacturing, design clinic scheme keeping in view  the demand. In the up-scaled 
schemes, the financial assistance is up-scaled & th e procedural simplifications are 
made to attract the beneficiaries & achieve the sig nificant deliverables under the 
Schemes.  The impact of upscaling is likely schemes  / programme to be evident in 
the coming years since they are promotion oriented.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee has adversely commented on serious u nder utilization of 
allocated funds under various components of NMCP, d uring the 12 
th  Plan 
period.  The Committee may be informed of upscaling .  How does the Govt. 
propose to upscale NMCP when the Committee found th at the achievement 
under individual component has been dismal?  
 
 
 

-71- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the trainin g programmes have 
not been standardised as per the Government’s own N ational Skill Qualification 
Framework. In absence of which obviously, the train ees face severe constraints in 
getting wage employment or finance for self employm ent. The Ministry must 
inform  the  Committee  what  it will  take  to  ma ke  its courses  complient  with 
NSQF  and  by  when  this  project  will  be  over.   The Ministry must set strict  
deadline for this and must adhere to that deadline.  The Ministry must realize 
that aspirations of young trainees are at the stake  and Ministry being part of the 
Government cannot let them down for its own shortcomings. 
(Para 101) 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
To make the training courses of ATI Scheme NSQF com pliant, a 
Standardization Committee has been constituted unde r the Chairmanship of Director 
General, Ni-MSME, Hyderabad. 
 
A Core Committee under the Chairmanship of AS & DC (MSME), Ministry 
of MSME has been constituted to guide, implementati on of NSQF compliance of 
Skill Development Courses.  
   
In the first phase, it has been decided to make all  skill development 
programmes of six months and above duration which a re not affiliated any statutory 
authority such as All India Council of Technical Ed ucation (AICTE), National 
Council of Vocational Training (NCVT) and State Cou ncil of Vocational Training 
(SCVT) as National Skill Qualification Framework(NS QF) compliant. By now, 7 
courses have been submitted to NSDA for NSQF- compl iance and the immediate 
target is to achieve the same for 9 more courses by March, 2017. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Ministry has set up Committees but have not in formed the 
Parliamentary Committee about the mandate of these bodies and functional 
linkage between the two Committees.  The Committee may also be informed 
about the courses submitted to NSDA and what is the  status and how long will it 
take to make all the ATI courses NSQF compliant.  W hether making ATI 
courses NSQF complaints entail expenditure.  If yes , whether ATIs have 
resources to meet such expenditure.   

-72- 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
The Committee notes that the Ministry tried to obfu scate the issue of 
Performance Audit with routine annual financial aud it by CAG empanelled 
Chartered Accountants. The Committee is not sure if  such CAs are empanelled by 
the CAG. The Committee may be apprised of the detai ls of such auditiors and 
the Rule under which such auditors are required to be empanelled by the CAG. 
Nonetheless, having taken into account the performa nce of these training 
programmes, the Committee reiterates its recommenda tion to have comprehensive 
Performance Audit for the 12th  Five Year Plan period  as per Chapter 7 of the Audit 
Regulations of the CAG of these Training Institutions. 
(Para 106) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The annual financial audit of the autonomous body v iz. National Institute for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (Ni-MSME), Hyde rabad for the last three 
years was conducted by the CAG appointed Auditor i. e. Swamy & Seshadri, 
Hyderabad, as per the Rule 50 of Memorandum of Association of Ni-MSME.  
    
Office of DC(MSME) have written a letter dated 09.0 5.2016 to CAG 
requesting them to conduct the Performance Audit of  Tool Room & Technology 
Development Centres, under Audit Regulations 2007 ( Chapter 7) of CAG Act, 1971 
The list of all the 18 Institutes has also been forwarded to CAG. 
Performance audit is not done by CAs, it is done by  CAG themselves, as per 
Audit Regulation 2007 (chapter-7) CAG Act, 1971. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that p erformance Audit of 
ATIs and Tool Rooms/ Tech. Centres should be done b y CAG.  The Ministry 
must request CAG to conduct such Audit more, financ ial Audit does not give 
true and fair picture of performance of a non-commercial institution.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee  takes note of target of training 104 000 incubates in 80 
LBIs. The Committee may be informed of the time fra me to achieve this target  

-73- 
 
and the annual  targets.  Whether  the annual  trai ning  target  was achieved  in 
2015-16. What was the target for setting up of LBIs  and TBIs during 2015-16?  
 
The Committee referred to the Outcome Budget 2016-1 7 and found there 
was not  quantifiable  target   set  for   the scheme  for 2015-16.  Instead the 
Outcome Budget states that the Scheme was still being formu lated. The 
Committee finds such ambivalence in setting tangible objectives eve n after two 
years of Budget announcement, patently unacceptable. The Committee finds utter 
dis-regard for set tangible objectives on the part of Ministry. 
(Para 137) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 ASPIRE (A Scheme for Promoting Innovation, Rural I ndustry and 
Entrepreneurship) was launched on 16.3.2015 to acce lerate entrepreneurship and to 
promote start-ups for innovation and entrepreneursh ip in agro-industry. Under 
ASPIRE, 80 Livelihood Business Incubation (LBI) centres are to be set up in which a 
total of 104000 incubates will be trained and 30 (1 0 new & 20 existing) Technology 
Business Incubation (TBI) centres will be supported  and setup. This quantifiable 
target has been reflected in the Outcome Budget of the Ministry for the year 2016-17. 
A Fund of Funds has been created under SIDBI for st art-ups and Rs. 60 crore 
released for operationalizing the fund. 
 
Achievements 
/head2right LBIs and TBIs are set up across 12 States of the country including NER. 
/head2right 25 LBIs and 4 TBIs have been approved and funds of Rs. 14.59 and Rs. 0.60 
crore respectively have been released/sanctioned.  
/head2right Training has been imparted to 1071 incubates till d ate against the target of 
training of 104000 incubates. 
/head2right 4 LBIs at Deoria, Kashipur, Naini (Allahabad) and C hennai and 9 LBIs across 9 
districts of Manipur have been operationalized.  
/head2right A target for setting up of 58 LBIs and 28 TBIs have  been envisaged for the year 
2016-17. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 Against the target of 58 LBIs and 28 TBIs during 2 016-17, 25 LBIs and 4 
TBIs have been approved so far of which 4 LBIs have  been operationalised.  
Against a target of training 10400 incubates only 1 071 have been trained so far.  
The Committee may be informed of updated performanc e.  Of Rs. 60 crore 
Fund of Funds set up by SIDBI, whether any of the A SPIRE trainee has availed 
any finance from such funds.  Provide details. 

-74- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes that a time frame for commis sioning those 22 
approved LBIs be fixed and also the Committee would  like to know whether BE 
2016-17, would be adequate to finance plant and mac hinery of these 22 incubators. 
The Committee may be informed of the target of sett ing up new LBIs, in 
addition to previously approved,  in 2016-17. 
(Para 144) 
 
 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 The 22 approved LBIs are likely to be commissioned /operationalized during 
the current FY i.e. 2016-17 and fund of Rs.100 cror e allocated in BE 2016-17 under 
the ASPIRE scheme would be adequate to finance plan t and machinery to these 
incubators.  Further, it is to inform that a target  for setting up of 58 LBIs has been 
envisaged for the year 2016-17. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of updated status of  achievement 
regarding operationalising the 22 approved LBIs and  about the target of setting 
up another 58 LBIs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee acknowledges that the LBIs were suppo sed to be set up in 
PPP mode. However, most of the partners are resourc e rich State agencies 
supported by Budgetary allocations.  Not many  priv ate  players  have  come 
forward to join this Scheme. The Committee feels th at in absence of clarity 
regarding ownership of Incubator and revenue model,  incubation business is not 
found to be financially viable enterprise.  There h as to be clarity regarding the 
obligations of Private Partner and if the Private P artner is expected to generate 
matching resources. The Committee may be informed i f the money delegated to 
LBI under PPP mode is in form of grant or loan and who owns the resources of 
LBI? 
 
(Para 145) 
 
 

-75- 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
5 proposals under PPP have been approved.  Ownershi p of Incubator lies with 
Applicant Organization subject to checks prescribed .  The proposals are examined 
with respect to financial viability.  The money giv en is in the form of one time grant 
for acquiring plant and machineries. Detailed guide lines are part of the MOU to be 
entered into by both partners. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the details of th ese 5 proposals under 
PPP mode with their location and trades being offer ed.  What is the proforma  
MoU that is signed with the Private Partner.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be informed about the utilization  of this Fund of 
Funds by the SIDBI and how many incubates have avai led this facility.  
 
(Para 
147) 
Action Taken:   
 
Since early 90s, SIDBI is making contribution to Ve nture Capital Funds under 
its Fund of Funds operations. Upto March 31, 2016, SIDBI had committed Rs. 
2311.29 Crore to 89 Funds. Venture Capital Funds su pported by SIDBI had invested  
Rs. 9217 Crore in 675 incubates (enterprises), out of which an amount of  Rs. 4700 
Crore had been invested in 579 incubates( MSMEs). 
Detailed guidelines for operating the Fund of Funds  for Startups are under 
finalization and approval from Department of Financ ial Services (DFS), 
Government of India is awaited. The Fund of Funds w ould be made operational 
upon receipt of necessary guidelines from DFS. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 Specific query was raised regarding allocation mad e to SIDBI Fund of 
Funds and number of ASPIRE incubates benefitted.  N o specific information 
has been provided.  Instead, guidelines for operati ng Fund of Funds are still 
under preparation after allocation has been made to  SIDBI.  Updated status 
may kindly be provided.  
 
 
 

-76- 
Recommendation/Observation  
The ASPIRE scheme was launched to mentor the entrep reneurs to set up 
their   own   business   and   become   employment   provider.   However,   having 
observed the performance of Deoria LBI where out of  243 passed out candidates 
only 31 have set up their own units and another 19 have taken up wage employment. 
More than half remain unemployed. There is no information regarding the 
survivability of enterprises which were supposed to  be mentored. 
(Para 158) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
   The training completed at Deoria LBI is very rec ent.  As such full impact of 
training on employment/self-employment is not known  immediately.  It is felt that 
more enterprises may be set up in future out of rem aining incubates. As far as 
survivability of enterprises is concerned, they are  at nascent stage and a proper 
review could happen only after some reasonable time. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be informed of updated informati on regarding 
employment/self employment of trainees and what han dholding is being done 
during the incubation period of these new enterprises.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee recommends that Ministry must link AS PIRE with 
MUDRA Yojna and Start up India. The Committee also   recommends that Ministry 
must survey the skill market and include trades wit h larger demand, and attract 
aspirational youth that strives for higher skilled job market. For this the Ministry 
may align ASPIRE with the National Skill Developmen t Mission. It is essential that 
Ministry should avoid s t e r e o t y p i n g  MSMEs as low cos t low technology 
sector.  
(Para 160) 
Action Taken :  
 
 Under the ASPIRE scheme, NSQF standards are ensure d.  The suggestion of 
DRPSCI is noted by ARI Division in the Ministry of MSME. 
 
 
 

 
-77- 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee may be informed about the action tak en on linking 
ASPIRE with MUDRA and Start Up India.  How many ASP IRE trainees have 
availed loans under these Schemes to set up their enterprises.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that despite BE being reduced b y half in RE, the 
utilization till January 2016 was only Rs 65 crores  which also included a transfer of 
Rs 60 crores  to  SIDBI  for  setting  up  Fund  of   Funds  to  provide  quasi equity in  
prospective projects. Thereby in effect, only Rs 5 crores were spent on setting up the 
incubators. Instead of ambitious District-wise Netw ork of Incubators and 
Accelerators as announced in the Budget speech, the  Ministry has moderated 
the target to setting up 80 LBIs and 30 TBIs by Mar ch 2017.  However till 
December 2015 only 3 LBIs and 2 TBIs were approved. 
 
(Para 161) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
The scheme was launched towards the end of March 20 15.  Thereafter 
detailing the guidelines took some time.  First set  of LBIs could be approved in 
October 2015 only.  Hence only 22 LBIs and 3 TBIs c ould be approved till March 
2016. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of updated informati on regarding 
achievements and utilization of funds allocated for ASPIRE.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
It is ironical the Ministry has set approval of 40 LBIs and 15 TBIs by 
March, 2016  as the target.   The  Committee  wonde rs  if only  approval  of  a 
project,  could  ever  be  a  target  for  a  Plann ed  Scheme.  The Committee 
apprehends that with this rate, Ministry is unlikel y to set up 80 LBIs and 30 
TBIs by the March 2017 as envisaged. The Committee also noted that by the end of  

 
 
-78- 
 
March 2016 only 22 LBIs were approved as against th e  target of 
approving 40 
LBIs and 15 TBIs for which Rs 6 crores have been re leased out of BE of Rs. 95 
crores. The Committee may be informed by when remai ning Incubators are likely 
to be commissioned. 
 
(Para 163) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 As on 30 
th  June 2016, 14 LBIs have been commissioned and the necessary 
training has commenced out of the 22 approved LBIs.  By September 2016, the 
Ministry expects to approve 50 odd LBIS and the com missioning would happen for 
remaining 9 LBIs approved as of yet other than 14.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of updated status of  commissioned LBIs 
and number of trainees alongwith location.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may also be informed as to how was th e Budget allocation 
83  tilized in absence of any actual commissioning of S FURTI cluster. 
(Para 170) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
The SFURTI budget was utilized only for the 1 st  Release for clusters approved 
during the period. The workflow of approval of fund s as per Guidelines suggests 
that, 40% of the Hard Intervention, 50% of the TA C ost and 50% of IA/CDE Cost to 
be released after final approval of the cluster pro posal. The second release would 
only happen on submission of Utilization Certificat es of the 1 st  Release and actual 
installation of machineries in the CFC concerned. T he actual commissioning happens 
even months after the fund release as the process i nvolves, infrastructure creation, 
machinery installation and other allied activities such as capacity building and 
development of soft skills of artisans concerned. H owever, to avoid any delay in 
implementation, timelines have been drawn for each project of SFURTI and the same 
is monitored in letter and spirit. 
 

 
-79- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the status of clu sters where 1 st  release 
has been made whether Utilization Certificates for 2 nd  release have been 
received and the amount released for 2nd  installment.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Regarding the actual achievement of Plan targets, t he Committee was 
informed  that  so  far  KVIC  got  final  approval   of  12  SFURTI  clusters  and 
another 12 proposals got in-principle approval by S teering Committee.  In view of 
meager expenditure, the Committee notes   that no c luster was actually 
commissioned during the year 2015-16. Despite serio us under utilization and 
uneven utilization of allocation, the Ministry soug ht Rs 100 crores for 2016-17 
and was allocated Rs 75 crores which was an enhance ment over 2015-16. The 
Committee may be explained the basis of seeking hig her BE despite dismal 
performance in the previous year. The Ministry coul d release on Rs 30 crores 
out of BE of Rs 50 crores till the first week of Ma rch 2016.  The Committee also 
asks how does the Ministry propose to spend the mon ey during financial year 
2016-17?  
(Para 171) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
As explained above under answer to Q.67, commission ing could not have 
happened in the FY 2015-16 as funds have been relea sed towards the second half of 
the last year. However, detailed implementation sch edule of each cluster is drawn 
and the progress is monitored regularly. As far as the BE of Rs.75 crore is concerned, 
Ministry plans to complete the finalization of all 71 clusters in the current year. As 
on 30 th  June 2016, 55 clusters have been assigned in-princ iple-approval, out of which 
38 proposals have been given final approval and fun ds have been released 
accordingly. The remaining 16 DSRs and all 33 DPRs are expected to be approved in 
this current year. Commissioning targets of all 38 clusters have been assigned. 
 
 
 

-80- 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 There has been a pattern in Ministry setting ambit ious target every year 
to seek allocation, which remains under-utilized an d target is seriously under 
achieved.   The Committee  may be informed of statu s of 12 approved and 12 in 
principle approved clusters of 2015-16 and those ap proved this year i.e., 2016-
17.  Also provide location wise status of 38 cluste rs to be commissioned this 
Financial Year.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Ministry expects that all 71 SFURTI clusters of  the 1 st  phase will be 
completed shortly. The Committee requires the Minis try to report to it the up- 
dated status of commissioned SFURTI clusters in res pect of interventions made and 
the cost of making such intervention and the number  of artisans benefitted, in its 
Action Taken Note on this Report.   
(Para 176) 
Action Taken:   
 
As on 30.06.2016, 38 clusters have been finally app roved by the SSC. The 
details are enclosed under Annexure-A.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
 Give the updated status regarding commissioning of  these clusters. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
Having observed the gap between sanctioned amount a nd actual disbursal of 
MM, the Committee does not completely agree with th e KVIC’s blame on Banks. 
The bottleneck lies with KVIC as well and needs to be resolved. The Committee 
finds the steps taken by the KVIC to be grossly ina dequate. KVIC can only 
monitor the progress through on line system, it has  to resolve the procedural 
bottlenecks that have been created by the structure  and procedure of the Scheme 
itself. Therefore, KVIC must address the structure of the Scheme, accordingly.   
 
(Para 
193) 
 

-81- 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
 The Ministry has taken with account the suggestion s/guidance of the Hon’ble 
Committee and these have been incorporated into the  new guidelines. It has been 
decided to introduce online process flow of applica tion and disbursement of Margin 
Money directly to financing  bank  branches through Corporation Bank by adopting  
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). KVIC has developed a n elaborate PMEGP MIS on-
line Portal. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be informed of quarter-wise disb ursal of Margin 
Money through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) and num ber of project 
disbursed.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
It is observed that in terms of employment generati on in years 2013-14 
and   2014-15,   every   State   significantly   un derperformed,   while   allocations 
remained under utilized till the last months of the  respective FY. The Committee 
asked the Ministry to elaborate the trend of under- achievement of employment 
targets despite availability of Funds. 
(Para 197) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
During the year 2013-14 and 2014-15, the Ministry o f MSME, while 
allocating target has directed that minimum 100 Pro jects with average MM of 
Rs.1.00 lakhs in each District should be created. T his occupies larger share of MM 
target and balance MM was distributed @ Rs.1.89 lak hs per project.   Because of 
this, the number of projects were increased tremend ously as well as during 2015-16, 
the Ministry of MSME, while allocating target has directed that minimum 75 projects 
with average MM of Rs.2.00 lakhs in each District s hould be created. On the basis of 
Projects, the estimated employment generation was calculated on the 8 persons of per 
project and fixed.  Because of fixation of higher t arget, the achievement could not be 
reached to the target. 
            Further, many field offices have not ac hieved employment target during the 
said period.  Since, many field offices sanctioned projects larger in size, the scope for 
creating employment opportunities was less.  

-82- 
 
   Lesser capital expenditure, higher working capit al was also one of the factor 
to reduce employment generation as Service sectors required huge working capital.  
The creating of employment opportunities will chang e from state to state and nature 
of industries started. 
  Projects are indicative. However the focus will b e made by KVIC for 
generating more employment. The base of trend of pa st performance it is observed 
that the average Margin Money of Rs. 2.13 lakh and Rs.2.33 lakh have been 
distributed per project during the year 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 While PMEGP is meant for manufacturing projects of  Rs. 25 lakh with 
Margin Money subsidy of 15-25% for General category  in urban and rural 
areas respectively.  If, Ministry is providing a Ma rgin Money subsidy at an 
average rate of Rs. 2 lakh/project.  It means, PMEG P is funding projects with 
an average cost of Rs. 8-10 lakh.   The Committee feels  that  a second trenche of  
assistance under PMEGP should be given to such unit s for their expansion till 
they attain the maximum units of Rs. 25 lakh.  The Committee may be informed 
about median cost of projects under PMEGP and media n Margin Money 
assistance given to PMEGP projects.  The Committee may also be informed of 
Ministry’s view on the recommendation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee  finds  the  situation  grossly  unac ceptable  where  money 
remains  tilizatio for larger part of FY and employment targ ets are underachieved 
by most of States. The Committee also finds that ta rgets under PMEGP are set in 
terms of Margin Money  tilization. Rather their should be a matrix  of  margin  
money  and  employment  on  the  basis  of  which  State-wise targets should be 
fixed. 
(Para 201) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 PMEGP targets are fixed in such a way that a minim um of 75 projects have 
been allocated to each district in the State with a verage Margin Money(MM) per 
project being taken as Rs.2.00 lakhs. Total average  project cost comes to Rs.8-10 
lakhs. After allocating District-wise targets of @ 75 projects per district with average 
MM of Rs. 2.00 lakh, the remaining MM subsidy has b een allocated on the basis of 
stipulated  parameters of  PMEGP  Scheme i.e. Rural  population, Backwardness  of  

-83- 
 
 
State, last year performance and Urban unemployment rate. Average employment per 
project is taken as 8 per project. However, due to the increase in the average project 
cost, the number of projects setup under PMEGP is d ecreasing, employment 
generation is also decreasing proportionately. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee acknowledges Ministry’s norms of Rs.  2 lakh/project, but 
expresses reservation that employment targets remai n under achieved due to 
money remaining under-utilized for larger part of F inancial Year.  The 
Committee may be informed State wise as to how many  Districts have achieved 
target of 75 PMEGP units per year during last two years.  
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee was dismayed to learn that during 201 4-15 and 2015-16 
(upto 14.03.2016), only 162 and 57 applications res pectively have been disbursed 
within 100 days. The Committee expresses its reserv ations that the KVIC is not 
been  able  to  meet  its  own  deadlines and stand ards.  The  Committee wonders the  
plight of PMEGP entrepreneur at the local level who  despite the tall claims of 
KVIC  about  online-monitoring,  has  to  endure  t he  uncertainty  for  months. 
Instead of facilitating ease of doing business, suc h delays are actually dis- incentives 
for any entrepreneur to avail benefits of Governmen t Schemes. It is squarely the 
responsibility of the Ministry and the KVIC to prot ect and promote the reputation of 
initiatives initiated by the Government. And going by the facts above, the Ministry 
and the KVIC have repeatedly failed the Government’s initiatives. 
 
(Para 210) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
As recommended by DRPSCI the Ministry has taken ini tiatives to 
implement the PMEGP scheme. Accordingly guidelines for online transfer of 
PMEGP Margin Money funds directly to Financing Bank  Branches have been 
issued by Ministry of MSME which remove the delay b eing caused by Nodal 
Banks for settling the Margin Money Claims and thus , quality implementation and 
better timely progress and utilization of funds wil l result with following time 
frame. It will be implemented from 01.07.2016. KVIC  has prepared the online 
system including online application filing for this purpose.    
 
 

-84- 
 
     
(i) After receipt of online application, within 5 worki ng days the Nodal officer of 
implementing agency shall interact with the applica nt personally on telephone 
or personal meeting and confirm the receipt/ accept ance of the application for 
preliminary scrutiny. 
(ii) The concerned Agency will within 48 hours of the re ceipt of decision of 
DLTFC forward the recommended application to the co ncerned Banks. This 
entire process has to be completed within 45 days o f receipt of application on 
line. 
(iii) The Banks will either sanction or reject the loan a pplication within a 
stipulated period.  Sanction will be issued based o n the online sanction letter 
and copies of the sanction order will be sent to th e applicant (by e-mail/hard 
copy) as well as to KVIC/ KVIB/ DIC within 30 days from the receipt of 
DLTFC recommended application from the District Agencies.  
(iv) The applicant will deposit his own contribution and  copy of EDP training 
certificate to the financing bank within 10 days, o f receiving the 
communication of his sanction of loan. 
(v) Bank will release the first installment of the loan  either in full or partly and 
submit the claim for Margin Money subsidy online th rough the on-line portal 
of Corporation Bank/KVIC Portal, Mumbai. 
(vi) KVIC will validate the subsidy claim and upload on to the Corporation Bank 
portal within 3 working days.  
(vii) Corporation Bank will transfer the Margin Money sub sidy claim amount 
validated by KVIC to the respective financing bank branch within 24 hours of 
the receipt of validation. 
(viii) Once the Margin Money (subsidy) is received in the Bank in favour of the 
loanee, within 24 hours it should be kept in the Te rm Deposit Receipt (TDR) 
of three years at branch level in the name of the beneficiary/Institution.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of the number of PME GP projects that 
have been disbursed Margin Money within stipulated 100 days during 2016-17.   

-85- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee considers this to be a violation of n orms prescribed by the 
Ministry of Finance, that money that should have be en spent evenly within that 
Financial Year, is allowed to remain unspent in the  subordinate offices  and  carried   
forward  to  next  Financial  year.  The Committee  may  be  informed whether the 
Ministry has informed the Ministry of Finance about  this money and whether 
proper approval has been obtained to carry the mone y forward to next FY. The 
Committee would also like to have a comment from th e Financial Advisor and  of 
the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 214)   
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
As per the instructions of Ministry of Finance the Unspent Balance on a cutoff 
date should normally be worked out on the basis of the amount that has been 
released by the Ministry by that date and the amoun t for which requisite 
confirmation of actual utilization for intended pur poses has not been received by the 
Ministry by that date.  If the confirmation has not  been received, the total amount 
released should prima facie be taken as ‘unspent’ a s far as the Ministry is concerned.  
A  statement  of  unspent  balance  regularly  forwarded  to  Ministry  of  Finance  on  
quarterly basis. As per GFR 212(1) The utilization certificate should be submitted 
with in twelve month of the closure of the financia l year by the Institution or 
Organisation concerned.  If any grantee Institute o r any organization do not submit 
all the Utilization certificates (s) due for rendit ion in respect all of the 
Scheme/Programmes/Project then further grant is not  released to that grantee 
Institute/organization by the office of . 
 Next proposal for release of funds is processed du ly considering unspent 
balance lying with the Implementing Agencies under relevant Scheme Head.  
However, the recommendation of the Committee has be en noted and approval of the 
competent authority will be obtained to carry the m oney forward to the next financial 
year. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee recognizes that Ministry has not been  taking due 
approval of competent authority to carry money forw ard to next Financial 
Year.  The Ministry has not provided the comments o f the Financial Adviser in 
this regard.  
 
 

 
-86- 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee therefore wonders that if the previou s information given in 
January 2016, were true then what was the ground fo r reducing allocation at RE 
(2015-16) stage. 
(Para 223) 
 
 
Action Taken:   
 
Regarding Plan S&T and Coir Vikas Yojana (CVY), the  Board could utilize 
the entire amount including opening balance and the  fund releases.  The Board has 
sufficient programmes to utilize the amount earmark ed under these schemes.  
However, the utilization under CUY has not picked u p due to reluctance on the part 
of the Bank to release loans to the applicants and under the component SCSP & TSP 
there is a slow pace of expenditure due to lesser i ntakes from the SCSP and TSP 
category. Since the utilization under these compone nts is not utilized at the desired 
level, the funds have been re-appropriated from CUY to CVY.   
 
 
The allocation was reduced due to slow pace of expe nditure and reluctance on 
the part of the Bank to release loans to the applic ants resulted in slow progress of the 
scheme and non-receipt of viable proposals.  Accord ingly, the Plan allocation was 
reduced from Rs.20 crore to Rs.8.38 crore under Coi r Udyami Yojana. Similarly, 
under Grant-in-Aid Salaries (Non-Plan) Head, budget  allocation of Rs.22.20 crore 
was reduced to 19.40 crore owing to the fact that t he utilization was 50% of the BE 
2015-16 upto September 2015.  As per M/o Finance’s norms, 7 months salary should 
have been disbursed upto September whereas 6 months  salary was released upto 
September.  On the basis of this, M/o Finance reduc ed the budget under Grant-in-Aid 
Salaries (Non-Plan) Head on pro-rata basis. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee feels that overall utilization by Co ir Board has been 
comparatively better.  Even in case of Coir Udyami Yojna, the Board could 
utilize the opening balance.  Therefore, there was no reason to reduce allocation 
in RE on the basis of under-utilization.  The Commi ttee fails to understand how 
could Non-Planned Grants in Aids (Salary) could be reduced which is a 
Committed obligation.  The Committee may be informe d of circumstances that 
led to violation of Ministry of Finance norms by Coir Board. .  
 

-87- 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee has been informed that Coir Board had  diverted Planned 
Funds meant for MDA to Non Planned Funds for paymen t of salaries. This was 
objected to by the audit team of the Ministry which  advised against release of 
Funds to Coir Board. The Committee takes it serious ly to divert the Planned Funds  
to pay the salaries and that is why the Committee h as been arguing that the Ministry 
must make a realistic assessment of the cost of imp lementing a scheme  instead  of  
making a lumpsum Non-Planned allocation for salarie s and other dues. However, in 
the instant case the Committee may be informed of the conditions that forced the 
Coir Board to divert Planned funds for the payments of salaries. Did the Coir 
Board ever raise the demand for more Non-Planned allocation to meet the salary 
dues. If yes, what steps did the Ministry take. 
 
(Para 227) 
 
Action Taken:  
 
The break-up of sanctioned outlays, releases and ac tual utilization under the 
non Plan Grants-in-Aid head were as under: 
          (Rs. In Crore) 
 
Year Non Plan (Grants in aid) Sanctioned and 
Released 
 
Actuals 
2008-09 6.24 13.99 
 
2009-10 16.80 18.79 
 
2010-11 18.50 19.35 
 
2011-12 14.98 22.37 
 
2012-13 14.97 24.62 
 
2013-14 18.90 24.85 
 
 
 
 
 

-88- 
 
 
Substantial portion of these transfers have been re plenished to the MDA accounts as 
detailed below:        
 
                                                     (Rs. In crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred from 
MDA to Non Plan 
Amount repaid 
from Non Plan to 
MDA 
Balance 
2011-12 1.50 1.50 0.00 
2012 -13  9.65  6.02  3.63  
2013-14 5.00 2.50 6.13 
2014-15 1.30 3.80 3.63 
2015 -16  2.00  2.00  3.63  
 
 
From 2013-14 onwards, requirement of salaries have been reflected under grants-in-
aid salaries head and adequate funds are allocated every year as per details given 
below: 
 
                                                     (Rs. In crore) 
Year  Funds allocated (RE)  Actuals  
2013-14 9.90 9.90 
2014-15 22.20 22.20 
2015-16 19.40 19.40 
 
From the above table, it may be seen that the adequ ate funds are being 
released to Coir Board to avoid diversion of plan f unds for the payment of salaries. 
The earlier diversions were made from plan funds fo r the payment of salaries to 
avoid embarrassed position for non-payment of salar ies to Coir Board staff. During 
the year 2016-17 a higher allocation of Rs.30.45 cr ore has been provided to the Coir 
Board by the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 It appears that for long the Coir Board suffered s hortage of Non-
Planned Grants in Aid for Salaries.  It had to dive rt Planned Funds for been 
fully utilizing Non-Planned funds allocated in RE t o pay salary dues.  Yet, 
Non-Planned allocation was reduced in 2015-16.  The  Committee may be 
informed of circumstances under which Coir Board wa s not able to adhere to 
Ministry of Finance’s norms, when Coir Board otherw ise has been utilizing its 
allocated funds well.  
 

-89- 
Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee is unconvinced with the reply about u nder-utilisation of 
Non-Plan funds meant for committed liabilities like  salaries, pensionary benefits etc. 
The Committee may be informed of the conditions whe re even such committed 
liabilities were under-utilised by the Coir Board w hich inter alia warranted a 
reduction of Non-Planned allocation at RE stage. 
(Para 228) 
Action Taken:  
 
The reason for reduction of Non-Plan allocation at RE stage was release of 6 
months salary i.e. 50% of the BE 2015-16 whereas the M/o Finance’s norms stipulate 
that 7 months salary should have been disbursed upt o September.  Accordingly, M/o 
Finance reduced the budget under Grant-in-Aid Salaries (Non-Plan) Head on pro-rata 
basis at RE stage. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee has not been informed the circumstan ces for such breach 
of norms by Coir Board.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee may be informed about actual procedur e of devolution of 
subsidy to CUY beneficiary and the time taken in ac tual disbursal of subsidized 
loan. 
(Para 230) 
Action Taken:   
 
Coir Board invites the application for availing ass istance under Coir Udyami 
Yojana through the Board’s online portal – coirserv ices.gov.in.  One who desires to 
apply for assistance under CUY can register their a pplications through this portal at 
anytime from any part of the country.   The Field O ffices of the Board situated at 
different parts of the country will accept the onli ne applications coming under their 
jurisdiction.  The Officer-in-charge of the Field Office will scrutinize the applications 
and the applications which are complete in all respect will be referred to the Regional 
Level Selection Committee (RLSC) for its considerat ion. This should be done within 
21 days from the date of receipt of the application .  The Field Office will forward the 
applications recommended by the RLSC to the Financi ng Banks within 7 days of 
approval of RLSC. Once the application is received by the Financing Bank, the Bank  
 

-90- 
 
shall intimate the sanction of loan or otherwise to  the beneficiary and Coir Board 
within 30 calendar days.  On receipt of loan sancti on letter from the Financing Bank, 
the beneficiary shall deposit his contribution with in 30 calendar days to the 
concerned Bank.  The Bank shall release 1 
st  installment of loan to the beneficiary 
within 30 days of receipt of beneficiary contributi on.  The applicant should have 
undergone Entrepreneurship Development Programme be fore releasing the 1 st  
installment of loan by the Bank.  After receipt of the loan sanction letter and Margin 
Money Claim from the Financing Bank, the Field Offi ce shall submit these 
documents to Coir Board Head Office through online portal for sanction and release 
of Margin Money (Subsidy).  Coir Board Head Office shall process these online 
Margin Money Claims and intimate sanction or otherw ise to the Field Offices within 
7 days of receipt of the M.M Claims.  Within 3 days  of sanction of Margin Money 
(Subsidy), the Coir Board HO shall release the Marg in Money to the CUY Nodal 
Bank and the CUY Nodal Bank shall transfer the Marg in Money to the Financing 
Banks for depositing as TDR in the name of the beneficiary for two years.  To depict  
the devolution of Margin Money to the CUY beneficia ry the Board has prepared a 
Flow Chart indicating the time schedule, which is also annexed.  
 The actual disbursal of subsidized loan under the Scheme takes place within 
120 to 150 days. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be informed of total application s received during 
last year 2015-16, number of applications cleared b y RLSC and of those how 
many have been cleared by Banks.  Please provide Ba nk-wise details.  How 
many applications have actually been disbursed in 1 50 days.  Though the 
Committee feels that 150 day limit must be reduced to 100 days. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The  Committee  may  also  be  informed  about  the   purpose  of  proposed 
modification in the CUY Scheme. 
(Para 231) 
Action Taken:   
 
During the Scheme implementation, the Board felt th at continuation of Coir 
Udyami Yojana during the XII Plan period with modif ications is essential for 
adoption of modern technology in the production and  processing of coir which will 
facilitate improvement in quality, improving the ma rketing opportunities thereby 
enhancing  the  earning  capacity  of the workers. The Scheme will be highly suitable  

-91- 
 
for contributing to the development of vulnerable s ections of the society especially 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and peopl e in North Eastern Region.  
Coir Board has conducted an independent evaluation of the implementation of the 
scheme during the XI Plan period by engaging M/s. D atamation Consultants Pvt. 
Ltd., New Delhi. In the evaluation report it was me ntioned that the purpose of the 
Scheme towards rejuvenation has been immensely serv ed.  Further, the evaluators 
have recommended for continuation of the Scheme wit h focus on extensive 
modernization and to keep the Scheme open to all ca tegories in the coir sector 
enhancing the limit of the project cost to Rs.10 la khs. Streamlining of the Scheme to 
ease Banking process for the disbursement of the lo an and subsidy, deregulation 
machine procurement so that the beneficiary has the  freedom to purchase the 
machines of their choice were also their recommenda tions. A marketing plan to 
increase the sales was also recommended to be incor porated in the scheme as this 
would lead to a chain of events as increase in sales will lead increase in production as  
well as exports and for that more coir workers woul d be needed and these changes 
will lead to employment as well as income generation. 
 
Planning Commission’s Working Group on MSME Growth for XII Plan in its 
recommendations has also stressed the need for cont inuation of the scheme during 
XII Plan period with suitable modifications and exp ansion to cover manufacturing 
units for value added products and processes, using  high-end machines and 
technologies.  The Working Group has recommended fo r enhancement of the ceiling 
of the financial assistance under the scheme so as to cover small and medium scale 
units who will be able to absorb higher investments , besides continuing the benefits 
for the tiny work sheds and spinning units.   
 
On the basis of the above recommendations, the Boar d has proposed the 
modifications in the Scheme of Coir Udyami Yojana. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 It was informed that Banks are reluctant to financ e under CUY Scheme 
despite being supported by the Government.  The Com mittee may be informed 
of reasons to reluctance on the part of Banks and s teps taken to improve 
implementation.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee appreciates that the new modified MPD A scheme has 
enhanced the financial assistance to artisans to 40 % while reducing the share of 
producing and selling institutions. The Committee a pprehends if such reduction may 
become a dis-incentive for producing and selling un its. The Committee may also be  
 

-92- 
 
informed how does the Ministry calculate the per da y per artisan 
wage for   the   
purposes   of   overall   allocation   for   MPDA.   The   Committee   also 
recommends that the Ministry must explore the ways to transfer the wages directly 
to the Bank accounts of the artisan through DBT as is being done in other DBT 
schemes like MNREGA. 
(Para 242) 
Action Taken:   
 
 Existing Market Development Assistance (MDA) schem e on production 
(Khadi & Poly) Scheme and additional components of Publicity, Marketing and 
Market promotion (including Export Promotion) Infra structure (inclusive of new 
component of Marketing Complexes / Khadi Plaza). 
 
Features of MPDA are – 
• Production of incentive (PI) plan was approved by t he Commission, as 
modification to existing MDA scheme, to be name as Modified MDA plan  
• Modified MDA plan is financial assistance to Kis re quiring fiscal support to 
increase the competitiveness of Khadi Production by  improving quality as well 
as marketability and at the same time increase the artisan earning 
• MMDA to be calculated @ 30% on prime cost of Khadi i.e. cost directly 
attributable to production of Khadi  
• Under MMDA plan the Kis will have full freedom  to fix the price of the Khadi 
and Khadi Products based on market demand and acceptability  
• 40% of the amount to be distributed among the Khadi  spinners, weavers and 
karyakartas 
• MMDA Plan provides guidelines for gradual phase out  of financial assistance 
for production and marketing support through products segmentation  
• Provides flexibility to Kis to utilize alternate ma rketing channels and leveraging 
professional expertise for sales promotion.   
KVIC has already transferred the wages direct to the Bank accounts of Khadi artisans 
through DBT. The funds released an amount of Rs. 0. 03 crore as on 06.06.2016 
under MPDA. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Ministry has not informed how does it calculat e per day per artisan 
wage for the purposes of overall allocation for MPD A and at what rate the 
wages have been transferred by KVIC to direct bank accounts of Khadi 
artisans.  

-93- 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee also refers to the reply to Rajya Sab ha Question 1189 
(30.7.15) wherein the Ministry has stated “Khadi spinning and weaving is a 
subsidiary activity. The artisans associated with K hadi Institutions are self-
employed persons. They  operate  charkha/looms  depending  u pon  the  free  time  
available  to them. The artisans are paid on piece rate basis i.e . number of hanks of 
yarn spun and  meters  of  cloth  woven.  Hence,  the  wages  of  Khadi   artisans 
are  not  strictly comparable to  minimum daily wages“. The Committee on 
previous occasions during its study visits has inte racted with khadi artisans in 
presence of the representatives of KVIC and had wit nessed the abject drudgery the 
female artisans had to endure practically for long hours daily, to earn an 
uncertain meager daily wage. The Committee is convi nced that regardless  of  the  
structure  of  khadi  sector,  where  artisans  are   employed casually, the artisans 
must be classified as skilled labourer for the purp oses of wage and other benefits 
and thus recommends that to enforce this earnestly,  it should be made mandatory 
condition for the institutions availing MPDA assistance to classify khadi artisans as 
skilled worker for the wage purposes and other benefits. 
(Para 243) 
 
Action Taken:   
 
 KVIC has informed to the Khadi institutions that i t is mandatory condition for 
availing MPDA assistance. To classify the Khadi art isans as skilled worker for the 
wage purposes and other benefits. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed if KVIC is ensuring that Khadi 
institutions availing assistance under MPDA are pay ing wages as per skilled 
workers.  If so, does not Ministry’s contradict  th e reply for Rajya Sabha         
Q. 1189 (30.7.15) reply in this regard.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The  Committee  while  appreciates  that  more  com prehensive  coverage 
would  be  available  to  khadi  artisans  under  n ew  social  security  schemes,  it 
however notes that no Budgetary provision has been made in this year’s Budget.  

-94- 
 
The  Committee  may  be  informed  by  when  the  m odalities  of  new  
insurance scheme will be finalized and what will be the share  of premium borne by 
the Ministry and the insurance Companies. Whether the M inistry will seek 
supplementary demand for this purpose.  
(Para 245) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
  
 
 A meeting was held under the chairmanship of Chair man, KVIC with 
Ministry officials and LIC of India, wherein following options were agreed upon. 
i) The best option would be to offer the existing AABY  with PMSBY and 
PMJJBY to khadi artisans. 
ii) In the above dispensation, the artisans have to app roach host of agencies, viz. 
LIC of India, and the banks. Arrangement may be evo lved so that settlement 
of all claims for khadi artisans are made through a  single agency preferably 
LIC of India as they have already built relationship with khadi artisans. 
iii) Another option could be enhancing the benefit of AA BY to three times for 
khadi artisans.  
The proposal is under examination for obtaining app roval for one of the above 
options. 
  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee may be informed of final Scheme and share of premium 
to be borne by the Ministry and insurance company i n the proposed new 
arrangement.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee in this penultimate year of 12 th  Plan has recommended the 
performance  audit  by  the  CAG  of  several  flag ship  schemes  like  PMEGP, 
Training Institutions and Tool Room and the NMCP fo r the entire plan period till 
2015-16. In addition, the Ministry should have its other schemes internally 
audited. And the salient findings of these audits m ust be included in the Annual 
Report. The Committee’s Reports may become the refe rence for such an audit. 
(Para 247) 
 
 

-95- 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
Observations of the Committee have been noted for c ompliance.  In case of 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), an Ev aluation Study of the 
Scheme was conducted and final Report submitted on February, 2014 .  
  
An evaluation study of CGTMSE was conducted and fin al report was 
submitted in January, 2014 
 Controller of Accounts of the Ministry will conduc t internal audit for the 
following schemes through two teams of Internal Audit wing for the year 2016-17:  
i. Quality of Technology Support Institutions and Programme 
ii. Infrastructure Development and Capacity Building. 
iii. Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
         iv.       Market Development Assistance Programme 
 
The files are being audited by Internal Audit Team of the M/o MSME 
annually in respect of Cluster division. 
 
   Office of DC(MSME) have written a letter dated 0 9.05.2016 to CAG 
requesting them to conduct the Performance Audit of  Tool Room & Technology 
Development Centres, under Audit Regulations 2007 ( Chapter 7) of CAG Act, 1971 
The list of all the 18 Institutes has also been forwarded to CAG. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the evaluation st udies of CGTMSE 
and CLCSS which must be incorporated in Annual Repo rt of the Ministry.  The 
Committee had asked for CAG’s Performance Audit of PMEGP, tool Rooms 
and NMCP.  The Committee insists CAG’s Performance Audit of PMEGP and 
NMCP.  The Ministry may reflect the finding of Perf ormance Audit of TRs/TCs 
in the Annual Report.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
The Committee is particularly concern over serious under utilization of 
funds under SCSP, TSP and NER meant for the margina lized sections of the society.  
That the funds are underutilized due to lack of dem and from these sections,   is  an   
insensitive   argument      by   the   Ministry   t o   hide   its   own shortcomings in 
reaching out to these sections. The Committee wonde rs if MUDRA Yojna could be 
successful with these very same sections, how the M inistry can blame the lack 
of demand. The Committee once again recommends that Ministry needs to 
physically expand its outreach among these sections . The Committee though finds it  

-96- 
 
ironical  that  the  same Ministry  which blames la ck 
of demand, has been entrusted  
by the Government to implement the SC/ST Hub. The Committee proposes to 
closely monitor the progress and performance of this Hub. The Committee may 
be informed of the structure and processes of proposed SC/ST Hub and the 
benchmarks to monitor its performance. 
 
(Para 250) 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
 
 
    Para 57 of the Budget Speech for FY 2016 has propos ed to constitute a  
National Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Hub in  the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises in partnership with industri es association. Ministry of 
MSME, to implement the above decision, undertook co nsultation with all the 
stakeholders. Letters were written to the State Gov ernments seeing their suggestions 
on the SC/ST Hub. States were also requested to pro vide details of existing schemes 
for benefit of SC/ST entrepreneurs in their states.  
 
A meeting was held by Secretary (MSME) on 13 May, 2 016 with various 
stakeholders including DICCI, various industry asso ciations including MSMEs, 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Tribal Affairs, NITI Aayog and 
representatives of States. Based on these consultat ions, a background paper was 
prepared on constituting SC/ST Hub. Intensive consultations were held with Ministry 
of Social Justice & Empowerment, Tribal Affairs, NI TI Aayog and Cabinet 
Secretariat. The Ministry of MSME is in the process  of finalizing funding, structure 
and shape of SC/ST Hub in consultation with NITI Aayog.  
 
II) O/o DC (MSME), has launched a New Scheme  "Prom otion of MSMEs in 
N.E. Region and Sikkim". The salient features of the scheme are as under: 
1. Introduction: The Ministry of MSME is working fo r development of MSMEs in 
the country. However it is felt that there is need for special treatment as far as 
development of MSMEs in North Eastern Region & Sikk im is concerned. With this 
objective in mind, a Note was taken to Standing Fin ance Committee (SFC) of 
Ministry of MSME for approval of special scheme for  growth of MSMEs in North 
Eastern Region and Sikkim. 
 
2. Scheme Components: The Scheme approved by Govt. of India has the 
following components: 
 
 

-97- 
 
 
2.1 Setting up new and modernize existing Mini Technology Centres. 
Objective: The Scheme envisages financial assistanc e to State Governments for 
setting up new and modernize existing Mini Technolo gy Centres. Financial 
Assistance: The quantum of financial assistance wil l be equal to 90% of the cost of 
machinery / equipment / buildings, not exceeding Rs . 10.00 crore. Government of 
India funding would not be 
admissible towards cost of land. 
 
2.2 Development of new and existing Industrial Estates. 
Objective: Financial assistance for development of new and existing Industrial 
Estates. 
Financial Assistance: 80% of the cost of infrastruc ture facilities not exceeding 
Rs. 8.00 crore will be sanctioned for development o f new and existing Industrial 
Estates. The infrastructure facilities will include  power distribution system, water, 
telecommunication, drainage & pollution control fac ilities, roads, banks, storage and 
marketing outlets etc.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
 The Committee with great reservation seeks informa tion regarding 
funding, structure and mandate of proposed SC/ST Hu b.  The Ministry may 
consider putting SCSP and TSP at the disposal of th is Hub which should advise 
the Ministry on utilization these funds and also mo nitor the progress.  The 
Committee may be informed that beyond routine consu ltations and procedure, 
what is the actual progress in setting up Mini Tech nical Centres and Industrial 
Estates in North Eastern Region.  
 
 
 
 
******* 