PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
ONE HUNDRED – THIRTY SIXTH REPORT  
  
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE ' S 127TH   REPORT ON MOU 
PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF PSUs OF SHIPPING INDUSTRY 
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925  (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                      
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE        
MINUTES        
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2003  ) 
  
 Dr. P.C. Alexander      —Chairman 
                        
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
3.      Shri Jayantilal Barot 
Page 1 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

4.      Dr. M.N. Das 
5.      Smt.  Saroj Dubey 
6.      Shri Faguni Ram 
7.      Shri Lajpat Rai 
8.      Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
9.      Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
13.  Smt. Sushree Devi 
14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15.  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
17.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
18.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
20.  Shri K Francis George  
21.  Shri Thomas Hansda 
22.  Md. Anwarul Haque 
23.  Shri A.C. Jose 
24.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
25.  Shri Mansoor Ali Khan 
26.  Shri Sunil Khan 
27.  Shri Deepak Kumar 
28.  Shri Manjay Lal 
29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy 
30.  Shri A. Narendra 
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak 
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
33.  Shri Uttamrao Patil 
34.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
35.  Shri P. Rajendran 
  
(i) 
  
  
36.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
37.  Shri Tarachand Sahu 
38.  Shri Ramanand Singh 
39.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
40.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
41.  Shri V. Vetriselvan 
42.  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
43.  Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Page 2 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary 
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
I N T R O D U C T I ON 
  
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having  
been authorised  by the Committe e, hereby present this One Hundr ed – Thirty-Sixth Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in  the  Committee ' s 127 th   
Report  on the MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).   
  
2.         The Committee   examined and  c onsidered  the Action Take n Notes on recommendations
contained  in the   Committee ' s 127 th   Report  on the MoU performance in respect of PSUs o f 
Shipping Industry pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises 
 ( Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).  
  
3.        This Action Taken Report has been prepar ed on the basis of the acti on taken notes furnished by
the Department of Public Enterp rises (Ministry of Heavy Industrie s and Public Enterprises) on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 127 th  Report.  The Committee adopted the analytical 
and descriptive approach to examine the action taken notes and af ter assessing the action taken notes as 
furnished by the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
and judging the same in the true spirit of the recommendations,  the Committee has prepared the present
Action Taken Report. Action taken notes  have been analyzed  and suita bly categorized in four chapters
in the Action Taken Report and the Observations/C onclusions and Recommendations of the Committee
have been placed in Chapter – V. 
  
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on  18 th   December,  2003 considered and adopted the 
Report.  
  
REPORT 
  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Public
Enterprises on the Recommenda tions contained in the  127 th  Report (of the Department-relate d 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) on MoU performance in  respect of PSUs of Shipping
Industry  pertaining to the Departme nt of Public Enterprises (Minis try of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises)  .The Report  was presented /laid on the Ta ble of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the 8 th  
May, 2003. 
 
2.         Action Taken Notes have  been received from the Department of Public Enterprises in respect of
the   recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows: 
NEW DELHI;   
December 18, 2003 
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER
 Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry 
  
Page 3 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Department of Public Enterprises
  
(Chapter - I). 
Recommendations:- 2.3, 3.2, 3.5, 5.4, 6.2 and 6.4 
which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply : (Chapter - II) 
  
Recommendations:- 3.4 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Department of Public Enterprises: (Chapter - III). 
  
Recommendations:-. 4.5, 5.2, 6.5, 6.7 and 6.8 
  
Recommendations/Observations in respect  of which  final replies of the  Department of Public 
Enterprises   have not been received. (Chapter - IV).  
Recommendations:-  5.6, 5.8 and 5.10 
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that   the Deparment of Public Enterprises  ( Ministry o f
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) has accepted its  recommendations as  mentioned in Chapter –I 
of the  Report.   
4.   In respect of the recommendations made in Para  3.4   in Chapter-II  the Committee is  convinced  
with the logic and explanat ion  advocated by the Depart ment of Public Enterpri ses and therefore   does
not want to  pursue  further .  
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementa tion  of recommendation 
contained in  Chapter-III  and theref ore  the Committee desires that the Department of Public 
Enterprises should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these recommendations 
6.         In respect  of recommendations  placed in Chapter-IV, the Department of Public Enterprises has  
either   furnished the interim replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted fo r
compliance/guidance,  therefore, the Committee desires  that the De partment of Public Enterprises
should furnish Action Taken Notes in  respect of recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
  
7.         The details of the Action Taken is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 
 
Page 4 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

CHAPTER - I 
  
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.1       Proper Weightage to R&D, energy efficiency, safety, industrial relations  in MoU system 
  
            The Committee, recommends that while importance to financial/ parameters is a must in 
liberalized economy in the era of stiff competition, it should also be seen that proper weightage is given 
to parameters linked with R&D, energy efficiency, safety, industrial relations etc. which form an 
important constituent in the overall performance of a PSE.  The Committee therefore, recommends that 
MOU should attach due importance to the parameters like R&D energy efficiency, safety, industrial 
relations for the well being of Public Sector Undertakings. 
                                                                                                            (Para 2.3)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.1.1    The recommendation of the Committee regarding giving due importance to R&D, energy 
efficiency, safety, industrial relations will be kept in mind while finalizing the MOU of HSL for the next 
year, i.e. 2004-05. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.2       Value engineering, inter-PSU cooperati on enhancement and balancing of capacity in MoU
system 
  
            The Committee, recommends that this lacuna should be addressed and an appropriate position is 
required to be reflected in the MOU.  It may be emphasized again that the MOU does not adequately get 
reflected through the parameters like safety, export orientation, R&D, value engineering, inter-PSU 
cooperation enhancement and balancing of capacity, etc.  This apart, energy efficiency which is a 
statutory obligation brought in the balance-sheet does not get much weightage in the MOU.  These 
issues also should be addressed. 
                                                                                    (Para No.  3.2)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.2.1    The recommendation of the Committee regarding giving due weightage to energy efficiency will 
be kept in mind while finalizing the MOU of GSL for the next year, i.e. 2004-05. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.3       Place of subjective issues like Business excellence in MoU system 
  
            The Committee recommends that the parameters should be more subjective in the sense and 
show how to achieve the business excellence and the management efforts towards it.  The same when 
evaluated the performance ratings can be established, otherwise, for the industry like GSL scoring in 
MOU rating is difficult. 
                                                                        (Para No.  3.5)
  
Page 5 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.3.1    Under the MOU system, the focus is kept on including those performance criteria through which 
objective and transparent evaluation of the performance of management of a particular PSE can be 
arrived at. The performance parameters for evaluating the performance of GSL in its MOU are based on 
the above principle, which is same for all other PSEs which are operating in almost similar business 
environment in which GSL operate. 
  
 
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.4       Under-utilisation of existing capacity by GSL 
  
            The Committee observes that under-utilisation of existing capacity by GSL in the absence of 
work-order is a matter of grave concern.  This negates the prospect of expanding the work sphere of 
G.S.L.  This is also in contravention of the performance of the PSU as shown under MOU. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that capacity utilization of PSU should be reckoned as a vital factor 
and given due weightage under MOU.
 
                                                                                                            (Para No.  5.4)
ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.4.1    The recommendation of the Committee will be kept in mind while finalizing the MOU of GSL 
for the next year, i.e. 2004-05. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.5       Weightage of inter PSUs cooperation in MoU system 
  
The Committee, recommends th at a weightage is to be in troduced in MOU document fo
r
cooperation of Indian PSUs for larger benefit of Indian Shipyards and HSL in particular. 
                                                                                                (Para No.  6.2)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.5.1    The recommendation of the Committee will be kept in mind while finalizing the MOUs for the 
next year, i.e. 2004-05. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
1.6       Shipbuilding Industry 
  
The Committee, recommends that  extension of  a similar provision to shipbuilding and repai
r
industry will enable them to plough back profit for acquisition of new assets for much needed
upgradation, modernization and expansion projects at low cost. 
                                                                                                (Para No.  6.4) 
ACTION TAKEN 
  
1.6.1    The recommendation of the Committee relates to Ministry of Finance and has been forwarded to
them for appropriate action.  
 
Page 6 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

CHAPTER - II
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLy  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
2.1       Targets in absolute terms 
             
The Committee observes that fixing the targets in absolute terms in the beginning of a year for 
industries like shipbuilding is very difficult to achieve especially in the present scenario of order books 
which is uncertain and customer driven. 
                                                                                                                        (Para No.  3.4)
ACTION TAKEN 
  
2.1.1    The Companies themselves propose the MOU targets under various performance criteria. The 
MOU targets generally flow from the Annual Plan targets, which are firmed up after detailed working 
and scrutiny at the Company level and are approved by the boards of the respective Companies. The 
Companies are expected to have certain level of knowledge about their future order booking without 
which they cannot plan their work plans, inventory position, etc. The same level of knowledge is 
reflected in the MOU performance criteria of order booking which is the starting point of the operational 
planning of the Companies and also measures the marketing strength of these Companies which is 
crucial for their long term development. Therefore, while it is true that it may not be difficult to always 
achieve the order book target, its inclusion in the MOU is important from the view of internal 
operational planning of the Company and improving its marketing capabilities.  
  
Chapter - III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RE SPECT OF WHICH TH E COMMITTEE HAS
NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRIES OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.1       Competition in Shipbuilding Industry 
  
            The Committee observes that ship repair has been in (profitable venture for CSL in their part at 
present) in heavy competition in the prevailing market. As a result thereof, profit margin has reduced. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that CSL should concentrate on larger vessels to sustain itself in 
the market as it is the only shipyard that can construct vessels of large carrying capacity(110000 dwt and 
125000 dwt). CSL therefore should reorient its marketing strategy from conventional method to gain 
orders from foreign countries in order to remain in the competition from countries such as Korea, CSL 
should have intake of computer knowledgeable people who can improve the present situation. MOU 
should take care of manpower efficiency for this purpose. High level of technical manpower skills are 
involved in the shipyard industry and retention of manpower and upgrading of their skills is a very vital 
factor in the industry. 
                                                                                                                        (Para No.  4.5) 
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.1.1    The issue of improving the intake of co mputer knowledge personnel has been brought to the
notice of Cochin Shipyard Limited for necessary action at their end.
Page 7 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.1.2    The Committee is of th e considered view that Cochin  Shipyard Limited (CSL) should
concentrate on larger vessels to sustain itself in the market as it is the only shipyard that can construct
vessels of large carrying cap acity(110000 dwt and 125000 dwt). CSL therefore should reorient its
marketing strategy from conventional method to gain orders from foreign countries in order to remain in
the competition from countries such as Korea.  In the age of the Information Technology, it is
permanent  for improving the intake of computer knowledgeable personnel to remain in the competition
with the advanced countries. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.2              Inter PSUs cooperation in Shipping Industry 
  
            The Committee, recommends that  HSL having built & repaired various sophisticated vessels 
including retrofitting/repair of submarines and having all infrastructure and human skills/ expertise at 
par with other Defence yards, MOU should be signed between I.N., Coast Guard & HSL for mutual 
benefit and cooperation.  Hence weightage should be introduced in MOU document for cooperation of 
Indian PSUs for larger benefit of Indian Shipyards and HSL in particular. 
  
                                                                                                            (Para No.  5.2)
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.2.1    The issue of signing MOU between Indi an Navy, Coast Guard and HSL would require
interaction with concerned agencies and also the Ministry of Defence. The recommendation of the
Committee has been forwarded to the concerned agencies to elicit their views on the same. 
  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.2.2    The Committee is of the vi ew that the Department of Public  Enterprises should undertake result
oriented follow up actions with all the concerned agencies for effective implem entation of the
Committee’s recommendation and shoul d not confine itself to mere fo rwarding the observations of the
Committee.  DPE while playing its pro active role may act as a platform interaction for mooting the idea
for inter PSUs cooperation in Shipping Sector as the concept is fast emerging and entails mutual benefits
and cooperation which is a must for  acquiring competitive edge in the liberalised and globalised
economy.  Promoting the signing of  MoU between India Navy, Coast Guard and HSL and the Ministry
of Defence is the responsibility of  DPE and re-orienting the paramete rs of MoU for giving impetus to 
the criteria of Inter PSUs cooperation for the larger benefits of Indian Shipyards and HSL in particular is
the primary responsibility of DPE, the Committee understands.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.3              Consensus on product range 
  
            The Committee, recommends that  a consensus on product range should be developed within 
each shipyard so as to avoid duplication of design and detailed engineering efforts. 
                                                                                                            (Para No.  6.5)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
Page 8 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

3.3.1    The views of the Committee have been forwarded to the concerned shipyards and the concerned 
Administrative Ministry/Department, i.e. Department of Defence Production & Supplies and Ministry of 
Shipping with an advice that all out efforts should be made for avoiding duplication of design and 
detailed engineering efforts. 
  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.3.2    The Committee feels that in order to appr opriate the market share to each of the units o f
Shipyards, a consensus on product ra nge should be developed within each shipyard so as to avoid
duplication of design and detailed e ngineering efforts.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Public Enterprises should vigor ously follow up with concerned shipyards and 
Administrative Ministries/Departments,  that all out efforts s hould be made for avoiding duplication o f
design and detailed engine ering efforts which will  encourage inter PSU c ooperation and save precious
manpower and resources. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.4       Technology Transfer in Shipping Industry 
  
The Committee, recommends that  items being sourced from abroad  should be identified. A list
of such items being procured from abroad should be made with specifications earmarked and be given to
domestic suppliers for supply.  The domestic suppliers  can react to it and pr esent to the Government
what hurdle/ constrains they ar e facing in supply of these item s.  Technology wise they can see
k
cooperation and collaboration of fo reign companies for joint producti on.  This will pave the way fo r
indigenisation of shipping industry from mere assembling of parts impor ted from abroad.  It is quite
evident that shipyards are strategically necessary to build and to main tain Warship and patrol Vessels to
secure extraction of oil and gas offshore from the Exclusive Econom ic Zone and keep the sea lanes safe
and secure. 
                                                                                                (Para No.  6.7)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.4.1    The views of the Committee have been forwarded to the concerned shipyards and the concerned 
Administrative Ministry/Departments, i.e. Department of Defence Production & Supplies and Ministry 
of Shipping for appropriate action. 
  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.4.2    The Committee understands that the Technology Transfer is the basic business precept for global
corporate Governance in order to  protect the domestic industry .  And the same is applicable to the
Shipping Industry in India which at present is merely related to  the assembling of parts imported form
abroad.  However, in order to i ndigenisation of shipping industry Te chnology Transfer is the first and
the foremost requirement.  
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
3.5       Data exchange between the suppliers 
  
            The Committee further desires that Data exchange between the suppliers should take place from
time to time.  This will enable them to assess po ssibilities of manufacturing of such items and stepping
up of mutual cooperation between them .  Such proposals can be mooted b y them to Government fo r
Page 9 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

help. 
                                                                                                            (Para No.  6.8)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
3.5.1    The concern of the Committee has been communicated to all shipyards and the concerned 
Administrative Ministry/Department, i.e. Department of Defence Production & Supplies and Ministry of 
Shipping for necessary action at their end.  
Further Recommendation 
  
3.5.2    The Committee is of the view that in the present age of the communication revolution data 
exchange among suppliers is essential to explore the possibility of manufacturing of various items for 
shipping industry and opening the avenues for mutual cooperation and areas of common interest.  It is 
all the more necessary because of the globalization process.   Therefore, the Committee reiterates that 
the Department of Public Enterprises must take up the matter effectively and efficiently with the 
concerned administrative Ministries and  Departments  for necessary action at their end. 
  
 
Page 10 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

CHAPTER – IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPEC T OF WHICH  FINA L REPLIES OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES  HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.1       In-house R&D facilities for design and production of ships 
  
            The Committee, recommends that in order to develop in-house R&D facilities for design and 
production of ships an amount of 0.25% of the project cost may be approved to the Shipyards for 
enabling such activities to be undertaken on a regular basis.  This will enable self sufficiency in 
production/maintenance of products/ships serving the defence nation.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a concerted effort should be made by shipyards, Indian Navy and the Govt. to ensure 
successful completion of projects undertaken and timely delivery to customers for which synergy of 
efforts is required between potent players. 
                                    (Para No.  5.6)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
4.1.1    The concern of the Committee regarding timely completion of projects and timely delivery to 
customers has been communicated to all the concerned agencies for necessary action at their end. 
  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.2       Streamlining the  procedure for  the scrap 
  
            The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to streamline procedure the scrap generated 
may be valued at rate of realizable value.  Necessary amendments to the relevant sections in the 
Customs Act is called for.  
                                                                                                            (Para No.  5.8)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
4.2.1    The recommendation of the Committee relates to the Ministry of Finance and has been 
forwarded to them for appropriate action.  
                  
RECOMMENDATION 
  
4.3       Extension of concessions of Custom Duty in ship-building 
  
            The Committee finds that as per existing arrangements, capital goods imported for ship repair are 
exempt from levy of Customs Duty, whereas the same for shipbuilding is not exempted.  The 
Committee therefore recommends that since shipbuilding is a capital intensive for shipbuilding for 
modernization, upgradation and expansion of capacities may be exempted from levy of Customs duty as 
in the case of ship repair.
 
                                                                                                            (Para No.  5.10)
  
ACTION TAKEN 
  
4.3.1    The recommendation of the Committee relates to the Ministr y of Finance and has been
Page 11 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

forwarded to them for appropriate action. 
 
Page 12 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

CHAPTER-V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT 
A GLANCE 
  
3.1       Competition in Shipbuilding Industry 
  
            The Committee is of the considered view that Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) should 
concentrate on larger vessels to sustain itself in the market as it is the only shipyard that can construct 
vessels of large carrying capacity(110000 dwt and 125000 dwt). CSL therefore should reorient its 
marketing strategy from conventional method to gain orders from foreign countries in order to remain in 
the competition from countries such as Korea.  In the age of the Information Technology, it is 
permanent  for improving the intake of computer knowledgeable personnel to remain in the competition 
with the advanced countries. 
 (PARA 3.1.2)
  
3.4              Inter PSUs cooperation in Shipping Industry 
  
            The Committee is of the view that the Department of Public En terprises should undertake result
oriented follow up actions with all the concerned agencies for effective implem entation of the
Committee’s recommendation and shoul d not confine itself to mere fo rwarding the observations of the
Committee.  DPE while playing its pro active role may act as a platform interaction for mooting the idea
for inter PSUs cooperation in Shipping Sector as the concept is fast emerging and entails mutual benefits
and cooperation which is a must for  acquiring competitive edge in the liberalised and globalised
economy.  Promoting the signing of  MoU between India Navy, Coast Guard and HSL and the Ministry
of Defence is the responsibility of  DPE and re-orienting the paramete rs of MoU for giving impetus to 
the criteria of Inter PSUs cooperation for the larger benefits of Indian Shipyards and HSL in particular is
the primary responsibility of DPE, the Committee understands.  
(PARA 3.2.2)
  
3.5              Consensus on product range 
  
            The Committee feels that in order to appropriate the market share to each of the units o f
Shipyards, a consensus on product ra nge should be developed within each shipyard so as to avoid
duplication of design and detailed e ngineering efforts.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department of Public Enterprises should vigor ously follow up with concerned shipyards and 
Administrative Ministries/Departments,  that all out efforts s hould be made for avoiding duplication o f
design and detailed engine ering efforts which will  encourage inter PSU c ooperation and save precious
manpower and resources. 
  
(PARA 3.3.2)
3.4       Technology Transfer in Shipping Industry 
  
            The Committee understands that the Technology Transfer is the basic business precept for global
corporate Governance in order to  protect the domestic industry .  And the same is applicable to the
Shipping Industry in India which at present is merely related to  the assembling of parts imported form
abroad.  However, in order to i ndigenisation of shipping industry Te chnology Transfer is the first and
the foremost requirement.  
(PARA3.4.2)
  
3.5       Data exchange between the suppliers
Page 13 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

            The Committee is of the view that in the present age of the communication revolution data
exchange among suppliers is essential to explore the possibility of manufacturing of various items fo r
shipping industry and opening the av enues for mutual cooperation and ar eas of common interest.  It is
all the more necessary because of the globalization pr ocess.   Therefore, the Committee reiterates that
the Department of Public Enterpri ses must take up the matter eff ectively and efficiently with the
concerned administrative Ministries and  Departments  for necessary action at their end. 
  
 (PARA 3.5.2)
MINUTES 
  
XIV 
Fourteenth Meeting 
  
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 p.m. on 
Thursday, the 18th December, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
  
  
PRESENT 
     Dr. P.C. Alexander              -- Chairman 
  
                        RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.
                  Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
3.                  Shri Faguni Ram 
4.                  Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
5.                  Shri KhanGhufran Zahidi 
6.                  Shri K. Chandran Pillai 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
7.                  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee 
8.                  Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
9.                  Shri K. Francis George 
10.              Shri Thomas Hansda 
11.              Shri A.C. Jose 
12.              Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
13.              Shri Sunil Khan 
14.              Shri Manjay Lal 
15.              Dr. K. Malaisamy 
16.              Shri P. Rajendran 
17.              Smt. D.M. Vijayakumari 
18.              Shri Radha Mohan Singh 
Page 14 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

SECRETARIAT 
            Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary 
Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer 
  
2.
                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee and 
recalled the work transacted by the Committee during the year 2003.  The Committee also took note
of the work transacted by the four Sub-Committees. 
  
3.                  The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration:- 
  
(i)                  130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in  Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small 
Scale Industries); 
(ii)                131st Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(iii)               132nd Report on  MoU performance in respec t of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(iv)              133rd Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 117 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Small Scale Industries; 
(v)                134th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s 119 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Public Enterprises (M inistry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vi)              135th Report on Action Taken by the G overnment on the Recommendations
contained in the Committee’s 120 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) o f 
Department of Heavy I ndustries (Ministry of H eavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(vii)             136th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 127 th Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs o f 
Shipping Industry, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(viii)           137th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recomme ndations contained 
in Committee’s 122nd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Steel; 
(ix)              138th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 111 th Report on Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy
Steel Plan ( ASP) Durgapur (Ministry of Steel); 
(x)                139th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 125 th Report on Implementation St atus of Modernization
Expansion and Financial-cum-Business Re structuring Programme of SAIL at a 
Glance (Ministry of Steel); 
(xi)              140th Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on Recommendations contained 
in the Committee’s 126 th Report on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); 
(xii)             141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal an d
Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries); 
(xiii)           142nd Report Action Taken b y the Government on Reco mmendations contained in
Page 15 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm

the Committee’s 123rd Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Mines;
(xiv)           143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Indus tries (Ministry o f 
heavy Industries and Public Enterprises); and 
(xv)            144th Report on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on Recommendations containe d
in the Committee’s 124 th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry o f 
Agro and Rural Industries. 
4.         The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, i f
required.  After a brief discussion all the Reports were adopted. 
  
5.         The Committee authorized Prof. M.M. A ggarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi,
members Rajya Sasbha, to present th e Reports to the Rajya Sabha.  It also authorized Smt. Jayashree
Banerjee and in his absence Shri  A.C. Jose, Members Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lo k
Sabha on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003. 
  
  
6.                                 *                                    *                                            * 
  
  
  
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. 
***relates to other matters. 
  
  
                                     
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Page 16 of 16136th Report on Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/136threport.htm