PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken on the 281st Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)
285
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken on the 281st Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2017-18)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December , 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2017/Pausha, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................ (i)
2. I NTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... (ii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................. 1-22
(i) Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the
Ministry........................................................................................ 2-7
(ii) Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire
to pursue further in view of the Government's replies......................... 8-12
(iii) Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has not accepted replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to
review their replies........................................................................ 13-16
(iv) Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
desire further comments of the Ministry........................................... 17-22
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................ 23-26

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
2. Ms. Anu Aga
3. Shri Narendra Budania
4. Shri Ram Narain Dudi
5. Shri Vivek Gupta
6. Shri Shwait Malik
7. Shri Sanjay Seth
8. Shri Amar Singh
9. Shri Pramod Tiwari
10. Shri T. G. Venkatesh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Ranjanben Bhatt
12. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
13. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
14. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque
15. Shri G. Hari
16. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
17. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
18. Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
19. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
21. Shri Tapas Paul
22. Shri Mutthamsetti Srinivasa Rao
23. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
24. Shri Y.V . Subbba Reddy
25. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy

(ii)
26. Shri Raj Kumar Saini
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya)
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli
29. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
30. Shrimati Dev Varma
31. Shri Rajan Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja. V ,  Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
Shri Devinder Singh Bisht, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having
been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred Eighty-Fifth Report on Action
Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises) on the recommendations contained in the Committee's Two Hundred Eighty-First Report on
the Demands For Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. I, thank the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises)
for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee's Two
Hundred Eighty-First Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 15th November, 2017 considered and adopted the report.
  N EW D ELHI; RAM CHANDRA PRASAD SINGH
15th November, 2017 Chairman,
Kartik 15, 1939  (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry
Rajya Sabha

REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's Two Hundred and Eighty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to
Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department
of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the 281st Report have been categorized
as follows:
Chapter-I The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations as mentioned
in the Chapter - I of the Report.
Chapter-II The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
further in view of the Government's replies.
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them
further for the present.
Chapter-III The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted
replies of the Ministry and desires the Ministry to review their replies.
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect of
recommendations contained in Chapter - III and desires that the Ministry in the light of
further recommendations/observations of the Committee furnish explanations thereof.
Chapter-IV The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee desire further
comments of the Ministry.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim
replies; therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish Action Taken Notes in respect
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the action taken replies of the Ministry and recommendations/observations of
the Committee thereon are given in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/Observation
In tune with the Vision and Mission of the Department, the Committee observes that schemes such
as 'Enhancement of Competitiveness in Capital Goods Sector' and F AME- India have been launched and
are being nurtured carefully by DHI to facilitate the Heavy Industry sector. However, coming to the
portion of Vision and Mission relating to CPSEs, the Committee finds that there is a lot of lost ground
that is to be made up by the Department. The fact that the growth of Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd
(BHEL) finds specific mention in the Mission statement underlines the crucial nature of the prospects
of the Company to the economic interest of the nation. In this context, the Committee observes that by
making growth of BHEL an integral of its Mission, the Department has entrusted upon itself the
responsibilities of ensuring efficient performance of its flagship company. (Para 8)
Action Taken
Factual Observation of the Committee noted by DHL
Recommendation/ observation
The Committee observes that during the XII Plan period, the Budget Estimate (BE) of the Department
has mostly seen reductions under Plan Head at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. Even so, it is encouraging
that the Department has been able to utilize its RE amount to the maximum during the Plan period. Over
the years, the Committee has noticed delays in approvals as reason for many schemes/projects not getting
operationalized on time resulting in scaling down of allocations at RE stage. From the ensuing year, the
Committee expects this glitch to be removed and the Department finding it easier to spread its expenditure
more evenly considering that the presentation of the Budget has been advanced by the Government to
ensure that funds are made available to the Ministries/ Departments right from beginning of the Financial
Year. (Para 11)
Action Taken
During the XII Plan period, the Budget provision was kept for the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15 for the scheme on Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector. However,
it was reduced to zero at RE stage because there was delay for the approval of scheme by CCEA as
the said scheme was approved only on 15.09.2014 and was notified 05.11.2014. Similarly, another
scheme/R&D project for Development of Advanced Ultra Supercritical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal
Power Plants was approved by the Cabinet only on 10.08.2016 and therefore the Budget allocation made
for the years 2014-15 and 2015-16 was reduced to zero at RE stage.
Moreover, Department has been able to make optimum utilization of the funds at RE stage. The
observation of the DRPSC has been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/observation
While assessing the AE for 2016-17, as available during mid- February, 2017, the Committee notes
that 
` 942.62 cr remains to be utilized yet during the month and a half left in the year. It is expected
2

3
that this amount will be utilized completely without any constraints that can be posed by the provisions
of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act. (Para 24)
Action Taken
By the end of month February an amount of ` 2404.76 crore was utilized. An amount of ` 400
crore for providing interest free Non-Plan loan for payment of salary/statuary dues, Bank Borrowing,
TDS, LIC dues, EDLI, Sales Tax, Service Tax, VAT etc and VRS/VSS compensation on account of
proposed closure of Instrumentation Ltd. Kota (ILK) as per Cabinet Decision dated 30.11.2016 was
approved in the 3rd and final batch of Supplementary demand for Grants 2016-17. However, almost
whole RE amount were exhausted by the March end 2017.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that NATRIP has received yet another extension from the CCEA on account
of forex variation, statutory levies, rise in input cost and other factors like change in scope of supply.
The project, originally intended to be completed by April 2011 at the cost of ` 1718.cr , has now got a
revised cost of ` 3727 cr and an expected completion by July, 2019. According to the Department, the
latest extension and revised cost approvals by the Union Cabinet has brought the NATRIP project on
track. The Committee derives confidence from the said submission of the Department and expects that
NATRIP will finally be completed by July, 2019 and no further extensions or cost over runs will happen.
Meanwhile, the Committee also takes note of the fact that the contributions of NATRIP can result in
the scaling up of automobile exports from India, giving impetus to the "Make in India" program and
also meet certification needs of Indian automotive industry. (Para 33)
Action Taken
All efforts will be made to ensure that further time and cost overrunning in the project do not recur.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee finds that for 2017-18, FAME-India scheme has attracted an increase in allocation
of 
` 52.1 cr compared to the previous year and takes into account the submission of the Department that
this amount will be utilized fully. It is an appreciative fact that the restriction of the scheme to limited
cities for two and three-wheelers has been proposed to be lifted in the modified scheme. It is felt that
this lifting of restriction may be appropriately considered for other type of vehicles as well, further, the
Committee finds that the deliverables for 2017-18 under the scheme include subsiding 1.5 lakh vehicles.
It is understood that this subsidy is currently released to the Registered Automobile Manufacturers
(OEMs) for the sale of electric/hybrid vehicles. In this regard, the Committee wants the Department to
examine the feasibility of transferring the subsidy component to individual buyers rather than the
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). This will help increase the visibility of the scheme much
more besides the other advantages related to the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode. The Committee
also feels that DHI should consider popularising the scheme more extensively through visual and print
media. (Para 38)
Action Taken
Out of the fund @ ` 175 crore allocated for FAME India Scheme for the F.Y. 2017-18, an amount
of ` 70.25 crore has already been sanctioned/released in the 1st Quarter of the year i.e. during April-
June, 2017. Hence, it is apparent that the allocated fund will be utilized fully.

4
It may be clarified that the scheme was made applicable for the sale of Electric and Hybrid 2 (Two)
Wheelers and 3 (Three) Wheelers anywhere in India, without any geographical limitations vide Gazette
Notification S.O. 2696(E) dated 30th September 2015.
Para no. 11 of the FAME India Scheme Guidelines provides that based on the outcome and
experience gained in the Phase-1, the scheme shall be reviewed appropriately with inputs from stakeholders
and shall be considered for implementation post 31st March 2017, with appropriate allocation of funds
in the future. It may, however, be informed that the Phase-1 of the scheme, which was upto 31st March
2017, has been extended for a further period of six months i.e. upto 30th September 2017 vide Gazette
Notification S.O. No. 1055(E) dated 30th March 2017. Accordingly the scheme is being reviewed for
finalizing phase-II of the scheme.
Under Demand Incentive Delivery Mechanism of the scheme, the beneficiary got the incentive
immediately at the time of purchase of electric/hybrid vehicle from the dealer. The dealer through
respective OEMs got reimbursement from the Government under this scheme. However, the dealer has
to get the certificate from beneficiary under his/her signature uploaded in the online portal of the
Government, which clearly mentions that he/she has got incentive for the prescribed amount under
FAME India Scheme of the Government of India. However, the Government has already made Aadhar
Number for individual beneficiary mandatory to avail the benefit of demand incentive. This online system
for extending demand incentive to beneficiary under the scheme has also been appreciated by the DBT
Mission Team visited this Department. Hence, there seems to be clear visibility of the scheme apart from
immediate realization of monetary benefit by the beneficiary under the scheme.
The valuable suggestion given by the Hon'ble Committee for popularizing the scheme through visual
and print media is noted for compliance in future.
Recommendation/observation
Considering this, the Committee is of the opinion that the onus of avoiding the receipts of such
proposals lies with DHI/DCAAI. Accordingly, it is felt that DCCAI should come out with clear guidelines
for submitting the R&D proposals to act as a reliable reference document for people to prepare the said
proposals. The parameters on which proposals have already been approved by DCAAI may also be made
available to the aspiring proposers and may be given wider publicity. All such activities may be
coordinated under a helpdesk or some such similar arrangement. Further, the Committee recommends that
urgent action may be taken to improve fund utilization under DCAAI as it administrates the Auto Cess
collected by the Government to be used specifically for the betterment of the very important Automotive
Sector . (Para 44)
Action Taken
Cess on sale of automobiles is levied as per notification issued in 1983 @ 1/8th of one percent in
terms of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. For sake of administrative convenience
this Cess is collected along with excise duty collections but is maintained in a separate head of account.
This money is being used by Development Council for Automotive and Allied Industries that is chaired
by Secretary, DHI to fund pre-competitive R&D projects for the benefit of the industry through a
transparent process of Cess Committee which is chaired by Secretary, DHI. The proposals sent are

5
evaluated by a Screening Committee and Technical Sub-committee in the light of the Draft guidelines for
submitting R&D project mentioned below:-
Guideline for Submitting R&D Projects under Cess Fund
1. Name of the project
2. Name of the Institution/Agency executing the project
3. Need & Justification of the project
4. Targeted beneficiary
5. Whether similar Research work undertaken earlier; if so the detail thereof and the reason for
undertaking this project.
6. Relevance to Automobile Industry
7. Total Cost of the project
8. Duration of the project
9. Present capacity of the Institution/agency to take up this project
10. Whether the project has been approved by the concerned governing body of the Institution/Agency.
However, recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation/ observation
The Committee takes note of the fact that the areas that were not covered under the Scheme for
Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector are being addressed under the
proposed expanded scheme in tune with the National Capital Goods Policy, 2016. It is also taken note
that the Department had sought an allocation of 
` 255.45 cr for 2017-18 to fund sub-schemes under
the Policy. However, the actual allocation under BE has only been ` 150.00 cr which is still more than
double the funds provided last year. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Finance could be
pursued in this regard and when as more sub-schemes under the policy matures as the year progresses and
funds could again be sought at the RE stage . (Para 54)
Action Taken
At the time of preparing B.E 2017-18 an Expenditure of ` 150.00 crore was projected on basis of
projects already approved under different component of the on-going CG Scheme. However, there is a
likelihood of approval of proposals from IIT Delhi and IIT Kharagpur which may result in requirement
of further Budgetary allocation.
Apart of the above under the National Capital Goods Policy, Subs-Schemes are being formulated
for which additional fund will be required.
Based on the requirement further fund for Capital Goods Sector will be sought at R.E. Stage
Recommendation/observation
The Committee finds it encouraging to note that the Advanced Ultra Super-Critical (AUSC) Technology
project has finally got the approval to operationalize. It is extremely appreciative that the project has

6
been approved to be executed in Mission Mode and a component-wise timeline has also been set. Cost
overruns, if any, are to be funded by the stakeholders. All this makes the Project a game changer in terms
of efficient project structuring and orchestration. A timely completion should be a reasonable expectation
and would wipe out the history of frustrating delay that normally occurs during the process of securing
the necessary approvals for the projects. The Committee comprehends that successful completion of the
project would propel the country to the primary position among leading countries of the world who are
competing to master this cutting-edge technology that would reduce coal consumption and carbon dioxide
pollution, phenomenally. (Para 60)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. BHEL on its part has initiated work on the R&D phase
of the project in a mission mode and all efforts are being and will be made for its timely completion
within the envisaged schedule.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that the NITI Aayog has reviewed and provided its recommendations on 24
CPSEs under DHL Out of the 25 operational CPSEs under DHI, besides the ones marked for closure,
5 have been recommended for strategic disinvestment, 4 for transfer to State Governments, one for part
disinvestment and 2 to be considered later for disinvestment. Only HMT Machine Tools has been
recommended for revival. The Committee observes that if these recommendations are approved, DHI will
be left with very few CPSEs under its administrative control. (Para 64)
Action Taken
NITI Aayog was entrusted the responsibility to critically review the performance of CPSEs and give
their recommendations on their future. They have recommended closure of some chronically sick CPSEs
under DHI and transfer of some to the State Govt. They have also recommended strategic disinvestment,
merger of some profit making CPSEs. However, the final decision on closure or disinvestment is taken
by the Cabinet/CCEA after detailed study and due consultations with Ministries / Departments concerned
in the larger public interest.
It is correct that with the closure of a number of CPSEs, DHI will be left with only a few. However,
this will provide an opportunity to the Department to focus more on the well performing CPSEs viz.
BHEL to enhance their performance further. Keeping in view the future scenario in the power sector, an
ambitious R&D project with a capital outlay of ` 1554 crore has been embarked upon for development
of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) technology for 'thermal power plants which will reduce the
carbon emission and increase the efficiency of thermal power plants in future. This project is undertaken
by a consortium led by BHEL with NTPC, IGCAR and DST.
DHI has a much larger role to play for industrial and economic development of the country. It has
been entrusted to steer the Capital Goods Sector to become a driver of growth in the emerging industrial
scenario. Government, of India/ DHI has launched the National Capital Goods Policy and has also
introduced several schemes to promote technological and engineering innovations in the field of Capital
Goods sector. There is a great potential in this field and a lot of work is required to be done.
Apart from the above, DHI is also responsible for framing and implementing policy for Automobile
sector. A lot is being done for making India an International manufacturing hub for Automobiles and

7
Automobile components. Government of India / DHI has launched the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing
of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME- INDIA) Scheme to support the hybrid/electric vehicle
market Development and its manufacturing eco-system to achieve self-sustenance. This Scheme would
provide" affordable and environmentally friendly public and private transportation/vehicular mobility options
for the masses, further, a project namely National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project
(NATRIP) is also being implemented under DHI which envisages setting up of world class automotive
testing and homologation facilities in India.
DHI will be focusing on both of these champion Sectors.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee takes into cognizance the fact that the efforts taken by BHEL to arrest the downward
spiral of the Company during the last few years has begun to bear fruit. This is evident from the fact
that both the production performance and the Profit before Tax" (PBT) of the Company is anticipated
to pick up from 2016-17 onwards. Considering the elongated cycle of capital goods market, the Committee
expects the upward swing in the performance of BHEL to be gradual and anticipated to be facilitated
by the impetus of the Government to invest more in power and related infrastructure in coming times.
The Committee observes that the success of BHEL in power plant commissioning and in order booking
indicates that the path of revival for the Company lies largely in focusing on strengthening their core
business. (Para 75)
Action Taken
The Government of India has taken various initiatives for the development, improvement and
resolving issues affecting the power sector - which has been the main line of business of BHEL.
However, the Draft National Electricity Plan (NEP) released recently (in December 2016) by the Central
Electricity Authority (CEA) indicates conservative projections for coal based thermal power plants.
With a view to have a broader business and product offering - including in the power segment, as
well as address any contingency particularly against the backdrop of dampened new capacity addition
scenario (projected by CEA) in the conventional power generation sector going forward, BHEL has been
and is also continuously exploring options and making careful diversification efforts. Such efforts include
in areas such as Renewable Energy, Power Transmission, Water business, Transportation, Defence etc.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee also notes that the Department have issued necessary instructions to the HPC to put
up their procurement policy for bamboo on the website to bring more transparency. (Para 92)
Action Taken
The revised and updated bamboo procurement policy has been uploaded on the Website so as to
further ensure transparency in bamboo procurement.

8
CHAPTER-II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee takes note that the Department has quoted varying figures in its Annual Report
regarding the number of CPSEs under it. While 31 CPSEs are under the 'administrative oversight' of
DHI, the number of 'operative CPSEs' under it stands at 25. The Committee assumes that this variance
in figures is consequent to the closure of certain CPSEs during the preceding year. However, while
perusing the status of CPSEs as recommended by NITI Aayog placed at Annexure II of the Annual Report
(2016-17), the number of CPSEs recommended for closure is 7. If this figure is to be considered, the
number of 'operating CPSEs' should be 24. The Committee observes this as a divergence which should
have been avoided by more specific description of the status of CPSEs under DHI, elucidating the
rationale adopted for the same. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department should
ensure that important documents like the Annual Report should be spelt out unambiguously and without
deficiencies in future. (Para 6)
Action Taken
Observations of the DRPSC are correct. The variation comes due to taking into account of
Hindustan Cables Limited as operating CPSE. As such the figures of operating CPSEs come to 25,
whereas if the HCL is excluded due to its approval for closure by the Cabinet on 28.9.2016, the figure
will come to 24 CPSEs. However, the observations/ recommendations of DRPSC are noted for future.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds that the Plan and Non-Plan segregation of funds has been done away with
from the year 2017-18 onwards and the classification of Revenue expenditure and Capital expenditure
has been put in place. The Committee understands that such bunching of funds is in alignment with the
classification of funds as mentioned in the Constitution of India i.e., 'Revenue and other expenditures'.
Also, it is not difficult to observe that in the era where budget allocations are being evaluated on the
basis of the outcomes/outputs, it is only prudent to do away with the prior segmented classification in
favour of a more holistic approach. The Committee expects that this rational step along with the
advancement in the date of passing of the Budget will help the Department in utilizing the funds
provided to it, in a more systematic and effective manner. (Para 15)
Action Taken
Utilization of funds is being regularly monitored by the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee also finds that individual Outcome Budgets prepared by Ministries/ Departments of
the Government has also been done away with from the current year. Instead, the Department has sent
its output/outcome framework in respect of its major Central Sector Schemes to the NITI Ayog/
8

9
PF-II Division, Department of Expenditure. However, the Committee is of the firm opinion that linking
budgetary outlays with deliverables/outcomes is an essential feature to ensure public accountability and
transparency of the Government expenditure. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that a structured
document clearly bringing out the outcomes in terms of the objectives of the schemes/programmes of the
Department must be brought out either by the Ministries/ Departments concerned or by the Department
of Expenditure for the benefit of the public and to justify the continued funding of the programmes/
schemes. (Para 16)
Action Taken
Department of Expenditure, in May, 2016 had issued instructions for preparing the Outcomes for
both Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes and had clearly mentioned actionable
points for the Ministries/Departments. The main actionable points on the subject matter were as follows:-
(a) Measurable Outcomes need to be defined for each scheme over the medium term, which is
going forward up to the year 2019-20 (end of Fourteenth Finance Commission period).
(b) On the financial side, the budgetary allocation for 2016-17 may also be normatively projected
going forward up to 2019-20 (assuming a normative increase of 5-10% every year).
(c) Year to year physical outputs, consistent with the financial resources projected above, need
to be worked out in a manner that is not out of line with the measurable outcomes as defined
in para (a) above.
(d) An evaluation framework will also be designed for each scheme based on this exercise.
Continuation of any scheme beyond the Fourteenth Finance Commission period will be contingent
on the result of such evaluation conducted by NITI Aayog.
This the output-outcome framework  prepared by each Ministries/Departments approved by NITI
Ayog. Subsequently, the said output-outcome framework /Outcome Budget as approved by NITI Aayog
were published by the Department of Expenditure and it is a part of Budget Document 2017-18. Thus,
budgetary outlays have been linked with deliverables/outcomes and a structured document clearly bringing
out the outcomes in terms of the objectives of the schemes/programmes of each Ministry/Department
has been brought out by the Department of Expenditure.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that during 2016-17, the total allocation to the Department was hiked by
` 1780.30 cr ( ` 332.91 cr- Revenue & ` 1457.39 cr -Capital). From the reasons furnished by DHI it
can be seen that the hike in Capital Expenditure is due to funding of expenses related to the closure of
5 CPSEs and a unit each of 2 CPSEs. However, the Committee finds that the total assistance given to
the CPSEs as furnished in the reply does not match with the rise in the Capital Expenditure for the year.
(Para 21)
Action Taken
The CPSEs' approved for closure by the Cabinet/CCEA are TSPL, HMT Watches, HMT Chinar
Watches, HMT bearing Ltd., HCL, HMT Tractor Division and ILK. The closure approved consists of
cash assistance as well as non-cash assistance. Department had informed the DRPSC about the cash/
non-cash assistance as approved by the CCEA/Cabinet on account of closure of these CPSEs. The
financial assistance for the closure of these CPSEs has been split in the financial year 2016-17 and

10
2017-18. Accordingly a budget provision of ` 1001.46 crore has been made for closure of sick CPSEs
in the financial year 2017-18.
Since, complete cash financial assistance has not been provided by the Government in the year
2016-17, there is difference in the hike in Capital Expenditure in the year 2016-17 and the total assistance
to be given to CPSEs on account of their closure.
Recommendation/Observation
In this regard, the Committee observes that since it is highly improbable that the Department is not
in possession of the exact figures regarding CPSE- wise assistance provided during 2016-17, the only
possible assumption here is that the said figure has not been included in the reply to the Committee. Such
ambiguous replies make the examination of DFG difficult for the Committee, especially in the wake of
limited time available for the exercise and it precludes the Committee from arriving at precise conclusions
and recommendations. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Department, henceforth, should
ensure that the replies furnished to the Committee should be precise and self-contained and address the
issue raised in an unambiguous manner. (Para 22)
Action Taken
The CPSEs approved for closure by the Cabinet/CCEA are TSPL, HMT Watches, HMT Chinar
Watches, HMT bearing Ltd., HCL, HMT Tractor Division and ILK. The closure approved consist of cash
assistance as well as non-cash assistance. As already pointed out, Department had informed the DRPSC
about the cash/non-cash assistance as approved by the CCEA/Cabinet on account of closure of these
CPSEs. Since, complete cash financial assistance has not been provided by the Government in the year
2016-17. there is difference in the hike in Capital Expenditure in the year 2016-17 and the total assistance
to be given to CPSEs on account of their closure.
Recommendation/Observation
Coming to the increase in Revenue expenditure, the Committee finds that the same has been due
to allocation of extra funds as Grant-in-Aid to NATRIP. These funds are the only portion of the enlarged
RE figure that has been utilized for developmental work, wholly. (Para 23)
Action Taken
The increase in revenue expenditure at RE stage was mainly due to allocation of additional funds
of ` 313.00 crore as a grant-in- aid to NATRIP to expedite of the project for development of Automotive
Testing Infrastructures.
In RE 2016-17, the actual hike under Revenue in the form of Support to CPSEs and NATRIP is
only ` 333.00 crore (HPC- ` 20.00 crore + NATRIP- ` 313.00 crore). Major hike under Revenue Section
is in the form of book adjustment as ` 4753.00 crore reflected under Revenue are only book adjustments/
non-cash assistance to CPSEs which have been approved for closure/financial re-structuring by way of
waiver of interest, waiver of guarantee fee, write down of equity and write off loan. These details are
as follows:
(i) Waiver of Interest:-HMT Ltd.( `1408.32 cr) + R&C ( `424.81 cr) + TSPL ( `315.92 crore)
(ii) W aiver of guarantee fee:- HEC Ltd. ( `2.53 crore)
(iii) W rite down of equity:- HMT Ltd. ( `848.49 crore)
(iv) W rite off loan:- TSPL ( `151.15 crore) + HMT Ltd. ( ` 1601.78 crore)

11
The above hike in RE is on account of technical/accounting reasons.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee observes that in the Demands for 2017-18, greater amount of funds have been
allocated to NATRiP, Schemes for Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid and) Electric Vehicles
in India - (F AME- India), Enhancement of Competitiveness in the India Capital Goods Sector Scheme
and, for the first time for R & D Project for development of Advanced Ultra Super-Critical (AUSC)
Technology for Thermal Power Plants Scheme. Continuing the trend that began at RE in 2016-17,
support to CPSEs has got a much higher share of funds compared to developmental schemes. The
Committee expects that prudent and well spread out utilization of the allocated funds would be effected
by the Department in the year ahead. (Para 26)
Action Taken
As already pointed out, the CPSEs approved for closure by the Cabinet/CCEA are TSPL, HMT
Watches, HMT Chinar Watches, HMT bearing Ltd., HCL, HMT Tractor Division and ILK. The closure
approved consists of cash assistance as well as non-cash assistance.
Complete cash financial assistance has not been provided by the Government in the year 2016-17
and the financial assistance for the closure of these CPSEs, as approved by the CCEA/Cabinet have been
split in the financial year 2016-17 and 2017-18. Accordingly a budget provision of ` 1001.46 crore has
been made for closure of sick CPSEs in the financial year 2017-18.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee notes that DCAAI focuses on issues related to the growth of Automotive and Allied
Industries and at achieving the AMP targets. The funds available with DHI are mainly derived out of
the Auto Cess. Going through the utilization of funds by DCAAI for the proposals received over the last
four years i.e., from 2013-14 to 2016-17, the Committee finds that the utilization has been erratic, with
most of the years showing large quantum of 'Surrender'. During 2014-15, 'Surrender' of ` 90.00 cr . is
reflected under 'Plan' head, which is a huge jump from Non Plan RE figure for the year. The Committee
is perplexed regarding this Surrender of Plan funds by DCAAI because, to its understanding, the
allocations to DCAAI are usually made under 'Non-plan' head. The Department has justified the 'Surrenders'
by citing weeding out of immature proposals received under DCAAI as the main reason. (Para 43)
Action Taken
Budget provisions for DCAAI are made under 'Non-plan' head. The details of BE, RE, Expenditure
and Surrender for DCAAI from 2013-14 to 2016-17 are as under:
(` in crore)
Y ear B E RE Expenditure Surrender
2013-14 24.00 12.00 12.00 12.00
2014-15 24.00 21.24 21.24 -
2015-16 48.00 48.00 44.95 2.75
2016-17 82.15 72.65 42.87 -

12
However, it is mentioned that Surrender of ` 90.00 cr. as reflected under 'Plan' head in the year
2014-15 was for National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project (NATRIP) for which
Budget provisions are made under 'Plan' head. In the year 2014-15 a budget provision of ` 426.93 crore
was made for NATRIP, out of which expenditure of ` 241.91 was made and an amount of ` 90.00 crore
was surrendered at RE stage due to the project period of NATRIP has expired on 31/12/2014 for the
extension of which Cabinet note is under inter-ministerial consultation. Both the heads NATRIP and
DCAAI come under the same Umbrella Scheme Development of Automobile Industry.

13
CHAPTER-III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY AND HAS ASKED
THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW THEIR REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
Likewise, having taken note that the list of operative CPSEs under the Department is lesser by 7
CPSEs this year, the Committee of the considered opinion that the other Mission of DHI to 'provide
support to its CPSEs to improve their performance' also requires considerable thought process and timely
proactive interventions from their administrative Departments to ensure that the existing number of
operative CPSEs are retained and that their numbers are not further depleted. (Para 9)
Action Taken
The Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) has been undertaking performance appraisal of the CPSEs
regularly with a view to assess their inherent strength and potential to keep themselves afloat in the
current and emerging global economic environment of business. As a part of this exercise, while profit
making CPSEs are supported for further strengthening, the loss making CPSEs having the potential of
making a turnaround are also supported through revival and restructuring plans by the Government. The
CPSEs or their Divisions, which have been chronically sick and are not found revivable on sustainable
basis are closed down or hived off after allowing attractive VRS/VSS packages to their employees.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes that the reply of the Department to its recommendation is in
contradiction to the stand submitted by DHI before the Committee with regard to the strategic
disinvestment of Bridge and Roof (B&R) Company Ltd. The Company was decided to be strategically
disinvested despite the fact that it was a century old CPSE that was making profit.
The Committee desires to know whether all profit making CPSEs would be supported for
further strengthening, based on performance or the decision for further strengthening would
depend upon the area of operation of a particular profit making CPSE.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee, however, considering the extensions of time and the cost overruns witnessed in case
of NATRIP, feels the need for a performance audit of the project to bring to light the exact reasons for
the aforesaid problems. This would bring more transparency in the execution of the Project and throw
light on the possible refinements needed in the managerial aspects and also act as guidance for future.
In this connection, it has been submitted to the Committee that the Department has constituted Committee
for the same. With respect to a performance audit by Controller and Auditor General (CAG), it was
appraised that the Department has a limited role. In this connection, the Committee draws attention to
the fact that the 'Performance Auditing Guidelines, 2014' of the CAG recognizes the report of a
Department- Related Standing Committee (DRPSC) as one of a source document for planning a performance
13

14
audit. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to carry out a performance audit
of NATRIP . (Para 34)
Action Taken
DHI has no objection to the conduct of Performance Audit of NATRIP by CAG.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes the reply of the Government. However, the Committee would like to
remind the Department that the Committee had recommended a performance audit to be carried
out. Accordingly, the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation that all the requisite
process for a performance audit of NATRiP may be set in motion without any further delay. It
is for the Department to take action in this direction and report back to the Committee in this
regard.
Recommendation/Observation
On the issue of strategic disinvestments/closures, the Committee is of the considered view that
though the modern theories of government and economics want the Government to withdraw from
business, while deciding upon disinvestments/ closures, it is always prudent to keep in mind that CPSEs
are also meant to serve certain larger social causes. The Committee would like to make a mention of
an example in this regard i.e. the case of the decision for 100% disinvestment of HNL, a company that
was classified only as 'Incipient sick' in 2016. The Committee finds that the decision was taken despite
the dissent of DHI and the perception that the Company could have turned around with a modernisation
mill development plan that was under submission. The State Government is also understood to have been
responsive to the requests of FTNL with facilitative decisions. Taking this case as a cue, the Committee
recommends that the NITI Aayog shall be asked to take a more holistic view in case of decisions
regarding CPSEs that may be perceived to have a chance of progressing well with a little help. This is
based on the considered opinion of the Committee that CPSEs are still relevant and they may be allowed
reasonable and financially prudent chances to revive and restructure. (Para 65)
Action Taken
Hindustan Newsprint Limited has been recommended for strategic disinvestment and the process
is in progress. The quotations for 'Legal advisor' and 'Asset Valuer' have been received and are being
processed and the lender has been released for appointment of 'Transaction advisor'.
HNL has been in loss for the last four years from the year 2012-2013 due to the import pricing
of Newsprint. However the Company has been striving by making Writing and Printing Paper also, along
with Newsprint and selling of Pulp to TNPL etc. The Government of Kerala has been supporting the
Company by providing raw materials at a subsidized rate from its Forests. They have also allotted land
of 2670 Ha on lease basis for Captive Plantation. Water is also provided by the State Government for
manufacturing of Pulp and Paper.
Even though HNL is recommended for disinvestment, if GoI/DHI decides to revive, the Company
can make profits during this financial year subject to financial support of around `30 cr. As Working
Capital either from GoI or arranging through Banks Company can make Writing & Printing Paper and

15
Newsprint to meet the demand for Writing & Printing Paper as well as to retain the customers for
Newsprint.
Further Recommendation
The reply of the Department indicates the ambiguity in Governments approach with regard
to the disinvestment of HNL. Further, the reply also buttresses the concern expressed by the
Committee that HNL was decided to be disinvested despite its potential to turn around, may be
with a little more help in arranging working capital. Accordingly, the Committee again strongly
recommends that DHI, by its own opinion, may seek the feasibility of reversing the decision for
strategic disinvestment of HNL by taking into consideration, the fact that HNL has the potential
to revive into a profit making CPSE, with a little more hand holding from the Government.
Recommendation/Observation
Further, the Committee takes note of the submission of BHEL that the reduction in weighted
deduction from 200% to 150% in Income Tax for investment in R&D has affected the prospects of the
Company. Being the highest spender in R&D, as claimed by the management, BHEL stands to lose the
most because of this move. The fact that BHEL is the highest investor after the GoI in the Advance Ultra
Supercritical Project with an amount of 
` 270.00 cr. gives credibility to their said claim. Considering
this, the Committee recommends that the Government should think of restoring the IT deduction for R&D
investment to 200%. Further, the Committee views the Advance Ultra Supercritical Project as an avenue
which can help BHEL make up lost ground, if commercialized successfully. It is expected that the
Company will be executing their part in the project successfully. (Para 76)
Action Taken Replies
R&D represents a journey from mind to market. Further, progressive technological changes require
carrying out R&D activities on a continuous basis so as to provide belter or more efficient products,
services and solutions. In India, getting advanced technologies nowadays from outside is generally an
expensive and time-consuming affair, besides it does not inculcate self-reliance. It is therefore crucial to
incentivise companies and organisations taking risks by investing in R&D, which can lead to development
of indigenous technology and new products for benefiting the society. In this regard, Section 35 (2AB)
of Income Tax Act, 1961 provided for weighted deduction of 200% of the expenditure incurred by a
Company on scientific research on an approved in-house research and development facility from financial
year 2010-11 to 2016-17. This also facilitated promotion of R&D efforts in the Country, and has also
been an inducement for investing in in-house R&D activities by many companies/organisations. However,
the Finance Act 2016 amended the aforesaid section and reduced the weighted deduction from 200% to
150% from financial year 2017-18 to 2019-20, and also further restricted this to 100% from 01.04.2020.
The reduction in weighted deduction affects the income tax liability of many companies engaged in R&D
and innovation, including BHEL which is among the highest R&D spenders in the Country in the
engineering and manufacturing segment. Given the importance of R&D for any economy, it is important
for the Government of India to expand incentives so as to encourage companies and organisations to
carry out or expand R&D activity and also contributing to innovation in the Country. Hence, the
allowability of weighted deduction under section 35(2AB) of Income Tax Act should be restored to 200%
by the Govt. of India, as was available earlier. This will also facilitate companies and organisations in
contributing to the ecosystem of "Make in India" programme.

16
As regards the Committee looking forward to BHEL successfully executing its part in the "R&D
Project for development of Advanced Ultra Super-Critical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal Power
Plants", the Company has taken up the associated work on a mission mode and also initiated steps for
its implementation process. Further, all efforts are being and will be made for timely completion of the
R&D phase of the project within the envisaged schedule
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes that the reply of the Department is in tune with its recommendation
for restoration of the weighted deduction back to 200% in Income Tax for making investment
in R&D. It also notes that the "R&D Project for Development of Advanced Ultra Super-Critical
(AUSC) Technology for Thermal Power Plants" is being taken up in mission mode by BHEL and
measures are being adopted to complete it without time/cost overruns.
However, the Committee does not find in the reply any submission about the steps taken
by DHI for taking up the matter of restoration of the weighted deduction in Income Tax,
appropriately. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the matter may he taken up at
appropriate level and action taken in this regard may be furnished to the Committee. The
Committee also wants the Department to explore the possibility of providing special impetus to
R&D spending on the lines of priority accorded to CAPEX.

17
CHAPTER-IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DESIRE FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation/observation
However, the Committee finds that out of ` 60.00 Cr. RE for 2016-17, the amount released till the
third week of February, 2017 is only ` 24.0184 Cr. During the remaining period of little more than a
month, ` 29.4963 Cr. is expected to be released. The Committee would have been impressed had the funds
for the Scheme been utilized in a more spread out fashion. Even so, it is expected that the remaining
funds would be utilized during the year as anticipated by the Department. (Para 55)
Action Taken
During the financial year 2016-17 out of the allocated budget of ` 60.00 crore (R.E. 2016-17) an
amount of ` 59.75.00 crore was utilized and Grant-in-Aid was released to eleven project implementing
organizations whose proposals had been approved earlier under different components of the CG Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
Regarding the Modernization of HEC, the Committee would like to bring to record its persistent
recommendations for the same as contained in its reports on DFG 2013-14, 2015-16 and 2016-17 of
DHI. The Committee cannot but register its disappointment on the lethargy shown by the Government
in addressing this matter for such a protracted time period. Having said this, the Committee now finds
it encouraging that HEC might be seeing light at the end of the tunnel with the signing of MoU with
the Russian company CNITMASH for setting up niche training centres for specialized training and all-
important Saraswat Committee report strongly favouring the Modernization of HEC. The Committee also
lends its whole-hearted support to the same and strongly objects to the transfer of HEC to the State
Government of Jharkhand, which might sound the death knell of a company of potential strategic
importance. A State Government cannot be expected to take over successfully into its folds a Company
of the nature and depth of HEC. It is recommended that the said move of the transfer of the Company
should be summarily dropped and expeditious approval of the recommendation of the Saraswat Committee
for the immediate funding of the requirements of HEC be undertaken, without any further delay. Further,
keeping in mind the possible of the forays of the Company into Defence related and other strategic areas
of manufacturing, the Committee also favours transfer of HEC as a Defence PSU under the Ministry
of Defence. (Para 83)
Action Taken
In order to revitalize HEC Ltd., a Revival cum Modernization Plan was prepared by M/s MECON,
envisaging a comprehensive overhaul of HEC's plants and facilities at an estimated cost of ` 956.48
crore.
Pursuant to discussion in PMO on modernization-cum-revival of HEC, an Expert Committee under
chairmanship of Dr. Sarswat, Member NITI Aayog was constituted to review the modernization plan of
17

18
HEC prepared by the Consultant (M/s. MECON) taking into account the business plan required for future
sustainability.
The expert committee carried out a thorough study of the modernization proposal. The Committee
reviewed the performance of the Company since its inception, analysed its core competence and visited
the plant to evaluate the present state of plant and machinery. The Committee held varied interactions,
not only with different levels of officials of HEC but also with the important stake holders in HEC's
products viz. Coal India Ltd. SAIL, Indian Railways, NPCIL, Defence organizations etc.
The Saraswat Committee had submitted its report in Jan, 2017. The Committee has strongly
recommended the revival of the HEC and observed that a manufacturing infrastructure like that of HEC
is very much necessary for country's aspiration to be self-aspiration in crucial strategic products.
The projected requirement of funds for the modernization and making the company liability free is
` 2252 cr. which includes a capital investment of ` 1252 cr. discharging of liability of ` 700 cr. and
requirement of working capital of ` 300 cr.
The recommendations of the Saraswat Committee are under consideration of the Department. As
a part of first phase of implementation of the recommendation of the Saraswat Committee, Cabinet in
its meeting dated 31.3.2017 has approved the proposal for monetization of land of 675.43 acres not
currently in use by HEC to the State Government of Jharkahnd to raise ` 742.98 crore and utilizing the
proceeds, inter-alia, for liquidation of statutory dues and other liabilities.
As regards the recommendation of the DRPSC for not transferring HEC to state Govt, of Jharkhand
and also being in favour of transfer of HEC as Defence PSU under the Ministry of Defence, the
recommendations of Committee have been noted by the Department. Appropriate action on these points
will be taken by the Government of India in consultation with all the stake holders.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee also feels that in keeping with the recommendations of the Saraswat Committee, the
Department should strongly consider selling out a part of HEC's surplus land at 
` 1.65 crore per acre
so that the HEC is enable to pay of all its liabilities and embark on a journey of success. (Para 84)
Action Taken
The Expert Committee recommended modernization of facilities with simultaneous discharge of
liabilities for long term sustainability of the Company . It also recommended provision of sufficient
working capital especially during construction/modernization period and source of fund identified
recommended by the Committee has been (i) disposal of land in two phases (a) for generating `743 cr.
by transferring 675 acres of land to Govt. of Jharkhand @ `1.10 cr. per acre and (b) generation of
around ` 1000 cr. by transferring additional land to Govt. of Jharkhand @ `1.65 cr. per acre, (ii) Loan
from Financial Institution, to be kept at minimum level for minimum interest burden, and (iii) support
from Govt. of India.
Cabinet in its meeting dated 31.3.2017 has approved the proposal for monetization of land of 675.43
acres not currently in use by HEC to the State Government of Jharkhand to raise ` 742.98 crore and
utilizing the proceeds, inter-alia, for liquidation of statutory dues and other liabilities.

19
As already stated the recommendation of the Saraswat Committee is under consideration of the
Department.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee note that HPC has run into losses from 2009-10 onwards owing to reasons like the
supply of raw materials getting affected due to gregarious flowering of bamboo, a concurrent ban on
supply of bamboo by the Government of Mizoram and the non- availability of coal from Meghalaya due
to the ban on the same by NGT. It is understood that the raw material availability for Nagaon & Cachar
Paper Mill has almost become normal and coal availability is expected to be resolved by March, 2017,
in view of broad gauge railway lines being made available by then. Further, a revival plan to the tune
of 
` 1,313 crore has been submitted, recently, to the Government under which ` 95 crore has been
provided during 2017-18 for the installation of Oxygen De-lignifications of plant and modern Boilers
at NPM and CPM. Considering the unique importance of the units of HPC in the NER emanating from
the fact that they are the main source of livelihood of a large section of population in the NE and as
they are the only Heavy Industry in the area, the Committee recommends the Government to accord
priority to its revival/ restructuring and modernisation of HPC. The Committee also feels that the State
Government of Assam may also contribute their bit to help the company in its efforts to regain its lost
ground. (Para No. 89)
Action Taken
Draft Note containing the proposal for revival of HPC has been circulated to concerned departments
for their comments. Based on the comments of concerned departments, draft CCEA Note is being
modified.
HPC has informed that Assam Government is concerned to the problems of HPC and is extending
possible support time to time. Government of Assam (GoA) has given exemption of VAT on purchase
of bamboo. GoA has further assured to consider exemption of V AT on purchase of coal and sale of paper.
Abolition of Educational Cess on purchase of bamboo is also under consideration. GoA is also considering
signing of Moll for supply of paper for 5 years to Assam State Textbook Board.
Recommendation/observation
However, the Committee also takes into account certain issues brought before it during the oral
evidence which include the need for a transparent and efficient bamboo procurement policy and sales
and marketing methods of its paper to various consumers including institutional buyers like State
Governments. The Committee, in this regard, takes into cognizance the submission of DM that they will
request the State governments to buy paper directly from HPC rather than do so through agents.
(Para 90)
Action Taken
The revised and updated bamboo procurement policy has been uploaded on the website so as to
further ensure transparency in bamboo procurement. The revised and updated CS & Marketing Policy
including Institutional Buyers like State Governments who are directly purchasing paper from HPC has
also been uploaded on the Website.

20
As per the advice of the Committee, HPC shall take up with the State Governments through DM
for issuing GO/Notification (direct purchase of paper from HPC) without any involvement of Agent.
Recommendation/observation
Coming to the issue of procurement of bamboo, the Committee is of the opinion that this should
be made an avenue for the small and marginal bamboo farmers are to sell their produce at the best
remuneration to HPC directly. The Committee is sure that this will also ensure the cheapest priced
bamboo for the Company. In this regard, the Committee draws attention to the stress laid in the current
Budget towards legally streamlining and promoting contract farming to ensure best prices to farmers.
Accordingly, it is recommended, that DHI and HPC shall consider entering into captive farming contracts
with local farmers. Assistance can also be sought from the State Government to fulfil the requirement
of land, if any, in this direction. Further, the Committee is also of the opinion that HPC should keep
in mind a medium to long term goal of migrating to an alternate and more environment-friendly fuel.
(Para 91)
Action Taken
The recommendation of Committee noted. HPC is already having a Gate Purchase Scheme under
which bamboo is purchased directly from farmers without involvement of any Agent. This system will
be further strengthened.
HPC shall also approach State Government for allotment of barren/unutilised land for captive
plantation of bamboo.
The suggestion of Committee to migrate to alternative and more environmental friendly raw material
is noted and possibility of the same shall be explored accordingly.
Recommendation/observation
Still further, the Committee would want DHI to actively pursue the possibility of securing funds for
the revival/restructuring of its CPSEs in NER from the Non-lapsable pool of resources for NER.
(Para 93)
Action Taken
Draft Note containing the proposal for revival of HPC has been circulated to concerned departments
for their comments. Based on the comments of concerned departments, draft CCEA Note is being
modified. Suggestion of the Committee to secure funds for the revival of HPC from the non-lapsable pool
of resources for NER is noted and possibility of the same will be explored.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee finds that revival of NEPA Ltd. was approved by the CCEA in September, 2012 with
a CAPEX of ` 285 crore (out of which ` 157.00 in the form of fresh equity by GoI and balance ` 128
Crore through bank loans) for RMDP. Out of the pledged Government support of ` 157 crore the
Committee has been informed that an amount of ` 104.58 crore provided during 2015-16 is to be utilized
by March, 2017 for RMDP. The Committee's expectation was that this year the remaining Government
support will be provided and NEP A is pursuing, with the help of DHI, avenues for bank loan components.

21
However, the Committee expresses its disappointment that the date of completion of the RMDP has been
extended from March to June, 2017 and no budgetary support is extended for NEP A for this year.
(Para 97)
Action Taken
Government accorded approval to the proposal for revival of NEPA Limited with CAPEX of ` 285
crore. Out of this, GoI equity infusion was ` 157 crore and balance amount of `128 crore to be raised
by the Company from Banks/Financial Institutions. Funds of ` 157 crore have already been released by
GOI in 4 instalments; last one of ` 47.91 crore was released on 31.03.2016. Therefore no budgetary
support is extended for NEPA this year.
As per contract, CPP renovation works were to be completed by June 2017, however the vendor
agreed to squeeze the schedule. Demonetisation has affected the progress of works and vendor could
not manage to squeeze the schedule. Best efforts are being made to complete the project early.
Company is still on old 1997 scales. Salary support since April 2014 is pending for release. Since
February 2016, Company is anyhow managing to release only 50-60% salary and wages advance for
sustenance of employees. This is leading to de-motivation and also affecting the progress.
The original sanctioned RMDP budget was ` 285 crore However, the revised budget estimate of
RMDP now works out to be ` 428 crore due to cost escalations and additional items for the overall plant.
Proposal for Revised Cost Estimate is being included in the CCEA Note for salary support.
The process of balance loan ` 128 crore from the Banks (SBI & BOI) is under consideration. DHI
has given approval of mortgage of Plant and Machinery and immovable property at Delhi. SBI, the lead
bank, sought a revised TEV report. For the purpose, consultant was appointed. Draft TEV report has
already been prepared and sent to SBI and is under review at their end. They have also indicated
requirement of credit rating. Tender for the same has already been floated and the work will be finished
within a month. Loan is likely to be sanctioned in May/June, 2017.
Recommendation/observation
Also, the Committee finds that NEPA has scaled up its tentative production performance to 
` 306
crore for 2017-18 compared to ` 13.75 crore (anticipated) performance during 2016-17. The Committee
appreciates optimism expressed by NEPA and presumes that the Company expects to do well during
2017-18 as RMDP is to be completed during the year. However, if that is the case the Committee finds
it difficult to comprehend why NEP A expects a tentative loss of 
` - 8.60 crore for 2017-18 despite the
projected surge in production performance. The loss figure gets stark when compared to the anticipated
profit of 
` 11 crore for 2016-17. The Committee wants the Department to go into the matter and furnish
an explanation for this ironical situation with regard to the performance of NEP A. (Para 98)
Action Taken
The anticipated profit for the Financial year 2016-17 was ` 11 crore after taking into account profit
of ` 89 crore on transfer of 803 acres Hempur Land to Government of Uttarakhand. Despite best efforts,
transfer could not be finalized during 2016-17. The process is now in final stage and funds are likely
to be received in May 2017. Excluding this exceptional item, anticipated loss for F.Y . 2016-17 is
` 78 crore, which mainly consists of salaries and wages of ` 36.50 crore, VRS of ` 5 crore, interest
of ` 22 crore on GOI loan and establish expenses of ` 11 crore.

22
After implementation of RMDP, NEPA would be able to produce quality paper/newsprint of 100,000
TPA. RMDP completion was targeted in June, 2017 and as such, operations were considered for part
of the year only, with targeted production of 74,250 MT.
During the first year with 9 months operation, company was able to contain the loss to ` 8.60 crore
only, after taking care of interest on GOI loan (salary support) and bank loan and higher depreciation
of RMDP .
Recommendation/Observation
Further, the Committee takes into account the recommendation of the NITI Aayog that the revival
process of NEP A may be permitted to complete and the Company may be reviewed for strategic
disinvestment. Firstly, the Committee disagrees with the dichotomous approach adopted by the NITI
Aayog. It is obvious that the uncertainty regarding the status of the CPSE will dangle above the
Company until a final decision is taken and is certain to affect the morale of the employees. This itself
can impinge the post revival performance of NEPA. At the same time the Committee also feels that,
NEP A can sway the decision on disinvestment, if any, in their favor by coming up with outstanding
performance after revival. The Committee recommends that DHI shall extend all support to NEPA in this
regard. (Para 99)
Action Taken
DHI is taking necessary steps to extend support to NEPA Limited. A proposal for budgetary support
for payment of salary/wages of employees of NEPA Limited is under process. For successful implementation
of RMD, Revised Cost Estimate proposal of NEPA Limited is also under consideration. NEPA will
certainly be motivated to come out with an outstanding performance.
Recommendation/observation
The Committee recommends that the above submissions made by the associations may be appropriately
considered for favourable implementation to the extent possible as creating a facilitating environment
for the private industry to prosper will be decisive in the growth of Capital goods sector in the Country.
The Committee also feels that the Capital Goods Industry should be accorded priority status while
formulating initiatives to improve 'Ease of Doing Business' in the Country. The demands put forth by
the association which does not directly fall under the purview of the Department may be taken up for
inter-ministerial consultation. (Para 102)
Action Taken
The Industry Associations were involved in formulation of the National Capital Goods Policy. The
ongoing Capital Goods Scheme, presently under implementation in the Department of Heavy Industry is
based on the recommendations of the Report of the Working Group on Capital Goods that was constituted
under the aegis of the erstwhile Planning Commission. Industry Associations participate in the Development
Councils for the CG Sub Sectors in a regular manner to air their issues. In other words, DHI actively
involves Industry Associations before planning any policy interventions and take up their issues with
other Ministries like Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Commerce etc. The issues concerning CG Industry,
which include issues raised by the Industry Associations, have been taken up in the Inter Ministerial
Standing Committee for Capital Goods. Meeting and follow up action has been initiated.
Recently Development Council meetings for Machine Tools Industry and Textile Machinery Industry
have been held on 24.05.2017 and 16.05.2017 with active participation of the Industry/Industry Associations.

23
MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M on Wednesday, the 15th November, 2017 in Committee Room 'D',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ram Chandra Prasad Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Vivek Gupta
4. Shri Shwait Malik
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Birendra Kumar Choudhary
6. Shri S. P. Muddahanume Gowda
7. Shri G. Hari
8. Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh
9. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena
10. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
11. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
12. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy
13. Shri Rameshwar Teli
14. Shrimati Savitri Thakur
15. Shri Rajan Vichare
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sasilekha Nair, Director
Shri J. K. Mallick, Additional Director
Shrimati Sreeja V . Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Renu Sreekanth, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the members of the Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee took up consideration of the draft 284th and 285th Action Taken reports of the Committee
25

26
on the 280th and 281st reports on Demands for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises and Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises), respectively.
2. Thereafter, after some discussion the Committee adopted the draft 284th and 285th reports without
any change.
3. The Committee, then decided to present its 284th and 285th reports to the Parliament in the next
session and also authorized the Chairman, Committee on Industry to decide the date and names of the
Members to present the Reports.
4. Thereafter, the Committee also decided to meet on the 23rd November, 2017 to hear the Secretary,
Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) on the working of
the Department.
5. The Committee adjourned at 11.47 A.M.