PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED – TENTH REPORT
 
       ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN COMMITTEE
' S 86TH   REPORT ON PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF METAL SCRAP TRADE CORPORATION
LIMITED (MSTC) MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
          
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                       
 
1.            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                             
2.            INTRODUCTION                                                                                                              
3.            REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                          
4.            OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  AT A        GLANCE         
                          
5.            MINUTES
                                                                                                                                        
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January 2002)
 
Dr. P.C. Alexander            — Chairman @
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3. Dr . Abrar Ahmad
4. Shri Jayantilal Barot
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
6. Smt. Saroj Dubey
7. Shri Faguni Ram
8. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
9. Shri P.K. Maheshwari    
10. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
12. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
15. Vacant
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
24.  Shri A.C. Jose
25.
  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
26. Shri Brijlal Khabri
27. Shri Sunil Khan
28. Shri Manjay Lal
29.
  Dr. K. Malaisamy
30.  Shri A. Narendra
31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
__________________________________________________________________________
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f.12th .November, 02 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who  ceased
to be the Member of the Committee and Rajya Sabha with effect from 20th August, 02
 
34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
35. Shri Malyala Rajaiah
36. Shri P. Rajendran
37.
  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
42. Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
43.
  Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
45.vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta,  Joint  Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh,  Deputy  Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been
authorised  by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundred –tenth  Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in  the  Committee ' s  86
th Report  on Performance review of Metal  Scrap Trade
Corporation Limited (MSTC).
 
2.         The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes on recommendations contained in the
Committee’s 86th Report on Performance review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited (MSTC).
 
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on  17
th December,  2002 considered and adopted the Report.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;
December 17, 2002
DR.P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Steel on the Recommendations
contained in the 86
TH Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry Report on
Performance review of Metal  Scrap Trade Corporation Limited (MSTC).
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Steel   in respect of the   recommendations
contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Steel  
 
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:- 3.1.6 ,  3.1.7, 3.2.5, 3.2.6, 3.2.7, 4.7, 5.4, 6.3, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6,  and 12.7
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies :
(Chapter - II)
Recommendations:- 2.3,  and 3.3.2,
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Steel   :.
(Chapter - III).
Recommendations:- 7.4, 7.5,  8.6 and 11.2
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry of Steel   have not been received.
(Chapter - IV).
Recommendations:-  9.2, 10.6, 10.7, 10.8, 10.9 ,13.1.2, 13.2.2, 13.2.3,  13.3.2 and  13.3.3.
3.         The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry of Steel has accepted its  recommendations  as 
mentioned in Chapter –I of the  Report. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
4.                  In respect of the recommendation made in Para 2.3 and 3.3.2  as contained   in Chapter-II  the Committee is 
convinced  with the logic and explanation  advocated by the Ministry of  Steel  and therefore   does not want to  pursue 
further .
5.         The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-
III  and therefore  the Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of
these recommendations.
6.         In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Steel has  either   furnished the interim
replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance therefore, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry of Steel would furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendation categorized   in Chapter-
IV  in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
7.            Observations/recommendations of the Committee  are given in Chapter (V)
8.         The Details of the Action Taken Notes is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
           
Recommendations ( Para 3.1.6 and 3.1.7)  
 
MAIN ACTIVITIES
 
3.1.6    The Committee understands the compelling circumstances under which the  MSTC changed its focus of
activities from acting as a selling agent of SAIL to that of maximizing direct marketing (DM) when MSTC got de-
linked from SAIL in 1993.   The Committee appreciates the change in strategy in post-decanalised phase of imports.  
The Committee is pleased to observe the performance of MSTC in direct marketing and hopes that an all out efforts
would be taken by MSTC management to strengthen the marketing activities to improve upon financial performance to
a new commanding heights.
 
3.1.7    The Committee understands the problems being faced by MSTC in carrying out business in a situation when
demand for melting scrap is going down due to increased production of HBI and also because of setting up of scrap
disposal unit-set up by PSUs and other Government departments, MSTC management has to chalk out ‘new strategy’ to
combat the situation.  The Committee feels that provided the Ministry of Steel adhere to the principle of generating an
atmosphere of inter-PSU cooperation and take concrete steps towards assisting MSTC in procuring work-order from
Government PSU, the problems of MSTC could be sorted out to a great extent.  The Committee may be apprised about
the action taken by the Ministry in this direction.
 
Action Taken
 
The observations of the committee have been noted. Marketing activities of the Company have been further
strengthened. In 2001-02, International Marketing Division had achieved sales of Rs.413 crore as against Rs.274 crore
achieved in 2000-01. In 2002-03, in the first six months itself the volume of sales has crossed Rs.600 crore mark.
Financial results have also improved accordingly.
In order to further strengthen the marketing activities, MSTC has installed an e-auction portal and the company
has already registered about 400 customers.  To assist MSTC in procuring work-order from the PSUs, Ministry has also
addressed all PSUs under Ministry of Steel to use the services of MSTC vide letter No.9(13)/2002-MF dated 22.11.02.
KIOCL (Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited) has reported using e.auction of MSTC in case of two lots, in its letter
vide No.D.O.No.D(C)/2002  dated 3.12.02 to Ministry of Steel

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
Recommendations ( Para 3.2.5, 3.2.6,  and 3.2.7 )  
 
INTERNATIONAL MARKETING
 
3.2.5    The Committee is pleased to note the performance of MSTC in international marketing and appreciates the
strategy of MSTC management for enlarging its import basket in post decanalised phase to compete with other private
parties engaged in similar business.
 
3.2.6    The Committee feels that with the revival of steel industry and undergoing process of strengthening of anti-
dumping the prospect of MSTC in international market would lead to opening of new avenues.
 
3.2.7    The Committee further hopes that MSTC management would chalk out strategy to ensure its survival while
working in adverse condition caused because of lower demand for scrap due to change in charge-mix-owingto increased
availability of DRI and sponge iron.   MSTC has also to learn how to respond and work in a competitive environment.
 
Action Taken
 
The observations/feelings of the committee have been noted.   MSTC is already working successfully in a
competitive environment. In 2001-02, International Marketing Division had achieved sales of Rs. 413 crore as against
Rs. 274 crore achieved in 2000-01. In 2002-03, the volume of sales has crossed Rs.600 crore in the first six months.
Financial results have also improved accordingly.
 
Recommendations  ( Para 4.7)
 
MODERNISATION, RESTRUCTURING AND EXPANSION PROGRAMMES OF MSTC.
 
The Committee notes the steps taken by MSTC management in the field of modernization, restructuring and
expansion programmes of MSTC.  The Committee is of the view that although MSTC is not engaged in the process of
production and is a trading company, however, steps taken towards modernization and restructuring would help in
improving its operational efficiency and managerial effectiveness.  The Committee is of the firm view that
modernization in the process and system of working of the company would have a definite bearing on the physical and
financial performance of the company.  The steps taken to modernize and restructure the communication and expansion
in the domestic as well as international marketing Division would yield positive fruits in the functioning of the
company, the Committee feels so.   The Committee further feels that the efforts made on the part of MSTC management
for enlarging import basket would add to the profitability of the company.
 
Action Taken
 
            The views expressed by the Committee have been noted. 
            With a view to modernize and restructure its operations the company has started an e-auction portal which has
started hosting its tenders on the web-site and E-mail facility has been installed in all branches and regions.   These
measures have already resulted in an improvement in physical and financial performance.
            Some measure of restructuring has been done by merging the purchase & sales transactions both in the domestic
and international trade areas under a common marketing group.  
            The company has also confirmed that measures to enhance the export basket have led to greater profitability.
 
Recommendations ( Para 5.4) 
 
PERFORMANCE OF MSTC
           
            The Committee observes that the activities of MSTC has undergone noticeable change with the changing
scenario of steel industry, change in the Government policy i.e. perspective.   The MSTC which acted earlier as a selling

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
agency for SAIL in respect of their melting scrap arising, has started to carry the business with the other Government
PSU, SAIL started selling melting scrap directly.    MSTC went, rightly, for strengthening of Direct-marketing when the
Government policy stood for de- canalisation of import.  Although the performance of MSTC suffered to some extent
during this phase of tumultuous change, however, it is the managerial skill, which led MSTC for changing business
gear, and it is the concerted employees commitment which has got a bearing on the physical and financial performance
of the company.   The Committee acclaims the performance of MSTC and hopes that an all out effort on the part of the
management and employees would continue to improve the financial performance of the company to a new zenith.    
                                                                          
 
 
Action Taken
 
            Management as well as employees of MSTC are trying to put in their best to further improve the financial
performance of the company.
Recommendations ( Para 6.3)  
 
 MOU RATING OF THE COMPANY
 
6.3       The Committee observes that MSTC is coming out of the woods and doing excellent performance as is reflected
from MOU rating as awarded by Department of Public Enterprises after taking into various parameters of performance
into consideration.   The Committee wishes its best for MSTC for continuing its excellent performance in forthcoming
years and hopes that MOU system would always act as a catalyst to improve the physical and financial performance of
the company.                                          
 
Action Taken
 
            MSTC is thankful to the Committee for their good wishes and is confident of earning excellent MOU rating in
the years to come.
 
Recommendations ( Para 12.3, 12.4, 12.5,12.6, 12.7) 
 
SWOT ANALYSIS OF MSTC
 
12.3     The Committee observes that MSTC management has given due accordance to the significance of SWOT
analysis in the general working of the company.  The Committee appreciates MSTC management for adhering to the
basic principles and practice of management.   The efforts of re-defining of SWOT analysis on the part of MSTC
management to a praise-worthy step and the Committee hopes that MSTC management would continue to re-orient its
SWOT – analysis as per changing industrial and economic scenario and chalk out its further strategy as per the  outcome
of SWOT analysis.           
                                                           
12.4     The Committee is of the opinion that MSTC management should take advantage of its strength as the company
has minimal fixed overheads expenditure due to optimum manpower with expertise from SAIL equipped with modern
telecommunication and computer.   The Committee is pleased to note that MSTC has good track record for executing
contracts due to its goodwill in the domestic and international market.  Banking upon its company, goodwill/track-
record, MSTC management should make efforts to enhance its market share in domestic as well as international market.
                                                                                                                       
 12.5-   The Committee opines that with the induction of liberalization policy bureaucratic procedures and regulation has
been done away with.  However, MSTC management in tandem with the Ministry of Steel should point out in the ATN
of the present Report the bureaucratic hurdles and Government control having adverse imports on the marketing
capacity of MSTC.   The Committee is of the opinion that MSTC management should have a re-look on the areas of
weakness i.e. induction of latest technological developments, streamlining of the main activities positioning of right
man at the right place in right time, redrafting of corporate goal in the internal market etc.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
                                                                                                                       
12.6     The Committee recommends that MSTC management would explore ways and means to capitalize on
opportunities for better financial performance of the Company and it is being hoped that the Ministry of Steel would
extend all possible help to MSTC in this regard.    MSTC management may explore new governess for activities of the
company and consequent changes in the object clearance of the company in order to infect synergy in the overall
working of the company.                                
 
12.7     The Committee further recommends that MSTC management should chalk out strategy for getting rid of threats
being faced by the company.   MSTC management may undertake required steps to inject resilience in the working of
the company in order to combat risk and undertake new works in open and competitive environment.                            
Action Taken
 
Regular updation of the Corporate Plan is indeed necessary and will be taken up in due course by the Company.
The Corporate Plan of the Company was broken down into three phases
                                                Years
            Short-term             -            2001-3
            Mid-term            -            2003-7
            Long-term            -            2007-12
           
It is hoped that most of the goals of the short-term plan will be achieved. While certain goals will be exceeded,
there may be a partial shortfall in goals in certain areas. Revision of the Corporate Plan will be taken up towards the end
of the financial year ending 31.3.2003.
MSTC is making continuous efforts to enhance its market share in the domestic as well as international market,
which is substantiated by the growth in the physical performance of the company for the last five years.
There are no specific bureaucratic hurdles impeding the work of MSTC. In any case, its operations are governed
by commercial considerations approved by the Board of Directors. In fact the status of the Company as a Public Sector
Undertaking enhances its credibility and performance capability because credibility is crucial for a trading house.
Furthermore the support from the Ministry gives the Company an added boost in its domestic marketing operations
particularly with other PSUs and Government Organisations.
            Advice given by the Committee for exploring latest technology for improved performance and also for chalking
out a strategy for getting rid of threats being faced by the Company would be given due attention.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
 
Recommendation (Para 2.3)
 
CAPITAL STRUCTURE
 
2.3       The Committee notes that the company has an authorized Capital of Rs. 5 crore and paid up capital of Rs.2.20
crore as on 31.3.2001 of which approximately 90 per cent of the shares are held by the President of India and the
balance 10 per cent by the members of Steel Furnace Association of India and Iron & Steel Scrap Association of India
and others.  The Committee recommends that MSTC management would take every step to ensure that capital
restructuring of MSTC take place in such a way that return on investment (ROI) is maximum.
 
Action Taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
 
At the moment the Company is having no debt. There is also no plan to make any infusion of fresh capital.
Under the circumstances, there is no immediate plan of capital restructuring. However, as and when this is done, due
attention will be paid to the point made by the committee.
 
Recommendations ( Para 3.3.2)  
 
MSTC AS A HOLDING COMPANY.
 
3.3.2    The Committee notes the activities and responsibility of MSTC as a holding company.
 
Action Taken
 
            No recommendation has been made.
 
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY OF STEEL
 
Recommendations ( Para 7.4 and  7.5)  
 
Projects/Schemes/Diversification Plans and Financial Requirements.
 
7.4       The Committee is pleased to note that MSTC management is giving due consideration to diversification plans
and entering into joint ventures.   The Committee is of the opinion that in the prevailing market Competitive era,
diversification of activities and projection of business through partnership/joint ventures has almost become a corporate
culture.   MSTC is moving in the right direction by adopting the canons of modern days business practice.   The
Committee hopes that MSTC, whether in existing structure i.e.as a PSU or in the post divested phase would continue its
efforts towards adopting the prevailing precepts and strategy in accordance with changing market scenario.
                                                                                                             
7.5       The Committee notes that financial provisions for completion of plans/schemes of MSTC and at the same time
hopes that all the plans and schemes would be completed without time and cost overrun.           
                                                           
Action Taken
 
Of the Rs.30 crore planned to be spent during 10
th 5-year plan, Rs.14.85 crore have already been invested in
FSNL which is included in BE for 2002-03.  As a technical investment, the Company has also acquired debentures
worth Rs.15.80 crore in Tirumala Rerolling Mills Pvt. Ltd. 
 
While it is MSTC’s hope to emerge as an international trading house, the size of the company (only 280 people),
the low capital base of the company (Rs.2.20 crore – paid up capital) etc. naturally impose a limit.   In trading, ability to
take financial risk and bulking of purchases are important factors.   It is envisaged that the company will continue to
grow but slowly and shall have to depend more on developing its infrastructure for growth.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            The Committee is pleased to note that  MSTC  has  already  invested in Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd. (FSNL)  to the
tune of Rs.14.85 crore earmarked in BE for 2002-03 out of  the  fund of Rs. 30.00 crore plan to be spent during  Tenth
Five  Year  Plan.  The Committee further notes that the Company has also acquired debentures worth Rs.15.80 crore in
Tirumala   Re-rolling Mills Pvt. Ltd.  The Committee observes that MSTC,  slowly but  steadily, is sailing through  the 
prevailing market competition  in the  liberalized and globalised  economy.  However, the Committee is of the view  
that   MSTC management may undertake  concrete steps  to widen  the capital base of company.  It is further  advised 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
that  adequate  steps may also be undertaken  for development of infrastructure  for growth .   The Committee further
recommends that   MSTC management should chalkout  strategy  for optimization of manpower  so that the small size
of the company should not come on to the way of company to emerge as an international trading house.
Recommendations ( Para 8.6 )  
 
OUTSTANDING ISSUES BETWEEN MSTC AND M/S. HARSCO CORPORATION INC. USA AND ISSUE OF
DISINVESTMENT.
 
8.6       The Committee observes that all on-going disputes between MSTC and its partner M/s. Harsco Corporation Inc.
USA should be resolved with the good offices of Ministry of Steel and SBI caps should evaluate the value of shares of
FSNL to facilitate the negotiation process at the earliest.   So far as the disinvestment of 100 per cent Government
shareholdings in MSTC through a strategic sale is concerned the committee desires that the Department of
Disinvestment may, in line with decision taken in regard to disinvestment of NALCO and MOIL, consider to give
MSTC employees/an opportunity to purchase atleast 5 per cent share in MSTC as a measure to allay fears among
employees and generate a sense of organizational belongings and commitment among employees.                                 
                                                                                   
Action Taken
 
The outstanding issues between MSTC and M/s Harsco Corporation Inc. USA have been resolved             and
the 40% shares held by M/s. Harsco Corporation in the subsidiary company Ferro Scrap Nigam Limited have since been
acquired by MSTC on 31.8.02 at a price of Rs.14.85 crores.
 
The suggestion of the Committee for giving MSTC employees the opportunity to purchase at least 5% of its
shares has been sent to Department of Disinvestment for consideration.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
 
The Committee is pleased to note that  the outstanding issues between MSTC and M/s Harsco Corporation  Inc.
USA have been resolved amicably and the 40% shares held by M/s Harsco Corporation in  the subsidiary company
Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd.   have since been acquired by MSTC on 31.8.02  at a price of Rs.14.85 crores.  The Committee
feels that  the measures  undertaken   would  have a definite tangible  impact on  the physical and  financial 
performance company. 
 
The Committee, however, desires that Ministry of Steel should apprise the Committee  as soon as  the Ministry 
of Steel   receives the response/opinion of the Department of disinvestment  on the issue of giving MSTC employees an
opportunity to purchase    at least 5 per  cent  of its shares when  the company feels selected  for hundred percent
disinvestment.   
           
Recommendations ( Para 11.2)  
 
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT OF MSTC
 
11.2     The Committee notes that there is no surplus manpower in MSTC at the moment and MSTC is managing in its
activities with a total manpower of 280.  The Committee is pleased to note that MSTC management is adopting the
strategy of redeployment of manpower in order to have optimum utilization of manpower.  The Committee hopes that
MSTC is adhering to the principle of right man at right place at right time which would certainly help in improving the
performance of the company.   The Committee also expects that MSTC management would examine the labour
productivity in term of turnover/Sales /profit and human resource as per requirement.                
Action Taken
 
The strategy of redeployment includes proper placement of personnel as well as the requisite training in order to
ensure optimum utilization of manpower and enhance their productivity. This strategy has apparently succeeded because
the per capita turnover/ sales/profit have been increasing for the last 5 years without any major change in the manpower.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
            Had the Ministry of Steel  furnished the Committee  the details of  increasing labour productivity  in terms of 
turnover/sales/profit substantiated  and  backed   by tangible  facts and   figures, spreading over the   last five years,  the
Committee would have  been in a better position to understand the  efficiency and effectiveness of Human Resource
Management of MSTC.
           
The Committee  wishes that the strategy  of redeployment  of manpower i.e. proper  placement of personnel as
well as  the requisite training in order to  ensure optimum  utilization of manpower  would have  tangible positive
impact on the physical and financial performance of the company.
 
 
CHAPTER –( IV)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
OF STEEL HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED.
 
 
 
Recommendations ( Para 9.2)
 
INTERIM TURN AROUND PLAN
 
9.2       The Committee recommends that MSTC management should continue with the interim turnaround plan to
improve further the financial performance of MSTC.  The committee is pleased to note that the measure of
diversification of imported basket has a positive bearing on the performance of MSTC and hopes that introduction of e-
auction for domestic marketing Division would go a long way in improving further the physical and financial
performance of the company.   
                                   
Action Taken
 
            The e-auction portal which has been launched in June, 2002 appears to have created a favourable impact in the
market and it is hoped that e-auction would go a long way in improving further the physical and financial performance
of the company.
 
Recommendations ( Para 10.6,10.7, 10.8 and 10.9)  
 
 PROCUREMENT OF WORK ORDER FROM SAIL, RINL AND RAILWAYS
 
10.6     The Committee recommends that MSTC management should strive its best to procure work order from SAIL,
RINL and Railways.   The Committee desires that MSTC management should also approach steel units in private sector
for work-order.   The Committee hopes that introduction of E-auction portal by MSTC management would help MSTC
to procure work-order from all around.
                                     
10.7     The Committee is of the firm view that the concept of inter-PSUs co-operation should be advocated by the
Ministry of Steel to lend a helping hand to other PSUs in the areas of mutual interest.  In this regard the Ministry of
Steel may act promptly as a facilitator and help MSTC in the procurement of work-order from SAIL and RINL.             
                                                                                                           
10.8     The Committee further recommends that MSTC management and the Ministry of Steel would continue to take
up follow up action with the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on continuous and regular basis for procurement of
work order.   The Committee desires that the Railway Board should give due consideration to the request of MSTC
management by giving preference to MSTC.                                                           
 
10.9      The Committee desires that the Ministry of Steel in its Action Taken Note of the present Report would furnish

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
the details of efforts made by Ministry of Steel as facilitator to MSTC in procuring the work-order from SAIL, RINL
and Railways alongwith the quantum of work order so received.
 
Action Taken
 
MSTC has been advised to approach Steel units in the private sector for getting work orders from them. Ministry
of Steel has also written to Chairman, Railway Board regarding the e-auction portal of MSTC. Other PSUs under the
administrative control of Ministry of Steel including SAIL and RINL have been addressed in the matter vide letter
No.9(13)/2002-MF dated  the 22
nd November, 2002.
 
Recommendations ( Para 13.1.2)  
 
PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY MSTC
 
13.1     Sales Tax Structure
 
13.1.2    The Committee understands the problems being faced by trading organization due to prevalence of multi-point
tax structure.   Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Steel should take up the matter with the
Ministry of Finance and State Governments.   The proposal of uniform system of VAT and one point tax may be
examined and if found feasible, steps in this regard may be taken at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
The matter  has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance for consideration.
 
 Recommendations ( Para 13.2.2 and  13.2.3)  
 
REQUIREMENT OF SUBMISSION OF END-USE CERTIFICATES FOR IMPORTED MELTING SCRAP
 
13.2.2                The Committee is of the opinion that the Government should evolve alternative effective mechanism to
check the misuse of scrap imported for melting, being used for re-rolling.
 
13.2.3                The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Steel should approach the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Excise) for withdrawing the provisions for requirement of submission of end-users certificate for
imported melting scrap.   If the Ministry of Finance remains unmoved the provisions may be made for early submission
of end use certificate by the actual users’ and in case of default, a certain penalty may be imposed on the defaulter.   The
Committee is of the view that MSTC should not be subjected to imposition of higher rate of duty for the default
committed by the actual users.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Ministry of Finance has been addressed in the matter vide letter No.D.O. No.9(13)/2002-MF  dated 3.12.02 .
 
 
 
 
Recommendations ( Para 13.3.2 and 13.3.3) 
 
REQUIREMENT OF AVAILING SERVICES OF TRANS-CHART FOR HIRING SHIPS FOR IMPORTS
 
13.3.2              The Committee understands that since MSTC finalise import contracts usually in a short span of time so
it is difficult on the part of MSTC to fix a vessel through Ministry of Shipping (Transchart).   Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Steel should take the matter with the Ministry of Shipping and help MSTC out by

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
doing away with the requirement of approaching Transchart.
 
13.3.3              The Committee notes that MSTC is of one of the few Government, companies which has successfully
withstood the impact of port liberalization era by changing its strategy according to the need of the situation. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry of Steel would extend a helping hand to the company in sorting out its problems so
that it can fetch a better price from the prospective buyers.
 
Action Taken
The Ministry of Shipping and Surface Transport has been addressed in the matter vide letter 
D.O.No.9(13)/2002-MF dated 22.11.02.
            The Ministry of Steel is committed to provide legitimate help and support to MSTC. The company has received
help from the Ministry of Steel whenever it has sought it.  However, since the Company is operating in the area of
commercial trading, they have been advised to develop business relationships based on commercial negotiation and
viability rather than Government intervention.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Recommendations ( Para 7.4 and  7.5)  
 
PROJECTS/SCHEMES/DIVERSIFICATION PLANS AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS.
 
      The Committee is pleased to note that  MSTC  has  already  invested in Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd. (FSNL)  to the
tune of Rs.14.85 crore earmarked in BE for 2002-03 out of  the  fund of Rs. 30.00 crore plan to be spent during  Tenth
Five  Year  Plan.  The Committee further notes that the Company has also acquired debentures worth Rs.15.80 crore in
Tirumala   Re-rolling Mills Pvt. Ltd.  The Committee observes that MSTC,  slowly but  steadily, is sailing through  the 
prevailing market competition  in the  liberalized and globalised  economy.  However, the Committee is of the view  
that   MSTC management may undertake  concrete steps  to widen  the capital base of company.  It is further  advised 
that  adequate  steps may also be undertaken  for development of infrastructure  for growth .   The Committee further
recommends that   MSTC management should chalkout  strategy  for optimization of manpower  so that the small size
of the company should not come on to the way of company to emerge as an international trading house.
 
Recommendations ( Para 8.6 )  
 
OUTSTANDING ISSUES BETWEEN MSTC AND M/S. HARSCO CORPORATION INC. USA AND ISSUE OF
DISINVESTMENT.
 
The Committee is pleased to note that  the outstanding issues between MSTC and M/s Harsco Corporation  Inc.
USA have been resolved amicably and the 40% shares held by M/s Harsco Corporation in  the subsidiary company
Ferro Scrap Nigam Ltd.   have since been acquired by MSTC on 31.8.02  at a price of Rs.14.85 crores.  The Committee
feels that  the measures  undertaken   would  have a definite tangible  impact on  the physical and  financial 
performance company. 
 
The Committee, however, desires that Ministry of Steel should apprise the Committee  as soon as  the Ministry 
of Steel   receives the response/opinion of the Department of disinvestment  on the issue of giving MSTC employees an
opportunity to purchase    at least 5 per  cent  of its shares when  the company feels selected  for hundred percent
disinvestment.   
           
Recommendations ( Para 11.2)  
 
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT OF MSTC
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
            Had the Ministry of Steel  furnished the Committee  the details of  increasing labour productivity  in terms of 
turnover/sales/profit substantiated  and  backed   by tangible  facts and   figures, spreading over the   last five years,  the
Committee would have  been in a better position to understand the  efficiency and effectiveness of Human Resource
Management of MSTC.
 
            The Committee  wishes that the strategy  of redeployment  of manpower i.e. proper  placement of personnel as
well as  the requisite training in order to  ensure optimum  utilization of manpower  would have  tangible positive
impact on the physical and financial performance of the company.
 
 
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
 
 
The Committee  met  at  3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 17
th December, 2002 in Committee Room  ‘A’, Ground
Floor Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            PRESENT
 
1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander      — Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
3. Smt. Saroj Dubey
4. Shri Faguni Ram
5. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
6. Shri P.K. Maheshwari
7. Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
8. Shri S. Sivasubramanian
9. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
 
LOK SABHA
 
10. Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
11. Shri Nepal Chandra Das
12. Shri Thomas Hansda
13. Shri A.C. Jose
14. Shri Sunil Khan
15. Shri Majay Lal
16. Shri A. Narendra
17. Shri Ananta Nayak
18. Shri P. Rajendran
19. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
20. Chowdhary Talib  Hussain
21. Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them of agenda for the
meeting of the day
 
 
 
 
3.            Thereafter, the Committee took up following draft reports for consideration:-
(i)
                 95th Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in engineering and Construction Sectors the Department of
Public Enterprises;
(ii)                100th Draft Report on performance review of National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC)
(Ministry of Steel);
(iii)              103rd Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 87 th Report on
the implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of Steel);
(iv)              104th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 85 th Report on
the Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories ltd. (Ministry of Steel)
(v)               105th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 64 th report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes and Post Disinvestment Performance of
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) Ministry of Coal and Mines;
(vi)              106th Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Goods Industry the Department of Public Enterprises,
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)            107th Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(viii)           108th Draft Report on the action taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 91 st Report on
Coir Board-A Performance Review pertaining to the Ministry of agro & Rural Industries;
(ix)              109th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 84 th Report on
implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries;  and
(x)               110th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recommendations contained in Committee’s 86 th Report on
Performance Review of metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) Ministry of Steel.
 
3.1       *                      *                      *                      *
3.2       *                      *                      *                      *
3.3       *                      *                      *                      *
3.4       After a brief discussion all the reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
3.5       The Chairman nominated two Members from Lok Sabha and three Members from Rajya Sabha to present the
reports to both Houses of Parliament.
4          *                      *                      *                      *
5.      The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M.
 
 
*Relates to other matters

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/110threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:26:00]
 