Ind. 17/96 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
INDUSTRIALISATION OF BACKWARD AREAS 
AND THE STATE OF THE CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR 
(Presented on 7th March, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 1996/Phalguna, 1917 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMrosmoN OF rnE CoMMITreE ............ , • • • • • • • • .. • .. • • • .. • .. • .. • • • .. • .. • .. • .. .. .. • .. • .. .. • .. • .. • (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT OF rnE COMMITI'EE ••• , ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• !_.- •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 
3. APPENDICES 
(i) Minutes of the Meeting ............. ., ............................................................. . 
(ii) Reports of Sub-Committee ....................................................................... .. 
1-12 
15-32 
35-241 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
4. Smt. Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
6. Shri Anil Kumar 
7. Shri Govindram Miri 
8. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
9. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
10. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
11. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
13. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
14. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
18. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
19. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
20. Shri Rama Krishna Konthala 
21. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
22. Shri Balin Kuli 
23. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
24. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
25. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
26. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
27. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
28. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
29. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
30. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
31. Shri Rajcndra Agnihotri 
32. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
33. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
34. Shri Ramdew Ram 
35. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katberia 
36. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
37. Shri Mohan Singh (Dcoria) 
38. Shri Naval Kishorc Rai 
39. Shri Manjay Lal 
40. Shri Rasheed Masood 
(i) 

(ii) 
41. Smt. Suseela Oopalan 
.U. Shri Purna Chaodra Malik 
43. Shri Tej Narayan Sinah 
44. Shri P.G. Narayaoan 
45. Shri Bolla Bulli Runaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri O.K. Saklena, Deputy Se~tary 
3. S.bri Shamsher Singh Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 

SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITIEE 
Having been authorised by the Department~elated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, I, Ashok Mitra, in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee, Present its 
Seventeenth Report. 
2. The Committee has, during its tenure, striven to keep itself abreast with the emerging/ 
trends in the industrial sector and the specific problems afflicting national industrial growth. 
The issue of overall growth apart, the unevenness of industrial expansion, the Committee is 
aware, has acute political and social implications. In the current financial year, the 
Committee chose to undertake a number of field visits in different parts of the country in 
order that members could closely acquaint themselves in on the state of the major industries, 
particularly heavy and capital goods industries, and the factors instrumental for the 
persistence of industrial backwardness in several regions. 
3. For the purpose 'Of the field visits, the Committee divided itself into six Sub-, 
Committees; five of the Sub-Committees concentrated on the problems of 'individual regions, 
while the Sixth Sub-Committee was assigned the task of studying in depth the difficulties 
faced by women industrial workers as well as women entrepreneur~. . · 
•"· 
4. The reports submitted by the Sub-Committees are reproduced in full in the annexures. 
These contain a number of ·valuable" observations and recommendations. The present 
introductory section is largely based on the analysis and findings of the Sub-Committees; it 
also offers a few supplementary comments on the issues under examination. 
5. A few preliminary comments are perhaps in order. The pattern of national industrial 
growth over the last five years is somewhat mixed. While during 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-
94 2_verall growth _C?f_" ind~t.!l_!lputput 1 including in the capital goo~ was less than 
satisfactory, a significant improvement in performance took place in 1994-95. The first half 
of 1995-96 witnessed an accleration in the rate of growth in the manufacturing sector as well 
as in the other components of the index of industrial production. The latest reports, 
however, indicate a slackening of this tempo, so much so that the rate of growth in the 
current financial year is unlikely to exceed what it was in the preceding year. The tidings 
from the capital goods sector are specially disconcerting; the rate of growth in this sector 
here has fallen below what it was last year. 
6. The Twelfth Report of the Committee had drawn attention to a phenomenon_"WhiC!ll§ 
worth mentioning again in·the light of developments in the current year. The Committee had 
in that Report dwelled upon the seemingly obverse relationship fe,att!Ji.PL.!~~E:~s~.J.!l jh~ 
finan~!_~~or iii01liose. iD. industry. In periods !hen ~~~_B!owth has been._~~~· 
tlie_sii~e_market has boomed; in contrast, as dunng maJOr parts oftlie current year, brisk 
Industrial performance has been accompanied by depressed conditions in the stock 
exchanges. It is conceivable that external events, incl,uding political developments, have led 
to a lowering of expectl!-tions ·on the part of foreigners and other investors regarding the 
state of health of India's financial sector. Irrespective of the validity of this hypothesis, it is 
possible to speculate on the other hypothesis, namely, that when resources are. drawn ~!!! 
~r underwriting industrial e)tp~n.sion,· !}le ~~~~!!_~i~§J~£!~.!Ji~]?.in~li !§.[_~~.E!l~! 
~rop. This need not be an altogether unwholesome development though. Lower realisations 
iri the stock exchanges may lead to a re-allocation of investiable funds toward the direction 
1 

2 
of conventional savings instruments, strengthening thereby the prospects of larger capital 
formation in the economy. 
7. A development of this nature will have an immediate impact on the prospects of several 
public sector industrial units, mostly in the capital goods sector, which the Sub-Committees 
had the opportunity to visit. The Committee would like to demarcate between two 
~
tegories of sick public sector undertakings. To the first category belong units which were 
rig!nally in the priv~-,~~ctor but were 1ak~P.-.!?~.-because of diverse considerations, 
/ ncluding the E~~i!!.!~ .P!~!_ec!_~e ~t~_of WE!!cers,. The other category consists of units, 
\ rgely specialising in the manufacture of heavy structurals and similar equipment, which 
came up in the course of the past four and a half decades, mostly on the initiative of the 
Government, in response to the challenge of self-reliant, industrial development. Invest-
ments in tl;lese units run into hundreds of thousands of crore of rupees comprised of hard­
earned savings of the Indian citizeMry. It is also not easy to brush aside such facts as that 
these units engage a huge number of workers and produce large volumes of key industrial 
commodities. Whatever criterion of efficiency may be deployed, it would need boldness to 
assert that these public undertakings do not deserve to he kept, alive merely because, on a 
one-to-one basis, their products are unable to compete with anaiogous products manufac­
tured by a foreign company and are imported from overseas. To fully open up the system 
means allowing these industrial units to go to the wall and therefore to lay waste investments 
sunk in the past. It should be one of the nation's concerns to explore whether alternative 
possibilities of survival exist for such units. The economy is extremely resource-short, as 
indicated by the recurrent crisis in the money market this year affecting fresh capital 
formation activities. In the circumstances, the endeavour ought to be to extract whatever 
output is extractable from installed industrial capacity without worrying excessively whether 
the goods produced would meet the criterion of external competitiveness. If these products 
have a ready market within the country, that should be justification enough for the process 
of production in these units not being permitted to come to a halt. The recent sharp 
deterioration in the external value of the rupee and the consequent need to curtail imports 
should lend additional support to the point of view that installed capacity in the country 
should, as far as possible, be fully utilised. 
8. Jhe problems confronting the capit!L&o.2~~~ctor.!!r~.J~m!~~h: !<?,,~~sappe~~!ernig~!_: 
In the face of unbridled globalisation_, the lifting of import controls and 31 drastic acrosS-the­
board reduction in the rates of import duties, competition from overseas can only intensify. 
The downward slide in the ext~rnal value of the national currency is unlikely to be of much 
help in restraining imports, since large profits resulting from expanding foreign trade 
concentrated in the hands of a limited section of people may re,nder a relatively stiff dollar 
rate of exchange only a minor irritant to imports. The Government and the Ministry of 
Industry in particular will therefore have to cbntinue to exercise a monitoring role vis-a-vis 
developments in these industrial units. The point made earlier, namely, that it is less than 
prudent not to avail of capacity that is already built into the system, perhaps ought not to be 
summarily brushed aside. The derating of installed capacity in a particular branch of 
industrial activity marked by old age may be carefully phased out and coordinated with 
planned imports of new capital equipment. In a totally decentralised environment, 
dovetailing of this kind is not easy. The necessity of a loose framework of industrial and 
exchange control planning therefore appears imperative even if the other features of 
industrial liberalisation are regarded as acceptable. 
9. A comment is called for on the role of the banks. The im ression the Sub-Committees 
have gathered is that, in many instances, industrial uni~ve ceased to ~-~.~~~ because <?!. 
.. "'"'*"'-~------yo,...-.-~-···""'"'"""'~'"-··~- _ __...< 

3 
~e~c!~I!~ of bank:s_t~u>ff~E-~he>rt-tt;@liquidity eithe~ for the 2Y!EE~.-~f. !~~.~-a!~!!~~ 
~r J()!.!!l~ . .E.~.E.!~t.!! . .2f.~~es ~<?!~~E~~~.!!J:iead of realisation from th~_!!!~!~~~o~ ~e proceeds 
~f th~- finis;t!~~"-·prQ~Uct~. ~eyeral industrial units have reportealy their books fillea·wnli ·· 
orders, ~t are unable to ope~!e.._~ecause the banks will not advance the necessary finance, 
nor will budgetary funds be made available. To be fair, it is perhaps pointless to blame the 
banks for this situation; they are under injunction from the higher authorities. 
10. Ambivalence in public policy in such matters is best avoidable. A number of contrary 
forces are seemingly at work. Some sympathy apparently still lUfkS in some official quarters 
for nursing back to health industrial units that are currently experiencing difficulties but have 
excellent equipment and face prospects of a ready market. But either the banks which could 
have assisted them are themselves sick, or a genuine doubt exists whether it would be wise 
to extend the sickness of industrial units to the banks too. It is against this background that., 
the Government often announces its decision not to extend further budgetary support to the 
units concerned and also cut them off from bank finance. Because of this confusion in 
policy, units which are otherwise viable and can survive without ballistic support from the 
Government, except only marginally, also come to suffer. 
11. The mechanism for rehabilitating sick units through the m~dalities of the Board of 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction experimented with in recent years can not be said to 
have met with unmitigated success. The BIFR was assigned the task of picking and choosing 
among the units that have gone sick; a procedure was laid down for quasi-judicial 
consideration of the conditions obtaining in the different units; supposedly hopeless cases 
were put up for purchase by private entrepreneurs, while for those units for which revival is 
agreed upon, the BIFR was to lay down a pattern of financial accommodation which the 
parties involved, including the Government, were expected to go along with. Some recent 
instances suggest that even when a certain arrangement has been finalised under the BIFR's 
auspices and with its approval, the terms laid down have not been adhered to by the banks 
or the Government itself, such as with respect to the write-off of interest charges and duties 
or the induction of fresh funds. The Sub-Committees were told that, in the case of some ( 
public undertakings that were t~rri!e>J:ies __ taken over in the past, pre-nationalisation dues 
were still pending, (attendi~g\ to the difficulties of the units . 
. ._,,!.(~ 
12. This state of ambivalenCe will perhaps continue for some while. In the meantime, it will 
be instructive if limited experiments could be tried out pursuant to various suggestions offered 
to the Committee. One such suggestion is for common production planning by a group of sick 
public sector units located in reasonable proximity to one another and specialising in a similar 
range of products: by interacting closely with one another and ensuring that the output of one 
unit is accepted as input in a neighbouring unit and vice versa, both units, it is claimed could 
significantly improve/ the prospects of their survival. Should that be the case, even banks and 
fmancial institutions might decide to change their general approach. 
13. The Sub-Committees were specially enjoined to enquire into the reasons of persistent 
industrial backwardness in several parts of the country despite periodic announcements of 
official resolve to transform the existing state of affairs. The Sub-Committees studied the 
problem with respect to the North-Eastern parts of the. country, the retarded parts of the 
Indo-Gangetic plain and similar parts in the Deccan plateau, and in the water-bound Union­
Territories. The detailed observations by the Sub-Committees can be seen in the Annexures. 
14. There are reasons to feel deeply disturbed over the economic conditions obtaining in the N·l . 
North-Eastern States. Even the rudiments of basic infrastructures are missing from the 12" ... : 
region. Not even an apology of a railway network exists over large parts, the roads are ' 'if'~ 
equally sparse, power is hard to come by. Whatever agriculture is carried on is under difficult -

,l 
4 
lS 
drcumstan<:es 8Dd basically concentrated in a single season. It is the lack of power) and the 
pervasive official disinterestedness till now to discipline the Bra}lamputra that g'primarily 
responsible for the insufficient supply of irrigation water: The assured availability of such 
water could have easily led to the cultivation bf more than one crop in the vast stretches of 
arable tracts in the region. The creation of other infrastructural facilities, including roads, 
bridges and rail links, would not only have provided additional employment during the phase 
of their construction, but would have also created the appropriate setting for full-scale 
industrialisation. 
15~ Financial resources, it wDI be stated, constitute the major stumbling block, thwarting 
the regions's aspiration to develop infrastructure and propel a~ricultural and industrial 
growth to higher plateaus. The prevalence of insurgency conditions, it is further pointed out, 
! 
implies a considerable draiuing away of funds which could have ~n otherwise deployed for 
accelerating the develepment of basic: infrastructural sei"Viees. This later statement has an 
unusual import : as if till as long as ~surgency is not totaJJy ·put down, the people of the 
North-East have to forgo the luxury of economic progress which citizenry in the other parts of 
the country are entitled to. 
16. There can be, another way of looking at this causation between insurgency and lack of 
development. Once the Union and State Governments pool their resources together and 
embark on a planned programme of economic and industrial ·growth, which. succeeds in 
transforming the economic landscape of the area and creates several sources of employment 
and earnings, that itself would conceivably be the surest guarantee against the persistance of 
insurgency conditions. Young people join the ranks of rebels bealuse of the discontent they 
tuck within themselves. Such discontent may have diverse roots, but, more often than not, is 
triggered by the lack of economic opportunities, including opportunities for gainful work. 
Viewed in this context, allocation of funds for infrastruc~ural development Jtncl industrialisa­
tion have a degree of significance which is not less than that of the allocation made for 
strengthening the defence and security arrangements. in the region. / 
17. The planning of power too, there is no question, has gone awry in the North-Eastern 
States. This region has been the victim of a strange kind of applied bureaucratic reasonin1. 
The authorities concerned, including the Planning Commission, ha~e in the past cut back on 
ambitious programmes which desired to add to the capacity for power generation in the 
North-Eastern States and Union Territories. These were invariab~ turned down; since there 
was so little of agriculture and industry in the region, it would, it was explained, be a waste 
to ~nction funds for new power projects. Such an attitude was a major stumbling block in 
the way of any growth impulses being set in motion in the region. Stagnancy of growth wa~ 
used as pretext to deny any appreciable increase in power capacity in the subsequent p~&;ud) 
and the inability to add to power capacity ensured stagnancy. in growth. The CUZ(.;~t of this 
logic has to be broken if the North-Eastern States are to register any meaninb,.ful economic 
progress. 
18. The island territories, namely Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep, also 
serve special attention: Although these islands are Union Territories and thus are directly 
1 administered by the Centre, yet things have practically remained neglected in as far as 
! ; industrial development is concerned. The Ministry of Industry may therefore actively involve 
]\ itself in drawing up time-bound schemes for development and promotion of appropriate 
, · small scale units in these islands. · 
~ . 
19. Two other points are worth mentioning. First, it would be risky to assume that, with 
liberalisation, the responsibility for promoting industrial growth in the backward regions, 
including in the North-East, could be left the care of private entrepreneurs. On their own 

5 
private investors are unlikely to move to territories where basic infrastructure is lacking; nor 
are they themselve going to take the initiative to promote the growth of infrastructual 
facilities in these areas since the rate of return, at least in the initial period, will be limited. 
The Government will therefore have to fill the major role for developing most of the basic I 
infrastructures, including power. 
20. The other issue to ":!!!~~-"~"~t.~~Jion needs to be dra~-2ver and over ~ain- is, once ...,. 
more, the reported indi~~l)ce Q{J?Ankst. including nat~2~al_ise&J!_anJ<.!~!!S.fi~an~al 
institutions, to the "missio_I!_EL.E!Q.!!l_9ting gr~~ .iL~.l!~!wC!T4 !~iPJll.· Both banks and 
financial institutions have concentrated their activities on half-a-dozen major States. The 
bulk of the short-term credit and long-term finance have flown to these States. Even within 
these States, the Preference has been to finance activities in urban tracts and relatively 
prosperous farming zones. In contrast, large pockets of under-developed territories have 
continued to remain so. Government funds are low, and with bank and financial institutions 
not cooperating, the situation has actually worsened in recent years. The introduction of 
schemes such as the Prime Minister's Rozgar Y ojana has not made much of a difference. In 
the view of the Sub-Committees, progress of '!YOrk under the PMRY and other projects of a 
similar nature has bogged down because of less than enthusiastic cooperation on behalf of 
the banks. In the context of the criteria of profitability indicated for the banks and the 
rigour with which these have, of late, been sought to be enforced, the banks, it is entirely 
possible, have fo\md it inadvisable to support schemes proffered by small-scale operators 
under the PMRY; the risk of default on credit advanced is adjudged to be high with respect 
to this class of borrowers. It is in the circumstances desirable that the Ministry of Finance 
evolves special stipulations and norms for facilitating the speedy implementation of public 
projects with high employment-generating and output-hosting pOtential, in particular in 
designated backward areas. 
21. In any event, the general observations on how to pull the North-Eastern States out 
of the morass of backwardness would also apply in large measure in respect of areas of 
retarded 'growth in the States of the Indo-Gangetic Plain and elsewhere. The situation as it 
has emerged in the country is as if we are dealing with two separate human conglomerations. 
In the metropolitan and near-metropolitan pockets, the phenomenon observed is of 
industrialisation on a buoyant march: most of the available supply of power is earmarked to 
cater to the needs of these advanced tracts; the power distribution network is also so 
arranged .as to serve, almost exclusively, urban and semi-urban zones. As just mentioned, . 
b~ and public financial institutions have their gaze riveted on these pockets. The rest of 
the hinterland is, it seems, hardly anybody's concern. And yet, these later tracts are where 
the bulk of the population live and subsist .only marginally. 
n. Two dimensions of the problem of inter-re.l!,~llal economic. imbalances, in the 
Committee's view need to be demarcated. Firs'f""is the uneven spreacror·resoilrces ·and basic 
facilities between the different geographical regions; the second is the simultaneous existence 
of relatively advanced and retarded tracts within the same region. Conventional prescriptions 
for narrowing both categories of disharmony have not succeeded in the past; nor can it be 
assumed that simply because the country has embarked on the road to liberalisation, 
economic inequalities of diverse types Will disappear on their own.· If anything, it could well 
be the other way round. Whatever its failings and imperfections, the State will have to play 
a crucial role in narrowing the inter-regional unevenness. There is little point in lamenting 
upon the lack of adequate perceptions in the past about such economic imbalances. 
Stereotyped recommendations made by official and quasi-official agencies and institutions 
did not work, either because these were not implemented with any degree of sincerity and 

6 
thrust; or because these were targeted on misplaced objectives. In the judgement of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Industry will have henceforth to assume the lion's share of 
responsibntty for implementing programmes of industrial growth in hitherto backward areas. It 
will have to draw up detailed blueprints of projects in coDaboration with the Planning 
Commission and of course the State Governments concerned. The preliminary task is to map the 
obvious areas of backwardness in the different States, prepare det~;tiled data on locally available 
materials and other resources, and reach a measure of consensus on the priorities which should 
guide industrial growth in such pockets. Detailed prescriptions of "!hat iS to be done in each area 
should embrace, apart from infrastructural planning, such measures as the opening of a single 
window arrangement to cater to the requlremt!nts of potential entrepreneurs, and scrutiny of 
smaD·scale activities which are to be fully integrated with the dovetaUed into the national plan, 
the State and district plans and plans and programmes of agencies at both Central and State 
levels. People's representatives, including Members of Parl~ent, should be part of this 
planning process at all levels. It will be necessary to work out priorities between ditTerent schemes 
and proposals at different levels, accompanied by corresponding resource planning at each of 
these levels. Funds earmarked for a particular district or project, it hardly needs stating, should 
not be diverted elsewhere, and such funds should be released on time. 
23. None of these ideas is new. What is however called for is sustained application of 
energy to translate them into reality. No illusion should be entertained about the magnitude of 
the task, involved. The application of energy has to be of a sustained nature, not merely because 
of recommendations made in this or that official report. It will be the product of pressure 
generated from below. This is in a sense the single most important instrumentality for propelling 
industrial growth which the Committee cannot but take cognizance of. There is a stirring of 
impulses noticeable amongst hitherto deprived sections and communities dispersed over India's 
vast countryside. The level of literacy amongst these communities is still low despite fifty years 
. of independence. That has not prevented the awakenings of a degr~e of relevant consciousness : 
millions amongst these sections are fully aware of the nature and extent of social and economic 
deprivation of which they are victims and the distance which separtttes them form other classes, 
communities and regions. 
24. Economic retardation, it can be argued, is itself an exclusive function of illiteracy and 
ck of social consciousness. Viewed in that light, perhaps the very first obligation of a 
programme which pledges to cut through industrial backwardness in the dispersed parts of the 
country would be to launch a massive literacy programme in the areas of retared growth. 
25. This, then, is the crux of the issue. The extent of economic progress achievable in a 
particular region is as much a function of the resources that are applied as of the general milieu 
in which activities take shape. It is equally dependent upon the quality of awareness of the 
populace. The development process, to really get going, awaits an impetus to be articulated in 
the hinterland. "The demand for industrialisation and for larger opportunities for work and 
employment has to originate from below. This demand still does not develop in its on, but is a 
function of environmental conditions. The importance of the social factors which give shape to 
enviroment must not be under-rated. Nor can we ignore the reality that the spread of literacy 
plays a major part in the unfolding process. Literacy assists in the absorption of newer 
technology and in the acquisition of new skills even as it makes hitherto deprived and backward 
communities better aware of their rights as free and equal members of this nation. Not that 
social and political awamesss can blossom without an adequate base of literacy. When their time 
comes, historical forces will assert themselves, however, adverse the circumstances. Literacy, 
however, imparts a greater coherence to the impulses which at such states strive to express 
themselves. 
... 

7 
26. It is, in this connection, most important to urge for the full-scale association of 
women in the on-going process of industrial aud economic development in backward regions. 
The feudal stigma perSists, women continue to be socially oppressed in several balatant ways 
in almost all parts of the country. Certain current realities are self-evident. Given the limited 
resources a poor country can garner for growth and the built-in inequalities in the system, 
the vast majority of households are in any case at the receiving end of gross social injustice 
and rough, unfair treatment. Women in these households are generally far more subjected to 
social exploitation than the other numbers. This is on account of the traditional roles 
assigned to men and women from which easy exits are not possible in an ambience marked 
by horrendous feudal legacies. On the other hand, as developments particularly in Kerala 
illustrate, once literacy and nutritional standards improve for women, social mobilisation 
gains in strength, and stirrings from below for better economic advancement assume an 
immensely superior thrust. 
27. The plight of millions and millions of women engaged in industries such as coir and 
bidi manufacture or in other small-scale activities often beggars description. Irrespective of 
the provisions of our Constitution and those of the United Nations Charter of Human 
Rights, women workers are discriminated against in industry after industry in more ways 
than one : they suffer from low wages that are paid at irregular intervals and are very often 
victims of social indignities of assorted kinds at the workplace. The ultimate remedy of 
cour-ce lies in the better mobilisation of women under the umbrella of organised trade union 
' movements. The spread of mass literacy is likely to help the process of such mobilisation, 
but this is one area where it would not be prudent to leave things to autonomous market 
forces. The administration both at the Central and State levels have to step in and eDsure that 
\ 
statutory minimum wages for women in the specified industries are not only announced 
~ regularly but are duly implemenied. The hoUsing and security arrangements for migrant 
" ( women workers should be carefully monitored and superintended. Hours of work for women 
workers also need to be strictly regulated. Not only should the law be laid down in these 
areas; where necessary, special regulatory .bodies must be set up to ensure that the statutory 
injunctions are strictly followed. 
28. While our attention cannot veer away from the problem of poor, helpless 
unorganised women engaged in cottage crafts and similar other activities, and sometimes in 
large-scale industrial undertakings as well, it would not be irrelevant to take cognizance of· 
the problems faced by women who have entered the arena of industrial entrepreneurship or 
who have ventured into the field of industrial management. It is certainly for consideration 
whether women entrepreneurs, especilly in the relatively backward regions, might not be 
encouraged to set up cooperative institutions and are helped to obtain both rmancial 
accommodation and entrepreneurial advice from rmancial agencies including the NABARD 
and the IDBI. One interesting suggestion put forward in this connection is the earmarking of 
a quota for purchases at both State and the Central levels from establishments presided over 
by women entrepreneurs. 
l9. It is far from the Committee's intention to under-emphasise the role of good roads 
or rail and communication links to propel. development, nor would it ignore such a 
worthwhile suggestion that, apart from a solid primary education base, all backward areas 
should be blanketed by technical training institutions and polytechnics so that the supply of 
skilled labour does not lag when the development process really catches on. 
3i0. A number of other suggestions deserved to be followed up. The district Panchayat 
organisation should invariably have a special cell for planning industrial growth; arrange­
ments must be made to associate technical advice of the appropriate kind with this cell. 

8 
While the task of building and expanding the basic infrastructures will devolve on higher 
authorities, a mechanism must exist whereby the felt urges of the people are enabled to 
reach the . upper echelons in the decision-making proces$. 
31. It should be the primary responsibility of the Union and State Governments to 
earmarks funds to ensure that projects formulated at the local level on the basis of local 
resources are not allowed to die out. State Finance Commissions can be generally expected 
to allocate funds for implementing such local level programmes; it would still be desirable if 
resources are additionally made available, on a matching basis, by the Union Government 
for such purposes. 
32. As mentioned above, the development of basic infrastructures will largely depend 
on the contents and contours of planning at the national level; the role of the Union 
Government will necessarily loom large here. In the view of the Committee, while planning 
at the national level for infrastructural growth, the priorities hitherto followed need to be 
reversed, and project which would help enlarge the growth potential in hitherto retarded and 
deprived areas should be lifted to the top of the ageuda. That is to say, where the choice is 
between allocating funds at the margin on a project either in a backward region or in an 
area already r~~atively economically advanced, the decision should, as far as possible, be in 
favour of the hitherto retarded area. This is in fact the outstanding challenge the nation will 
have to face at the level of national decision-making in the coming years. In case, because of 
resource constraint, a temporary halt is ordered in capacity expansion of telecommunications 
or rail or road links in a metropolitan or semi-metropolitan region, it may have 
repercussions on the pace of growth in. the region for some while. On the other hand, such 
an embargo on the expansion of basic infrastructures might conceivably also lead to a more 
rational use and elimination of waste from out of existing capacity. True, such slackening of 
the pace of expansion of infrastructural facilities could inconvenience some interest groups 
and activate lobbies in their support. The authorities would do well not to yield to such 
developing pressures. That apart, the system of fiscal and monetary incentives should be so 
worked out that private entities, whether foreign or domestic, receive the appropriate signals 
at each point of time. Whatever the other compulsions, the persistence of economic 
backwardness over large stretches of the country has ominous social and political 
implications. Priorities at the national level must change in response to this challenge; the 
nature of this change must be det~rmined by impulses triggered from below. 
33. That a poor country is always hamstrung by lack of resources is a cliche. But 
because it is a cliche, its relevance is not reduced. What is essential is that Central and State 
Governments, as well as the dccentralised agencies further down the hierarchial line, must 
not -work at cross purposes and thereby fritter away resources. Political and ideological 
· positions of decision-makers at different levels will often tend to be at variance with one 
another in such a huge, big country such as ours. It would still be extraordinary if a large 
measure of agreement is not reached on the priority tasks in particularly retarded area. 
34. One point deserves separate mention. It would be neither desirable nor feasible to 
take away the executive and monitoring functions of the panchayat institutions in 
programmes aimed at eradicating industrial backwardness. No outside agency can fit into the 
format of decentralised development assigned to representative institutions the office-bearers 
of which have been elected on the basis of a democratic mandate. The panchayat bodies will 
continue to be the pivotal element for prepaiing the blueprint of growth at the local level 
and its subsequent implementation. It is for consideration whether during the on-going 
process, the panchayat agency concerned should not invite representatives of the State 
Government, the Union Government, banks and principal financial institutions to participate 

9 
in an advisory capacity. Reconciling the points of view of the different entities is not as 
difficult a task as it might seem initially, Once, through close interaction with one another, 
the realisation dawns that. their mutual roles are neither adversary nor competitive, the 
impulse to cooperate would being to gain instrength among the participating agencies, 
thereby facilitating the realisation of objectives the panchayat institution had set for itself. 
35. Some infrastructures, such as opening up rail and telecommunications links, belong 
to the exclusive domain of the Union Government. The creation of new rail connections has 
currently been reduced to a political football; priorities are more often than not determined 
on the basis of the clout of individual interest groups or individual Members of Parliament 
or particular State Governments. The time, has certainly come, the Committee feels, when 
this pattern is substituted by a more rational system of priority fixation. As argued earlier in 
this Report, the demand for industrialisation emanating from hitherto neglected regions will 
call for a shift in the agenda. In the view of the Committee, the Ministry of Industry and the 
Ministry of Railways may consider constituting a joint decision-making body in association 
with the Planning Commission to decide the aggregate sum to be set aside for railway 
development in the country's backward regions over a five-year period, indicate its region­
wise breakdown and settle the sequence according to with the projects are to be executed. 
State Governments will have the right to approach these inter-ministerial Committees with 
their suggestions and recommendations. Similarly, within each State, while deciding the 
priorities and Scheduling of infrastructure development, the State Government may consider 
taking into account representations from below and have them processed for onward 
despatch to the Centre. 
36. The Committee envisages no difficulty. in case a similar pattern were to emerge with 
respect :to the planning and implementation of other infrastructural activities, such as road 
building and creation of new telecommunications facilities. The State Government will 
express its views on the determination of priorities, but it will exercise no veto, just as no 
Central agency will have a veto either. The endeavour will be to reach a consensus on the 
basis of continuous efforts at accommodating pne another's point of view. This, after all, . 
constitutes the core of a genuinely federal arrangement. 
37. The Union Government, particularly in the Ministries of Industry and Finance, 
should, in the view of the Committee, exercise appropriate moral suasion so that State 
Governments desist from competitive soliciting of private investment in their respective 
States by, for example, lowering local taxes such as sales taxes. Such a practice reduces 
realisable revenue for all the States and thus reduces their overall capability to finance 
industrial development on their. own. It would at the same time be desirable that the Union 
Government takes a sympathetic view of representations about the desirability .of granting 
certain prerogatives to State Governments in terms of Articles 268 and 269 of the 
Constitution, a gesture which· is unlikely to alfed the revenue growth potential for the Centre. 
The nation can develop only on the basis ol endeavours shared by the Union and State 
Governments; a dog-in-the-manger policy can scarcely help the cause of balanced national 
economic growth. 
38. The Committee would like to append a further observation. The package of policies 
for promoting industrial growth in backward areas had tended to be applied in the past in 
piecemeal fashion, often sequentially, without taking into account the total picture of 
possibilities; For instance, there have been announcements from time to time of 'holidays'. 
from income and corporate taxes on behalf of the Centre and sales tax on behalf of the 
States, or of transport subsidies, of supply of inputs at subsidised rates, and so on. What bas, 
however, been missing is an intearated approach which bas also the imprimatur of approval of 

10 
banks and financial institutions. The Committee would like-to see this disarray substituted 
by a blueprint of recommendations vetted jointly by all agencies concerned for, say, a five­
year period, which will then be rolled over from year to year. Such blueprints should be 
made. prepared for all levels of administration. The blueprint at the national level should 
be dovetailed into the State and panchayat level blueprints. Requests for alterations and 
adjustments on a year-to-year basis could emanate either at the national level or the State 
level or from the panchayat bodies themselves. 
39. A measure of confusion may be inevitable in the beginning in such exercises. That 
is. only to be expected. Once the agencies and institutions operating at different levels are 
forced to interact with one another, the sheer weight of circumstances would perhaps 
persuade them to agree on a common set of goals and a common set of instrumentalities 
to attain these goaly / 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
.. 1. The Ministry of Industry should assume the main responsibility to implement 
Pfogramme of industrial growth in hitherto backward areas. It should draw up detailed 
btbeprints of projects in collaboration with the Planning Commission and the State 
Governments. Detailed prescriptions of task for each area should embrace, apart from 
infrastructural planning such measures as the opening of a single window arrangement to 
cater to the requirements of potential entrepreneurs. 
2. The Planning Commission should, in collaboration of the State Governments and the 
Union Ministry, set up a cell to monitor the availability of basic infrastructural facilities 
such as railway net-work, power, roads and water. 
3. There is need to formulate clear-cut policies with regard to the -role the Union 
Government intends to play in respect of its public sector undertakings, particularly with 
reference to disinvestment of its share holding. 
4. The Government also n~eds to r.e-derme its policy concerning the public undertakings 
which are under reference to the Bureau for Industrial and Financial . Reconstruction 
(BIFR). In this connection, possibilities may be explored for cqmmon production planning 
by a group of sick public sector units located in reasonable proximity to one another and 
specialising in a similar range of products. 
5. The banks have not been till now very enthusiastic about projects under the Prime 
Minister's Rozgar Yojana. It is necessary to ensure that time-bound measures are taken for 
examination, allocations and release of funds for such of these projects as are considered 
viable. It is desirable that the Ministry of Finance evolves special stipulations and norms for 
facilitating speedy implementation of projects with high employment generating and output· 
boosting po~ential, in particular in the designated backward are~s. 
6. In order to provide an integrated approach for the industrial development, blueprints 
of recommendations should be vetted jointly by all agencies concerned for, say, for a five 
year period. Such blueprints should be worked out at all levels of administration. The 
blueprints at the national level shoul~ be dovetailed into those for the States and panchayats. 
7. The North-Eastern States have had been long neglected. It isnecessary that a time­
bound programme is drawn up for economic development of this region, with emphasis on 
the development of basic infrastructures such as rail links, roads, air services, power and 
water. 
8. Transport and tax subsidies to backward areas and the North-Eastern regions should 

11 
continue; care should also be taken that transport subsidies are also paid in time and adjusted 
upwards when considered appropriate. 
9. The Ministry. of Industry should take special time-bound measures for development 
and promotion of smali scale units in the island territories of the country, namely, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands; the transport subsidy prevalent here should continue without restric­
tions; the port facilities in the islands must also be improved. 
10. The Union Government should sympathetically consider representations about the 
desirability of granting certain prerogatives to the State Governments in terms of Articles 268 
and 269 of the Constitution so larger funds become available for industrial growth on the 
initiative of State Government~ 
11. Requests from State Governments for declaration their States as industrially 
backward should be considered sympathetically, and the criteria for declaring a State 
industrially backward should be reviewed from time to time so as to take into account shifting 
realities. 
12. All backward areas should be blanketed by technical and vocational training 
institutions and polytechnics so as to ensure supply of skilled labour when the development 
process catches on. 
13. District panchayats should play much greater role than at present for planning 
industrial growth. Special cells should be set up in the district panchayats and arrangements 
made to provide technical advice of the appropriate kind with such cells. 
14. The Union and State Governments should earmark funds to ensure that projects 
formulated at the local level on the basis of local resources are not allowed to die out. 
15. Panchayat institutions should be vested with executive and monitoring IJ9Wers for 
implementing programmes aimed at eradicating industrial backwardness. The responsibility 
for preparing blueprints of growth at the local level and its subsequent implementation should 
rest with the panchayats. 
16. The Ministries of Industry and Railways should constitute a joint decision-making 
body alongwith the Planning Commission to decide on the aggregate sum to be set aside for 
railway development in the country's backward regions over a five year period, indicate its 
region-wise break-down and settle the sequence according to which the projects are to be 
executed. 
17. In order to cut through industrial backwardness, massive literacy programme should 
be launched in the areas of retarded growth. · 
1 18. Women should be associated in the on-going process of industrial and economic 
development in the backward regions. The administration both at the Union and State levels 
must-ensure that statutory minimum wages for women in the specified industries are not only 
announced but also duly implemented. 
19. The housing and security arrangements for migrant women WQrkers need to be 
carefully monitored and superintended and working hours for women should be strictly 
regulated and adhered to. 
20. Women entrepreneurs, especially in the relatively backward regions, should be 
encouraged to set up cooperative institutions and help may be provided to them to obtain both 
financial accommodation and ~ntrepreneurial advice from rmancial agencies including the 
NABARD, the IDBI and other financial institutions. ,/ [. 

, Th~~ uffkbi <Ht.'<:niragernent and should be provided w rese::aa:i.l nwl 
dc-;dnr~menta! activities aim~;;d specifically foz the lnu'Htiona} and :s;;naH seal~;; s•:ctrw. 
A.pprx.F~:wi2te rneasures nH·1Y a!so b~ i2ken fa.:· wider dissem~nathm of resuHs of r··<:~:e:a5 
:tlnder;.itkt.::n by s~i,!.ntific and tect~r!o~ngic~1! s~tench.:s ~r~d;er !it:z dLr~:ct auspit:~~s (;f the (~o5An£:~! 
tht ,';;~knmk and Industrial Re~ran::h and other ~iH~h institutions su Ht3t tte SmaH Sr::de 
Sector wuid din::-r.dy bt:nefit, 
A.SHOK fr'HTRA 
C,hairn1an~ 
:~)eJ)ar~rru;'tJJ·· {{elat,!d 
Parlia;nentary Standing 
o~-~~ [nrl:;sti·):, 

APPEN.DICES 

APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF 'I'HE MEETING 
VII 
SEVENm MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th June, 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Govindram Miri 
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
7. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
8. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
9. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
11. Shri Gurdas Kamat 
12. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
13. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
14. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
15. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
16. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
17. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
18. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajari 
19. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
20. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
21. Shri Ramdew Ram 
15 

16 
22, Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
23. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
24. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
~ 
25. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
26. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
27. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
28. Shri Manjay Lal 
29. Shri Bolla Bum Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman informed the Members that, as per the decision of the Committee to 
study the subjects of Industrialisation of Backward Areas in the country and the status of 
Capital Goods Industrtial. Units, the comments of the Ministry of Industry were obtained 
and have since been circulated. With a view to studying the subjects in all its dimensions, it 
was necessary that an on-the-spdt-visit of industrially under-developed regions was underta­
ken in smaller groups. These groups could also avail of the opportunity of such visits by 
going round central industrial units under the administrative control of the Ministries of 
Industry, Steel and Mines operating in those regions for a better appreciation of their 
performance. After some discussion, it was decided to constitute five Sub-Committees 
consisting of nine members each. The Sub-Committees would prepare a report on their 
studies for consideration by the Committee. The Sub-Committee may select one industrially 
backward region and the industrial units in that region for on-the-spot study. The Committee 
also decided that a member serving on a particular Sub-Committee maf associate himself or 
herself for the study with any other Sub-Committee(s) to which he or she has a background 
of knowledge and experience. The Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee to 
nominate such Committees and appoint Convenors for each Sub-Committee. The Committee 
also authorised the Chair.man of the Committee to seek the permission of the Hon'ble 
Chairman, for the visits of the Sub-Committees to different regions. The Committee 
authorised the Sub-Committees to identify the places of their visit(s). 
3. * * * 
A summary of the discussion was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 
30th June, 1995. 
• **Relates to other matters. 

;A', Parliament 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra----Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Govindram Miri 
6. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
7. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
8. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
9. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
10. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
11. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
13. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
14. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
15. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
16. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
17. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
18. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
19. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
20. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
21. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
22. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
23. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
24. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
25. Shri Ramdew Ram 
26. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
27. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
28. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
29. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
30. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
31. Shri Manjay Lal 
32. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
VIH 
17 

18 
SECRETARIAT 
1. S~ri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion) 
1. Shri V.K. Shunglu, Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Mohan, Economic Adviser 
3. Shdmati Pratibh;;t Karan, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri C.S. Prasad, Economic Adviser (SSI) 
5. Shri L::Jxman Das, Director 
6. Shd B.D. Seth, Deputy Economic Adviser 
7. Shri J.P. Mishra, Deputy Director 
8. Khwaja M. Shahid, Deputy Secretary 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on the 
Industrialisation of Backward areas and the Status of Capital Goods Industries. The 
Committee directed the witnesses to furnish an updated note on the various points raised 
during the discussion for its consideration at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft composition of the Sub-Committees 
and the business to be transacted by them. After some discussion, the following composition 
of the Sub-Committees was approved:-
Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
SUB COMMITTEE-I 
l. Shri Ramdas Agarwai-Convenor 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri Anil Kumar 
4. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
5. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
6. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
7. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
8. Shri P.O. Narayanan 
9. Shri Rasheed Massod 
SUB COMMITTEE-II 
1. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta-Convenor 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
4. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
5. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
6. Shri Balin Kuli 
7. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
8. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
9. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 

19 
SUB COMMITTEE-III 
1. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh PatH-Convenor 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
4. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
5. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
6. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
7. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
8. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
9. Shri Manjay Lal 
SUB COMMITTEE-IV 
1. Shri Naval Kishore Rai-Convenor 
2. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
3. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
4. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
5. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
6. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
7. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
8. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
9. Shri Ramdew Ram 
SUB COMMITTEE-V 
1. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah-Convenor 
2. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
3. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
4. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
5. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
6. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
7. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
8. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
The Committee, however, authorised the Chairman to make any change(s) in the 
composition, if requested. 
4. The Committee decided to meet on 24th and 25th July, 1995. 
S. The Committee, then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 24th July, 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
4. Shri Govindram Miri 
5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
8. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
9. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SAlJHA 
10. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
11. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
12. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
13. Shri Balin Kuli 
14. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
15. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
16. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
17. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
18. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
19. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
20. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
21 Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
22. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
23. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
24. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
25. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
26. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
27. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
28. Shri Manjay lal 
29. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
20 

21 
2. The Chairman of the Committee informed that the visit programme(s) of Sub­
Committees-! to V has been approved by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. He also 
advised Convenor of Sub-Committee- VI to identify the places where the Sub-Committee 
inay like to visit so that permission of Hon'ble Chairman may be solicited in the matter. 
3. The Committee decided, that after completion of first phase of visits of the Sub­
Committees it will meet at the end of September to exchange notes on the information and 
perception of the Sub-Committees on the subjects during their field trips. 
4. The Sub-Committee, thereafter, met and finalised the details. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on 25th July, 
1996. 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th July, 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri San?tan Bisi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Govindram Miri 
6. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
7. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
9. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
10. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
11. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
12. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
13. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
14. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
15. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
16. Shri Satyanaray~m Jatiya 
17. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
18. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
19. Sliri Naval Kishore Rai 
20. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
22 

23 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Industry, (Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro & 
Rural Industries) 
1. Shri S.A.T. Rizvi, Additional Secretary & Development Commissioner (SSI) 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.S. Prasad, Economic Advisor 
4. Shri K.S. Shetty, Advisor (Planning) 
5. Shri Raju Sharma, Director 
6. Shri M. Sahu, Director 
2. Members brought to the notice of the Chairman that notes from the Ministry on the 
subject of day's Agenda were received only that morning, i.e. just prior to commencement of 
the meeting and Hindi version of the note was not supplied. The members were of the view 
that it may be brought to the notice of the witnesses, who were about to appear before the 
Committee. The Chairman conveyed Committees' unhappiness to the witnesses who 
explained the reasons for the delay and assured that it had been taken note of for 
compliance. 
3. The Committee thereafter heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses 
on the status of Small Scale Industrial units and cottage industries in backward regions of the 
country. The Committ~e directed them to furnish an updated note on the various points 
raised during the discussion for its consideration at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.25 P.M. 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd August, 1995 in Room No. 
63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
4. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
7. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
8. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
9. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
10. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
11. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
12. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
13. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
14. Shri Manjay Lal 
15. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S.S. Rana, under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman of the Committee informed the Members that he had received a 
telegram from Shri Rama Krishna Konathala expressing his inability to head Sub­
Committee-IV due to pre-occupation and to make alternate arrangement. In the 
circumstances, the Committee decided to nominate Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita, as Convenor 
of Sub-Committee-IV 
3. Some of the Members expressed their views on the programme of their visit as had 
been finalised by the respective Sub-Committees and desired a few changes. The Chairman 
of the Committee recalled that ample orportunity was given to the Members at the meetings 
held on 24th and 25th July, 1995, to discuss and chalk out the details of their visits. Since 
the programmes, as finalised by the Sub-Committees hadalready been sent to the concerned 
Ministries and State Governments for making necessary arrangements, it may be difficult to 
reschedule the visit programmes at this stage. Even if the Members wanted some minor 
24 

the visit programmes, Convenors may consult their respective Sub-Committee 
<.:ccordingly. 
·i;, Chairman reminded the Members that repor~s on visits have to be prepared which 
;;i;ould imer-aiia cover ~,r~ blems and prospects of capital goods industry and what measures 
\:V'ere required lo provide ii;t. to hither to industrially backward regions. In this connection 
he sought the cooperation of nH the Convenors of the respective Sub-Committee and their 
ME>mbers. 
51 * * "' ,. 
* 
;;-~ 
* o .. 
7 .. The Committee then adjourned at 6.20 P.M. 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5~00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 6th December, 1995 in Room 
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri Govindram Miri 
5 .. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
lOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Ramdew Ram 
19. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
20. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
23. Shri Manjay Lal 
24. Shri P .G. Narayanan 
25. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Seksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
The Chairman initiated the discussion and reminded the Members that the Convenors of 
the six Sub-Groups constituted by the Committee were required to submit their reports on 
26 

27 
their respective field visits on the following two subjects:-
- State of bac~ardness in different parts of ~the country; 
' - State of , capital goods industry in the country. 
1.1. The Chairman infonned the Committee that a meeting was held with the 
Convenors of the Sub-Groups on 3rd November, 1995 to review the progress made by the 
various Sub-Groups. In that meeting it was agreed that the Convenors of Sub-Groups will 
submit their reports to the Secretariat latest by December 20, 1995. The Chairman was 
confident that the Convenors of the Sub-Groups would be able to adhere to the schedule 
agreed upon so that a consolidated report of the six Sub-Groups could be presented to.Jhe 
Committee by the middle of January, 1996. ~:·'"''~' 
1.2 The Convenors of the Sub-Groups who were present assured the Chairman that they 
would adhere to s~hedule as agreed upotl for submitting their respective reports. 
2. • • • 
2.1 • • • 
l.2 • • • 
3. • • • 
4. • • • 
5. • • * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 P.M. 
Retate to other matters. 
. ; 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 12.00 NooN on Friday, the 22nd December 1995 in Room No. 
62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Govindram Miri 
5. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
6. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
9. Shri Raina Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Bulin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
14. Shri Manjay Lal 
15. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, JQint Secretary 
2. Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretaty 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee informed that few study reports from 
the Sub-Committees for consideration of the main Committee have yet not reached t~e 
Secretariat, despite the lapse of the last date for submitting the reports namely, the 20th 
Oecember. The Convenors of all the Sub-Committees were requested to expedite the reports 
of their respective Sub-Committee. The Convenors gave assurance that they will do the 
needful. 
3. * * * 
•••Relate to other matters. 
28 

29 . 
4. The Committee decided to meet on 24th and 25th January 1996 to discuss the draft 
report to be prepared on the basis of the reports of the Sub-Committees. 
The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M. 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 22nd February, 1996 in Room No. 
63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govindrant Miri 
4. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
9. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
10. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
11. Shri Mullapally Ramachandran 
12. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
13. Shrimati Sumit:ra Mahajan 
14. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
15. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
16. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
17. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
18. Shri Manjay Lal 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the Draft Seventeenth Report of the Committee 
Industrialisation of Backward Areas and the Status of Capital Goods Sector. 
The Chairman invited suggestions from Members on the Draft Reports. 
3. After some discussion, it was decided that the Committee will meet again 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27th February, 1996 to further consider the report, as revised, 
the light of the views of the Members. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M. to meet again on 27th February, 19 
30 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
~ • '.' 1. i) i' • 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27th February 1996 in Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Govindram Miri 
6. Shri K. K. Veerappan 
7. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
LOK SABBA 
8. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
10. Shrimati Kesharbai Sooajirao Kshirsagar 
11. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
12. Shri Balin Kuli 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Shanna 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri Rajendta Agnihotri 
16. Sbri S. N. Vekaria 
17. Sbri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
18. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
19. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
20. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
21. Shri Manjay Lal 
22. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sbri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary. 
3. Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the Revised Draft Report of the Committee on 
Industrialisation of Backward Areas and the State of the Capital Goods Sector. After some 
discussion, the report was adopted. 
3. The Committee decided to present the report to Parliament on the 7th March, 1996 
and authorised the Chairman of the Committee and Shri Nyodek· Yonggam to present the 
31 

... ---
---r 
32 
report in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri M. Baga Reddy and V. Dhananjaya Kumar to lay a 
copy of the report on the Table of the Lok Sabha. The Committee also decided to enclose 
the reports of the Sub-Committees on field visits as annexure to the report of the 
Committee. 
4. The Cllairplan, thereafter, thanked the Members of the Committee for their 
cooperation and valuable suggestions in analysing and finding solutions in the task before the 
Committee. Th~ Members of the Committee reciprocated. 
5. ~e Committee then adjourned at 10._45 A.M. 
'' .. ,, ' 

APPENDIX-II 
STUDY REPORTS OF SUB-COMMI'ITEES 
·' ' ''•• ' 
.. 
STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-I 
. ~. ', 

---------- -- -------- ------- ---
Study note re£ardinalst Phase visit of Sub-Committee-! of Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry to Rajasthan during September 13-18, 1995 
The Sub-Committee-I of the Committee on Industry _was constituted to study the 
problems of industrialisation in backward areas and capital goods manufacturing industry in 
five States viz. Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Goa. The Sub­
Committee consisted of six Members, namely:-
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
2. Shri Anil Kumar 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
4. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
5. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
6. Shri Rasheed Masood 
Shri Ramdas Agarwal was the Convenor of the Sub-Committee. 
The Committee at first visited Rajasthan during September 13-18, 1995 for the purpose 
and held discussions with representatives of Chamber of Commerce and Industries, officers . 
of State Industry and other Departments, district authorities of Udaipur and Sirohi and 
workers and management of Hindustan Zinc Limited and Hindustan Copper Limited. The 
salient features of the outcome of study are as under:-
On 14th September, 1995, the Sub-Committee heard the views of the officers of the 
State Industry Department, district authorities and representatives of Chamber of Commerce 
and Industries of Udaipur and Workers' Unions and Management of Hindustan Zinc 
Limited. 
Officers of State Industry Department 
Giving an overview of the industrial scenario in Rajasthan, the Director of Industries 
pointed out that though Rajasthan was the second largest State in terms of area, it was 
economically backward one as compared to the other States in the country. The per capita 
income of the State was Rs. 3983 as against the National per capita income of Rs. 5598. The 
State has only 17 Kms. of railway route per thousand sq. Kms. There were only 335 large 
and medium scale industries in existence on 31.3.94. This number was much le~ in 
comparison with the neighbouring States like Maharashtra and Gujarat. Similarly there /were 
only 64437 registered SSI units in Rajasthan as on 31st March, 1993 which was just 2.88% of 
the total registered SSI units in the country: Mining and mineral based industries are th~ key 
industries in Rajasthan. Despite having great potential for automobiles, electronics and 
· petroleum based industries in Rajasthan no significant development of such industries had 
taken place in the State. He attributed inadequate road, rail and airlinks as the main reasons 
.for slow industrial developll}ent of Rajasthan. Accor,ding to him ceramics, wool based 
industries, leather industrie~. ·electronics, agro processing and mineral processing industries 
had good potential provided adequat~ thrust for development. The Sub-Committee had been 
given to understand that the Government of Rajasthan was very keen for industrial 
development. Number ·of'' effective steps had been taken such ~S- development of industrial 
areas, entrepreneurial development programme, and ade,'luate arrangement for finance. 
35 

36 
Besides, number of financial concession and facilities had been announced viz. capital 
investment subsidy, sales-tax deferment/exemption, testing equipment subsidy, subsidy on 
purchase of testing equipment for registration under -ISO 9000 series etc. State Government 
has also allowed enhanced capital iqvestment subsidy to the industries set up in .the tribal 
sub-area plan of Udaipur and Sirohi district and NIDs viz. Sirohi, Barmer and Jaisalmer. 
State Government has developed all the infrastructural facilities required for industrial 
development. One or more industrial areas with full infrastructural facilities have been 
developed by the State to encourage and assist the new industrial ventures. State investment 
subsidy upto 30% to SSI/LMI, as the case may be, has also been provided. 
Udaipur Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
The Sub-Committee was told by the representatives of the Udaipur Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry that the Southern Rajasthan was rich in natural and mineral 
resources. This region is essentially a tribal belt and has immense potential and offers 
excellent climate for all round industrial development. Unfortunately industries based on the 
minerals could not be developed for want of infrastructural facilities such as lack of (i) broad 
gauge link (Udaipur to Chittorgarh and to Ahmedabad), (ii) railway link to Banswara, 
(iii) airport of international standard, (iv) adequate air services despite the fact that 
Udaipur has immense tourism potential, (v) by-pass on the National Highway No. 8 for 
Udaipur, (vi) proper tran,sport facilitate for movements" of goods and (vii) high cost of power 
coupled with its ·shortage and poor quality. 
It had been brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that the District Industries 
Centres (DIC) which were established for giving single window service. and to act as nodal 
agency for industrial development, after initial few yeats of establishment~ had been totally 
disintegrated. They were .unable to play any major role in the industrial development as they 
had been entrusted with various miscellaneous work. Similarly though the entire economy of . 
the region is dependent on the exploitation of the mineral wealth, the recent actions of the · 
Environment and Forest Ministry are detrimental to any development in the mining sector. 
Cases of de-reservation from the forest of the areas rich in mineral deposits are not being 
done or taking lot of time which delays the mining activities. 
The Sub-Committee was also told that though entire Southern ·Rajasthan was essentially 
tribal dominant, tax holiday scheme was not applicable to this region as was applicable to 
many other regions of the country. Imposition of TDS from this financial year on services 
including transport services was creating lo~ of pr~blems and therefore needed to be 
abOlished. Similarly Octr()i whicb has detrimental. effect Ol), th~ lo~aJ and commercial 
acti~es should be totally abolished to ensure fast ·indaisitW,··.aiut·economic growth. 
w.rk..S 1JDkHJs o1 llblt:lwiM Zlm: Llmf~«~ 
The SulrC~mmittee was infOrmed by Union's.representative of Hiridustan Zinc limited 
that they bad never allowed work ol this Public Sector Undert~~ing.to suffer on account of 
any industrial-dispute. In fact, ther~ lia,s not ·beep: a si~~ 51f~k~ · in HZL ever since its 
ineo.rpor.ation as a Public ~r Undertaking in January. 1966. Their approach has been to 
settle their problems/disputes through negotiations with the management. The workers also 
participate- in various social welfue activities for tbe· persons living around industrial units of 
HZL and have beeB contn)utiflgJrom. their welfare fuuds as well as fmm the salary of the 
workers f07 the victims of natural calamities from time to time. 
. __ The Sub-Committee was given to UJ1.demand that though liZL was profit making PSU, 
one of its smelter at Chanderiya was unable to operate to its full capacity. It was giving only 
50% production of its/capacity. The Unions also expressed apprehension about the adequacy 

37 
of safety measures taken at the Rajpura Oariba Mine as a result of w}:lich number of 
accidents took place there. Some of the problems relating to other industries in Rajasthan 
highlighted by the Unions were viz. exploitation of workers engaged in marble mining, child 
Jabour, benami mining, non-payment of minimum wages and lack of infrastructural facilities 
such as road, power, water etc. 
Management of Hindustan Zinc Umited 
The Management of the Hindustan Zinc Limited informed the Sub-Committee that it was 
a profit making Public Sector Undertaking. It operates 7 lead zinc mines with a total ore 
production capacity of 3.22 million tpa - 4 smelters with combined installed capacity on 
149000 tpa zinc and 65000 tpa lead besides a rock phosphate - tungsten mine. The physical 
and financial performance of the company for the past five years had shown significant 
upsurge in lead-zinc concentrate and metal production besides maintaining a good track 
record of generating surpluses. HZL was one of the few PSU's identified by the Government 
of India for disinvestment of its holdings. HZL shares are now listed on the Bombay, Delhi 
and Jaipur stock exchanges. The management is very responsive to the genuine demands I 
problems of its employees and workers and employee employer relations are cordial. HZL is 
also conscious of its responsibility for protection of the environment. The company is in the 
forefront in taking well planned and effective steps to check pollution and create healthy 
surroundings for its work force and populace residing in and around its units. The company 
is equally concerned about its socio-economic role. The concern manifests itself in the form 
of numerous rural health campaigns, family welfare activities, ~dult education programmes, 
water supply, installation of handpumps, providing grains and fodder etc. The management 
attributed the low production from Chanderia smelter to the ·adoption of new technology 
and assured the Sub-Committee that it was a temporary phase and once the operational 
problems and other things settled down, the plant will work to its fullest capacity. They also 
allayed the fear of the workers about inadequate safety measures at Rajpura Dariba Mine 
and assured that all possible safety measures were being taken by HZL in all its units and 
the number of industrial accidents was negligible. 
On 15th September, the Sub-Committee held discussions with the district authorities of 
Sirohi and representatives of Abu Chamber of Commerce and Industries. 
District Authorities of Sirobf. 
The District Magistrate of Sirohi informed the Sub-Committee that there were about 3500 
individual units-seven large, some medium and rest SSI in Sirohi district. Eight industrial 
areas are being developed by. the Rajasthan Government in the district. Mo~~ of the 
industries in Sirohi are mineral based and as such the minerals have an important role in the 
e~onomy pf the district. The main minerals are limestone, woallast.onite base metal like lead, 
zin<:; .copper, tungston, calicide .etc. The Sirohi district was of the category of "No Industry 
District" earlier and drawn all the. concessions and facilities of NID. However its industrial 
growth has accelerated very fast with the incoming of entrepreneurs from within the State as 
well as from Gujarat State. The District Magistrate pointed out that to further accelqrate the 
.. pace of development in the district, it was essential first to upgrade the existing 
infrastructure such as availability of industrial plots, enhancement in technical as well as 
entrepreneurial skill and improvement in the conditions of artisans and household sectors as 
well as augmentation of power, rail and road network, communication and industrial training 
facilities. Potential for export can be explored for the products lik~ cement, marble I granite 
tiles and polyester and synthetic yarns. The Sub-Committee has been given to understand by 
the district author~ties that the main problem being faced by the entrepreneurs is 
the grant of loan for working capital by the banks. The bankers are flouting 

38 
norms laid by the RBI and ask for surety. The Banks are reluctant to give loans to even 
those entr-epreneurs whose names are cleared by the DIC. Similarly, charging of entire 
cost of electrification from the entrepreneurs for their industry by Rajasthan State 
Electricity Board is adversely ~ng the growth of industry. Unemployment/ 
under employment is rampant in the State. For industrial development, they were of the 
opinion that among other things, tax holiday scheme be made applicable to Sirohi district 
as the growth centres were located in tribal areas which are very backward. 
Abu Chamber of Commerce and Industries 
lbe Sub-Committee had been given to understand that despite declaring Abu Road as 
backward area and a notified Tribal belt and a "No In~ustry District" by Central 
Government the position was that out of 300 odd units, .almost 100 were in possession of 
Rajasthan Finance Corporation, and ab9ut 100 were closed an~ out of the remaining 100 
odd units, only 10 to 15 were running well and the rest were being termed as defaulters 
by the RICCO and RFC. In a memorandum to Sub-Committee Abu Chamber had 
submitted that this situation was mainly due to non-development of desired infrastructure 
even though the desired funds might had been made available. According to them the 
major bottle-necks leading to weak infrastructure were:-
(a) Lack of banking facilities and non-availability of working capital funds to S.S.I. 
sector in particular. 
(b) Non-availability of even unskilled and skilled labour due to the tribal belt. 
(c) Non-av~Hability of qualified managerial and technical staff since none wants to 
settle down in such a backward place even at Jucurative terms due to absence of 
educational, medical, health and otber growth facilities. 
(d) Non-availability of quality power. 
r 
(e) Non-availability of local market due to absence of large public sector unitS as 
compared to areas in Gujarat where one big project will sustain more than 50 to 100 
. S.S.I. units in its surroundings. 
(f) Non Co-operative attitu~e of th.e Government to backward areas. 
(g) Lack of infrastructure for raw material support by State and Central Government. 
(h) Lack of communication facilities. 
(1) Lack of transportation net-work etc. 
(J) Non-compliance of RBIIBIFR guidelines by the State financial institutions ~4v 
commercial banks for rehabilitation and revival of potentially viable sick/weak ..,,~i .,;. 
The Chamber of Commerce and Industries also submitted that the exd.~t: rules which 
were framed in 1944 have become old, outdated and misfit in the }.1reseat context. and 
therefore, should be made simpler, rationale and realistic. The tax holiday benefit scheme 
for the units established in. North East backward areas should be · extended to the 
backward area like Abu Road which bas been declared '"No Industrial District" and is 
situated in tribal backward area. Banks/financial institutions should be directed to help 
SSI in order to save them from extinction. Adequate measures should be taken to ensure 
that g1,1idelines issued by the RBI to all commercial banks and financial institutions for 
granting of reliefs and concessions which cap be extended to potentially viable sick/weak 
units under rehabilitation scheme be complied by the financial institutions and bank&. 
The Sub-Committee met the Industry Secretary of Government of Rajasthan and 

39 
officers of other government departments connected with the industrialisation and the 
Deputy Chief Minister on 17th September, 1995 .at Jaipur. 
Meeting with State Government Otncers 
::·.' ~ . ~ 
The Sub-Committee was told by the Industry Secretary that RICCO which had been 
entrusted with the work of development of infrastructure and_ arranging capital i~v~tmeat 
for the growth of industries in Rajasthan was. doing a good job. It had acquiredl311ds and 
developed industrial areas in many districts. He also-informed the Sub-Committ<?e·,-~at with. 
a view to keep the pa~ of industrial growth in Rajasthan, Government was giving subsidy to 
"No Industrial Afea" which had earlier been given by the Central Government. The 
Government was also giving sales-tax exemptions and had started merchant banking 
activities. He suggested that with a view to keep balance between the under developed and 
developed States particularly after liberalisation, the Central Government should make 
sufficient allocation of funds for the development of infrastructural facilities in the 
industrially backward States. This would also check migration of entrepreneurs from under 
developed States·· to developed States. Natural Gas should be arranged for industries in 
Rajasthan from HBJ pipeline which passes through the State. Bankers attitude towards the 
private entrepreneurs for granting loan be changed and working capital be made available in 
time to save industries. Research and Development and training institutes be opened in 
Rajasthan. It was pointed out to the Sub-Committee that whatever industrialisation had 
taken place in Rajasthan was in or around cities or town. No industry had come up il) the 
backward remote area. Interest rate by financial institutions, therefore, needed tp be 
lowered for backward areas with a view to encouraging the setting up of industries in .. those 
areas. Subsidy by the Centre may continue but in the form of central assistance. IDBl policy 
of non-financing a substantially exposed sector in a State was not justified and had shown 
adverse effect. It should, therefore, be changed and the exposure should be in the conte~ of 
the country and not in the State. V set earth station was required to develop electronics in 
the State particularly for the development of -software. Earth Station refused by the Orissa 
may be given to Rajasthan. 
Some of the other suggestions for industrial development in Rajasthan given to the Sub­
Committee were setting up of tool rooms in the State for proper development of industries 
particularly SSI, training facilities for the development of ceremic industry, central fiscal 
policies be directed towards backward States, creation of funds by the Central Government 
for development of backward areas. It was also pointed out to Sub-Committee that the 
procedure of registration of Khadi Samities was very complicated and cumbersome and 
discouraged development of Khadi industry. This should be simplified and training 
programme for village artisans engaged in Khadi industries be arranged. All power grids in 
the country should be united together by creating National Power Grid instead of regional 
grids. This would enable utilising the excess power being generated by the State Electricity 
Boards of one State by the other power deficit State Electricity Board. Working capital be­
arranged exclusively for SSI by banks or some other separate agencies. Marketing of the 
produce of SSI be arranged and ensured. Handicrafts need to be encouraged. 
The Deputy Chief Minister of Rajasthan had suggested that the Centre must ensure 
equal growth of all the States. Competition in giving incentives by States should be checked 
by the Central Government with a view to stop the fleeing of entrepreneurs to a State giving 
more incentives. As the banks are not cooperating in the implementation of the Prime 
Minister Rozgar Yojna, the implementation of same may be given to the bank themselves or 
it should be made mandatory for them to accept the recommendation of the State industry 
department. The Khadi Development Fund on which interest rate is 15% should be reduced. 

i 
40 
Inland container depot for exporters should be expedited and impediments/delays in 
clearance of projects by the various Central ministries/departments should be eliminated. 
On 18th September, 1995 the Sub-Committee visited Khetri and heard the views of the 
Workers' Union of Hindustan Copper Limited and U&;·$anagement. 
Representatives of the Worker Union 
The representatives of the recognised Union told . the SUb-Committee that import of 
copper by private sector after liberalisation had advenely affected the Company. The prices 
were now required to be made competitive with international market and fixed according to 
the London Metal Exchange. The Coinp~ny ·had faced financial crunch in the past and in 
that period of financial crisis the worke~. and employees had agreed to suspend some of 
ithefi" faCilities such as LTC and OTA. It was pointed out that the Hindustan Copper Limited 
was the· only industry in Khetri. No ancilliary or auxilliary industry ci:>uld .come up in Khetri 
mainly due to lack of infrastructural facilities and as such there was .. unemployment in and 
around Khetri. It was suggested that the present capacity of Khetri smelter and refinery 
plant producing copper be extended from 31000 tpa to 100000 tpa. Further, instead of 
importing ore concentrate for that purpose, Ule Company shpuld develop mines in and 
around Khetri and other places in India which will not only save [Qteign· eKI!ange. but will 
also generate employment. There was acute water scarcity in th~ area and wliatever ground 
water was available had got polluted by the effluent •barged by tbe plant. Khetri was not 
linked. with the railway. There was no techttical institute in Khetri where local populace 
could be trained in mining and other technical jobs. It was also brought to the notice of the 
Sub-Committee that though there were three senior secondary schools in Khetri, none of 
them was exclusively for girls. The people of the town, therefore were hesitant to send their 
girls to school after middle level. Transport facility had not been provided to the employees 
and workers and they had to depend mainly on the State roadways for commuting to and 
from their places of work. It was also brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that the 
matters of compensation to the dependents of the deceased employees/workers either by 
way of providing employment or compensation, linger on for years and there was no 
provision for giving employment to the lady member of such families. Some of the 
representatives of the unrecognised unions told the Sub-Committee that the management 
was anti-labour. No elections had been held for the unions for the last 10-15 years or so. 
The management did not take . into confidence the office bearers of unrecognised unions in 
any matter connected· with the workers. There was rampant corruption in the company. 
Engineers and officials were in league with the contractors. There were no promotional 
avenues at lower level and many plants in the Company were being run without tfiking 
adequate safety measures as a result, number of industrial accidents take place every year. 
The Management of HhJdustan Copper Limited 
The Sub-Committee had been given to understand by th~ management that copper 
mining industry in India had some inherent constraints due to low grade of Indian ore and 
poor geometry of the Indian ore body. As agatnst 3-4% copper content in ore in most of the 
o~er copper producing countries in the world, the average copper content of Indian ore was 
just around 1%. Though mining cost in terms of per tonne ore in India was more or less 
comparable with international standard but in terms of metal it was 2.5-3 times higher than 
the international cost because of poor grade of ore. 
In the initial years, the company incurred losses because of teething troubles, 
unremunerative administered prices not related to the cost of production from very low 
grade of copper ore available in India and lack of investments ·in mines. However, the 
company continued its efforts for increasing production and productivity through various in-

41 
house measures. HCL ·also built up sound foundation for workers' participation in -
management with forums being availed at various tiers from shop floor to the Joint 
Consultative Committee for the copper indqstry at the national level. Cordial industrial 
relations in all the production units was also a contributory factor for improvement in 
physical performance. With liberalisation of the economic policy, import of copper had been 
decanalised and the administered pricing system of copper bad been abolished from March, 
1992 thereby leaving HCL to sell its products in competition to the landed cost of imported 
copper notwithstanding the inherent constraints of Indian copper ore. 
With the implementation of KCC expansion scheme at a marginal cost of around· 
Rs. 365 croresJ HCL's profitability was estimated to increase by around Rs. 165 crores per 
annum. The expansion in Malanjkhand Mine and opening of Cbapri-Shiddeswar Mine.. would· 
increase the availability of concentrates and to that extent there would be lesser import of 
concentrates for meeting the requirements of expanded capacity of Khetri smelter. The 
expansion in the capacity of ICC smelter to about double its present capacity at' a very 
marginal cost, would further boost the profitability of the Company, besides narrowing the 
gap between demand and domestic production. The Company had a plan of entering into 
export market in the long run, once the self-sufficiency in the production of copper in the 
country was achieved, as HCL's incremental cost of production was likely to be much lower 
compared to other prospective producers in the country. HCL thus plans to be the leader of 
copper industry in India. ,. 
The Sub-Committee ·has been given to understand tha.t gauge conversion is essential for 
bringing imported concentrate from Kandla Port to the plant: This will also help in the 
development of SSI. Verification of the uniol)lholding of elections for them which is done 
by the Central Labour Ministry and not by the management. The management has no 
objection in holding elections. The General Manager meets all the unions whether 
recognised or unrecognised, frequently and takes the ~iews of all the unions into 
consideration on various issues. As the HCL is the only industrial unit in Khetri, the 
expectation of the local populace are too many from the Company. HCL is conscious of its 
social obligations and protection of environment for people working in its units as well as the 
people living in and around Khetri. The Company is running a 209 bed hospital where five 
beds have been reserved for local people and free treatment is given to people .of weaker 
sections. It organises free eye camps every year and medical camps in surrounding villages 
every month. Considering acute drinking water problem of the area, the Company is 
providing free potable water to the villages situated by the side of the road from Chaonra to 
Khetrinagar. Number of handpumps have been installed fot the villagers where .direct supply 
is not possible. In order to meet the requirement of water for its operations, the Company is 
recycling the entire water used in its plant. The Company has also installed m9dem pollution 
control plants to ensure that the emission of pollutants from the plant~_re~_\ .. ~n the 
limits prescribed by the pollution control board. The Company llas..oonstructed -j3'1futs. 
pucca road from Chaonra to Khetrinagar. Adult education classes are also being run· 
voluntarily in surrounding villages. · · · 
The Sub-Committee may consider. 
Study Report of 2nd Phase Visit of Sub-Committee-! of Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry to Bombay and Goa during 13th to 17th November, 1995 
The visit of Sub-Committee to Bombay arid Goa was earlier scheduled from 14 to 18 
Oct.ober, 1995. But due to unsatisfactory stay arrangements at Bombay, the Convenor of 
Sub-Committee had to postpone the visit. The Sub-Committee rescheduled its visit from 13 
to 17 November, 1995 after getting assurance from the Ministry of lndu~try to the effect that 

42 
' such lapse would not occur and all possible care would be taken to make the visit 
purposeful. 
The Sub-Committee camped at Bombay on 13.- November, 1995 where it interacted 
with the representatives of the State government of Maharashtta followed by · a 
discussion with the management of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited. On 14 
November, the Sub-Committee held discussion with Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce 
with regard to . the problems the entrepreneurs were facing in setting/running industries 
in the S~~te. This was followed by a discussion with the bank management regarding 
the pregress of Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana in the State and also a meeting with the 
management of Mazagaon Dock Limited regarding port facilities available for industrial 
uriits in the State. Before leaving for Goa, the Sub-Committee held discussion with the 
management of Manganese Ore India Limited~ on 15 November at Bombay. 
At Goa, the Sub-Comiiuttee ·started its business With a meeting with the 
representatives of the State government of Goa on 16 November, 1995 on issues 
concerning industrialisation of the State. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee met with the 
representatives of Goa Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Goa Mineral Ore­
Exporters Association in two separate meetings. Before dispersing on 17 November, the. 
Sub-Committee took an opportunity to visit the Mormugao Port Trust and held 
discussion with the Port authorities about facilities available for industries. 
The details of the discussion held with various authorities during the visit are given 
in the following paras. 
PreseJJtatloa of State Governmeat of Mabarssbtra 
The Sub-Committee started its business with a meeting with the representative of 
State gevernment of. Maharashtra at Bombay. The Industry Secretary in the beginning 
mentioned about the excellent infrastructural facilities available for setting up of 
industries in the State. Udyog Mitra was working as a single window agency in the 
State to guide/help entrepreneurs in setting up industries. He conceded that high 
subsidy was provided for industries in backward areas but of late, a pocket of 
prosperity in terms of concentration of industries had grown up. In Bombay itself there 
was no further scope of setting more industries though entrepreneurs were desperate 
enough to have their industries in the city. The State government had now applied 
.disincentives in the city. 
The Industry Secretary very honestly admitted again that there were certain lacunae 
in the concept of single window agency for setting up industries. Certain environmental 
clearance requirements were alsO' coming on the way of dispersal of industries. Entrep­
reneurs interested in setting up 'industries in backward or far off areas fund it extremely 
difficult to get green, si~:as•~- had to, pass through inany agencies. The Secretary 
emphasised that the Central Governm-ent 'Should give clear cut instructions/guidelines on 
pollution issue. The Ministry of Envirotftnent should review its policy to delegate 
powers in setting up of industries. 
He was also critical of the present labour laws which according to him needed to 
be simplified. An entrepreneur, particularly who was willing io set up a small unit, 
found the labour laws very difficult to be tackled with •. He mentioned specifically about 
the Factories Act which at present was applicable to industries/units employing more 
than ten persons. He suggested that in order to mitigate the difficulties of entrepreneurs 
and persuading them to set up industries in backward areas it was important that 
industries employing less than fifty. persons should be kept out of the Factories Act. He 

43 
also emphasised that non-core sector should be controlled which otherwise had become a 
den of corrupt practices. According to him Coal Control Order should be dispensed with. 
As regards small scale sector, the Secretary mentioned that production of items reserved 
for this sector declined after reservation of certain items. He said that the experience 
indicates that subsidy beyond a point was not a sustainable step. It was equally important 
that the government· should oonsider enacting new legislation ·for the protection of small 
scale entrepreneur who was under pressure from different directions. According to him small 
scale sector needed to' be totally reoriented as the speed of decision making was too sJow for 
this sector which was producing 40% of the ·total turnover of the country with only 11% 
credit available. It would also be desirable to have separate banks for industrial financing. 
As regards the Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana, the Industry Secretary informed that 
banks were not interested in more cases. He wanted that banks should scrutinize double 
cases than what had been fixed as the target so that the target of disbursement was achieved. 
The Sub-Committee feels that the Government should appreciate the positive suggestions 
put forth by the State Government with regard to simplification of labour legislation and need 
for separate legislation for small scale entrepreneurs. The Sub-Conumttee also feels that the 
suggestions regarding the need for clear cut guidelines by the Environment Ministry on 
pollution and also tile need for decontrol of non-core sector are worth examining. This would 
certainly strengthen the single window system for industries. 
Metal Scrap Trade Corporation (MSTC) 
The management informed the Sub-Committee that MSTC was primarily engaged in 
two activities viz., (i) Foreign Trade, and (ii) Domestic Trade. 
In Foreign Trade, MSTC was the sole Canalising Agency for import of scrap till 
February, 1992. Import during the last two years of canalisation were 15,44,000 tonnes and 
2,80,000 tonnes. Imports.during 1992-93 went upto 6,82,000 tonries. However, in subsequent 
years, only 307,000 & 278,000 tonnes were imported. Total imports of scrap by the country 
have also come down during these years resulting in market share of MSTC being around 
30% . MSTC had, therefore, embarked upon a Corporate Planning exercise to identify areas 
with potential for diversifying so as to remove dependence on one item, namely, scrap. It 
has also simultaneously been trying to expand the basket of imports by including other items 
such as Pig Iron, "Billets, Coke, HR Coils, etc. 
The management suggested that MSTC should diversify into imports of other items, 
develop export business as well as set up joint ventures for manufacturing steel relate<I 
items. 
In case of Domestic Trade, MSTC is handling disposal of scrap worth about Rs. 300 
crores for over 100 Public Sector Undertakings Government Departments. Hewever, this 
number and volume can be substantiall~ increased if Railways and Defence also entrust the 
disposal of their scrap to MSTC. The management suggested that it is imperative that the 
Government renders support to MSTC both in Foreign Trade and Domestic Trade since 
there are definite disadvantages to the country in decanalisation of imports of important raw 
materials like scrap. 
Similarly in case of Domestic Trade, organisations like Defence, Railways and some 
other Public Sector Undertakings are utilising the services of private auctioneers who are 
offering such low rate of servi~. charges that it does not even justify the bare minimum cost 
of the operation. This ·means that there are c;>ther incentives available to the privat~­
auctioneers which is at the cost of the Public Sector Underta~ings depriving them of the 
necessary revenues. 

44 
The management was of the view that the proposed diversification project of MSTC 
should be given top priority for clearances by the Ministry, Planning Co11;1mission, CCEA 
etc. so as to enable MSTC to create its own productivity and give sufficient business volume 
to its existing infrastructure. 
On enquiring as to what has been the impact of liberalisation on the Company, the 
management clarified that liberalisation has l)rimarily involved decanalisation of import of 
scrap, -reduction of import duties and simplification of systems and procedures in this sphere. 
A-s a result of these measures, following developments have taken place:-
( a) A .number of private units including large organisations such as Reliance, TISCO, lTC, 
etc. and international traders as well as individual furnace upits have come into the field 
of import of scrap. This has resulted in foreian suppliers taking advantage of a number 
of players in the field and dilution of strict quality criteria follo~ed by MSTC during the 
canalisation period. MSTC has also had as a result to follow suit, since the prices offered 
to MSTC otherwise were necessarily higher and as such uncompetitive. 
The mushrooming has led to simultaneous import by a number of parties and avoidable 
infructuous cost by way of bunching of vessels at ports, demurrage, necessity to keep 
material in stock for extended periods due to inability to sell in advance, introduction of 
extra commercial practice. 
(b) Impact of Reduction of Duties 
Import Duty on melting scrap has been reduced to 5%. Simultaneously, duty on finished 
products has also been reduced. For example, duty on billets stands at 20%. As a result, 
billets are being imported in preference to scrap import since billets produced out of 
imported scrap after melting in furnaces is .costlier than the landed cost of imported 
billets. As a result of this as well as th~ hike in international price of scrap, a large 
number of furnaces have closed down, resulting in gross under-utilisation of investment 
and capacity built up. 
(c) Impact of Removal of Definition qf Heavy Melting Scrap Rerollable Scrap 
HEAVY MELTING SCRAP (HMS) was defined in the import policy in 1985-88. 
However, in the last few years, this definition has been withdrawn and as a result large 
scale imports of HMS are being undertaken now. Material actually coming under this 
category however is in higher sizes which can only be categorised as rerollable scrap. 
Duty on rerollable scrap ranges upto 40%, whereas duty on HMS is just 5%. This leads 
to large scale evasion of duty. 
MSTC cannot obviously be party to such practices and is not in position to import HMS,_ 
being otherwise unviable. In the present decanalisation regime, HMS is being imported 
from sources which include zones of conflict. As a result there have been a number of 
cases of presence of explosives in these consignments which have led to loss of life. This 
is primarily due to non-eQforcement of quality control, due to inability of private 
importers to enforce such a discipline on the sellers . • 
The management has highlighted the following facts regarding import of scrap after 
decanalisation:-
1. There have been several instances where scrap imported by private importers have 
been accompanied by explosives and· on a few occasions there have been serious 
casualities. 
/ 

45 
2. There has been every possibility of radio-active contamination being present in such 
material imported. 
3. Due to substantial differential in customs duty between HMS and rerollable scrap, 
there is every possibility/tendency on the part of private importers to import 
rerollable -scrap in the guise of HMS which naturally results in revenue loss to the 
country. 
4. Price manipulation through under-invoicing/over-invoicing depending .upon the 
circumstances cannot be ruled out which evidently is at the cost of revenue and loss 
of foreign exchange to the country. 
0~ th~ basis of evidence of the m$magement and the papers/documents submitted before 
it the Sub-Committee feels that though it would be difficult to extend full monopoly to the 
Com.pany in the field of importing Scrap but Govem~ent may still help out MSTC by 
' r~ti~nulising the duty structure for raw materials and S1!mis to enable it to compete with 
Pri\'ate Sector. It should also be wet within the consideration of Government of India to 
expedite clearance of the diversification proposal, of the company. Ministry of Railways and 
Defence may also be persu~~.tJed to prefer MSTC -in respect of disposal of their scrap. 
Meeting with the represen~tives of Trade & lndustry 
The Sub-Committee also got an opportunity to interact with the representatives of trade 
and industry in the context of their problems/experiences in running/setting up industries .in 
the State of Maharashtra. · 
The representatives informed the Sub-Committee that at present there was no system to 
guide the entrepreneurs, particularly small scale entrepreneurs, about the incentives 
available for them for setting up industries in backward areas. They emphasised the need to 
conduct training programmes for small scale entrepreneurs. 
As regards the infrastructure, the representatives emphasised the need to streamline the 
supply of raw material. The representatives were critical of the existing poor power supply 
condition in the State. According to them the transmission and distribution of power should 
be privatised and for that a joint venture by private parties could be launched in four States 
viz. Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa and Karnataka. So far as the road network was concerned, 
the representatives felt that the Government had not framed any guidelines for private 
parties engaged in the construction of roads. According to thertl construction of regional 
highways should be preferred as it was quite profitable. The representatives also emphasised 
on the need to build schools, hotels, hospitals, etc., alongwith physical infrastructure so as to 
attract industries in baekward areas. As regards labour legislation the representatives 
submitted that existing legislations were pro-labour. They wanted a review of the legislation 
so that it might be made pro-production. 
The representatives were- critical of the delay in the present procedure of processing 
applications. They wanted that the procedure should be reviewed and efforts should be 
made to arrange applications for clearance from different agencies for setting up industries, 
particularly in l:fackward areas. They suggested that as far as possible all projects should be 
certified by private agencies. 
The Sub-Committee endorses the views of the representatives about the need for 
development of infrastructure and feels that the Government should take the opportunity. of 
utilising their experience in the field. The Sub-Committee recomm~nds that the Government 
should also review the procedural issues for processing applications and formulate new 
guidelines tuned to the requirement of the industry. 

46 
~tatioo of Lead BaDk MlmagemeDt at Bombay 
The Sub-Committee met the bank authorities in connection with Prime. Minister Rozgar 
Y ojana and also issues concerning credit facilities available for industries in the State of 
Maharashtra. · 
The Management of the State Bank of India, lead bank in Maharasbtra, informed the 
Sub-Committee that the Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana launched on 2nd October, 1993 
primarily provided credit facilities to educated unemployed, urban youth for undertaking 
mit;i'o-enterprises in manufacturing, service, business and allied agricultural sector. As per 
the existing guidelines the scheme provided for financing the project cost upto a maximum of 
Rs. 1 lakh with margin of 5% of the project cost. There was a provision to extend capital 
subsidy of 15% of the project cost. The banks extended a loan of 95% of the project cost, 
which was repayable in three to seven years after a moratorium of six to eighteen months. 
Under the scheme, the training was made compulsory for industrial and service ventures, 
while for certain activities in business sector it might not be required. District PMRY 
Committee imparted a four weeks training covering, (i) elements of book-keeping (ii) simple 
knowledge of marketing (iii) acquaintance with product costing and (iv) familiarisation with 
project financing by banks. 
As regards banks performance under PMRY in Maharashtra the State Bank of India 
authorities informed the Sub-Committee that in 1993-94, SBI ·had sanctioned 76.20% cases 
to the target, made 72.48% disbursement against sanctioned cases and total 55.24% 
disbursement had been made to the target. The achievement against such entries had been 
97.93%, 90.23% and 88.37% in 1994-95. Upto September, 1995, the bank had been able to 
achieve 9% target as sanctioned number of cases and the cases in respect of which 
disbursement has taken. On enquiring about the reasons for poor. performance during year 
1995, the bank authorities clarified that very few applications were sponsored to the bank 
compared to the target which might result in bunching in the latter months. 
The bank authorities highlighted the following problems they were facing in sanction/ 
disbursement under PMRY;-
Sanction: 
(i) Applicants were ineligible on account of income more than stipulated. 
I 
(ii) Applications did not belong to the service area. 
(iii) Projects were unviable. 
(iv) Applicants were already defaulters in oth~r banks. 
Till September 1995, very few applications were sponsored to the bank compared to the 
target which might result in bunching of applications in the latter months. 
Disbursement: 
(i) Delay in training programme. 
(ii) Beneficiaries not coming forward to complete the formalities, despite reminders. 
(iii) Requisita margin-money was not arranged. 
(iv) Want o-rsuitable location and power connection. Non-allotment of autorickshaws. 
(v) Insistance on cash drawings. 
The bank had, however, taken the following steps to improve its performance:­
(i) Adequate powers had been delegated to all Branch Managers to sanction loan 
under PMRY; 

47 
' 
(iit~ Branches had been strictly advised not to take any collateral security. _______ ---~"---=--+-+--' 
(iii) The circles had been advised to instruct the controlling authorities to visit branches 
where the progress was slow and take suitable steps to dispose of the pending 
applications. The issue was also discussed in the CSMs conference held on 30 
0Gtober, 1995. Circles had been requested to ensure that 
(a) all pending applications were processed without delay. 
(b) ail applications were dealt within the prescribed time-frame. 
(c) sanctioned applications were disbursed expeditiously. 
The performance of the scheme was being reviewed in the Executive Committee of the 
Central Board every month an~ corrective steps taken wherever necessary. 
The Sub-Committee ·had been informed that Dena Bank had taken much more effective 
steps as indicated below:--
1. Each and every branch manager of tke bank, even the smallest in rural areas, had 
been given special powers to sanction loans upto Rs. 1 lakh under the scheme. 
2. Branches had been asked to dispose off the applications within the time stipulated 
by the Reserve Bank of India. 
3. In lead districts, L.B.O.'s had been asked to work in close liaison with DIC to 
ensure sponsoring of quality applications in sufficient number, that too in a phased 
manner, so as to avoid large rejections and last minut~s pressure. 
4. The progress of the bank's branches, as well as all banks in lead areas was being 
monitored regularly and wherever required, immediate actions initiated to overcome 
the hurdles. PeriOdical letters to regional authorities I branches had been addressed 
impressing upon them the urgent need to promptly attend the applications and 
implement the scheme in letter and spirit. 
5. L.B.O.'s in lead districts had been asked to persuade the DIC to arrange meetings 
of the Task Force Committee at block level and also invite the local branch 
managers at the time of screening/interviewing the borrowers so that the benefit of 
their experience about the potentiality for various activities in the area and the 
applicants could be taken. 
6. Regional authorities had been asked to closely monitor the progress and concentrate 
on the branches having longer pendency and high rejection and take necessary 
corrective steps promptly. -
7. Branches had been advised to properly record the _ movement of the loan 
applications received under the schem~ and reconcile the same with DIC officials 
from time to time. -
8. Branches had been advised to identify suitable beneficiaries in their area and refer 
them to DIC, which helped in achieving the targets as also to avoid rejections. 
9. Branches had been advised not to insist on collateral security guarantors or deposit 
and not to reduce the amount of loan applied for without justification. 
The bank authorities put forth the following suggestion for improvement under the 
scheme:-
-~- :(i) Need-·for awareness training programmes in cluster of villages and township about 
the sc~eme; 

48 
(ii) The training programme should also cover simple management areas like cash-flow 
management, marketing, quality control etc., with special emphasis on financial 
management and book-keeping; 
(iii) It was also necessary to take steps to highlight the importance of repayment. This 
might be done by effective publicity through media like T.V., Press, emphasizing that 
the loans under the scheme were not doles or grants and would not be written off; 
(iv) Initial scrutiny needed to be made more effective to ensure that only the deserving 
applicants were considered and rejections were minimal. 
The secOJ!~t item for discussion with bank authorities was banking facilities for industries 
particularly the small scale industries. The SBI authorities informed the Sub-Committee that 
advances to small scale industry constitute a major portion of SBI's landing to priority sector. 
In Maharashtra the total advances to small scale industry had been steadily increasing from 
Rs. 765 lakhs, in 1992-93 toRs. 794 lakhs in 1993-94 and Rs. 910 lakhs in 1994-95. The bank 
had initiated the following steps to bring under coverage more and more of the SSI units of 
the small scale industry (SSI):-
(i) A vast network of 590 branches had been established to deal predominantly with 
SSI advances. These branches included 16 exclusive SSI branches, 99 branches in 
industrial estates, 54 branches in industrial areas, and 421 SSI intensive 
branches. In the State of Maharashtra 81 such bran<;hes Were located, out of 
which 15 were in industrial estates, 12 in industrial areas and 54 were other SSI 
intensive branches. It was planned to open 20 more specialised SSI branches 
during 1995-96. 
(ii) All branches had beell directed to accord high priority to extend credit to small 
scale industrial units. 
(iii) A growth of Rs. 930 crores in SSI advance was planned for 1995-96. 
(iv) No loan proposal from SSI unit could be declined except with the prior 
concurrence of the controlling authority. 
(v) With a view to increasing the uninterrupted flow of -credit to SSI the seven point 
action plan of the GOI was being vigorously implemented in the bank. 
(vi) The discretionary powers of the sanctioning.authorities had been increased upto 
a maximum of 400% for speedier flow of credit to SSI. 
(vii) The officials dealing with the cre<iit to SSI were being given specialised training 
to respond better to the demand of SSI borrowers. 
(viii) Recommendations of the Nayak Committee were being fully implemented. 
Working capital of SSI units upto Rs. 1 crore was now being assessed on the 
basis of turnover rather than on the basis of working capital cycle. 
(ix) A sum of Rs. 1,000 crores was being extended to Kh~di and Village Industries 
Commission by a consortium of commercial banks to enable them to lend to 
eligible small scale industrial units. The share of SBI in the ·consortium was Rs. 
475 crores. 
The bank authorities had the following suggestions in the matter:-
(i) The larger of SSI units were graduating to medium and large scale units. The upper 
ceiling put up on the value of plant & machinery for SSI was not adequate. The limit 
which was at present Rs. 60 lakhs and Rs. 75 lakhs for SSI and the ancilliary units 
respectively, required to be raised. 

49 
(ii) The present system of linking the growth of priority seCtor which· wa~ SSI to a large 
extent, to the contemporaneous growth of total bank credit was operationally not 
realistic. As credit to other sectors often expanded rapidly ovet. a JShOrt ,pe~od by 
high volume, it became practically impossible to match· s:u.ch : ~a~ion with 
corresponding expansion of lending to PS/ SSI in the saine time~frame as tliis sector 
typically absorbed credit in relatively small individual doses spread over a large 
number of units. Thus there was a need to establish an alternative bench-mark for 
measuring performance of banks in lending to priority sector. ' 
(iii) The limit for granting composite loans was Rs. SO,OO<Y- only. This was required to 
be enhanced. 
(iv) Administrative costs of lending to SSI, particularly the sma1ler units was high as 
compared to large scale industries. In addition, in case of smaller loans, banks also 
bear the premium payable to the DI & CGC. 
(v) There had been a steep increase in the rate of premium payable to DI & CGC 
(2.5% p.a.) thus adding of the cost of the SSI sector. On the other hand, the extent 
of c:over had been reduced, thus adversely affecting both the banks, and the SSI's 
borrowers. The DI & CGC scheme needed to be reviewed I rationalised. 
On the basis of the evidence of the bank authorities and the paper submitted before it the 
Sub-Committee appreciates the efforts made by tfle banks under PMRY. The Sub-Committee, 
nonetheless, feels that much more prf:!ctically oriented view is required. The conflicting views 
of banks and the state authorities indiCltte a need of review o: the guidelines under the scheme 
on the basis of problems being faced in the field. Time has come that Reserve Bank of India, 
the Ministry of the Finance, the Ministry of Industry and the State government may sit 
together to sort out these problems and help in making· PMRY a success. Similar reorientation 
could also help out in financing small scale .industries. 
Mazagaon Dock Limited (MDL) 
The management informed the Sub-Committee that the Mazagaon Dock Limited 
Bombay, was the leading ship building and offshore fabtication yard in India. The yard was 
established in the 18th century, and over the two hundred odd eventful years, earned a 
reputation for quality work and a tradition of skilled and resourceful service to the shipping 
world, in general and the Indian Navy in particular. Ship building technology between 1965 
and 1971 in the Mazagaon Dock underwent extensive expansion and modernisation. The 
conversion of two small shipways into a single large shipway also enabled the Company to 
construct vessels upto 27,000 dmt. 
The first modern warship to be built by the company was the leander class frigate 
"Nilgiri". The design was obtained from the British Admiralty and the frigate itself was built 
in collaboration with Messrs. Vickers Ltd. and Messrs Yarrow (Shipbuilders) Ltd. of U.K. 
The Nilgiri was launched in October, 1968 and commissioned in 1972. During the next nine 
years Mazagaon Dock built and delivered five more frigates to the Navy. The Nilgiri, 
Himgiri, Udagiri, Dunagiri, Taragiri and the Vindhyagiri proved to be powerful units of the 
Indian fleet and earned trem~ndous .acclaim for the Indian .industry. A new .class was 
christened as the "Godavari Class" and the first ship of the series 'Godavari' was launched in 
May, 1980 and commissioned in December, 1983. The secon~ ··Ganga' was launched in 
October, 1981 and commissioned in December, 1985, the third and last of the series 
'Gomati' was launched in March, 1984 and commissioned in April, 1988. The construction of 
the Godavari class frigates was milestone in the achievement of self-sufficiency in design 
capability. 

so 
The Sub-Committee was given to understand that in May, 1984, Mazagaon Dock was 
also entrusted with the construction of sub-marines. The construction of sub-marines 
required a totally new technology and very stringent quality standards. The first sub-marine 
'Shalki' was launched on 30 September, 1989 and after undergoing extensive trails joined the 
·sub-marine fleet of the Navy in February 1992. The second sub-marine 'Shankul' was 
launched m March 1992 and commissioned in May 1994. Besides warships for the Navy, 
Mazagaon Dock had also completed the construction of a series of offshore patrol vessels for 
patrolling, policing, search and rescue operations in the exclusive economic zone of the 
country. They had also been provided with pollution control and fire fighting capability and 
could carry a helicopter on board. The design of vessels was evolved entirely at Mazagaon 
Dock. Seven coast guard ships, Vikram, Vijaya, Veera, Varona, Vivek and Vigraha today 
form thr~ mainstay of the coast guard fleet. MDL had also completed the construction of the 
two seri~~ of offshore supply vessels to the ONGC. 
On th.:: export front also, Mazagaon Dock had been on the first place. It was the only 
shipyard in India to have built ships for foreign clients. Since 1974-75, the Company had 
built and supplied two ~go vessels to Singapore, two large water tankers for the Iranian 
Navy, silk general cargo vessels to U.K., over a hundred barges to the Gulf and ten police 
launch to Mozambique. 
The di~overy of oil in Bombay High opened for Mazagaon Dock, a new horizon for 
diversification. The oil crisis of the early 70's led to Mazagaon Dock esta~Iishing indigenous 
capacity for the manufacturing of offshore platforms for ONGC. Mazagaon Dock augmented 
the !acilities for the fabrication of platforms by developing yards at Nahava and Mangalore. 
In order to achieve allround self reliance in the strategic field of offshore oil exploration and 
exploitation, Mazagaon Dock further developed capacity to provide offshore services. The 
foreign monopoly in many areas of offshore technology was replaced by the indigenous 
capacity developed by Mazagaon Dock froin 1976 onwards. 
Mazagaon Dock had so far constructed and installed over fifty platforms, fabricated and 
delivered two Jack-up rigs, two single bouy mooring systems, three flare tripods, six bridges, 
coated about seven hundred kms. subsea pipe line and laid ·about fQur hundred kms. of 
:;uosea pipe line. Jack up rigs "Sagar Kiran" constructed by Mazagaon Dock for ONGC, 
were the fast ever jack-up rigs built in India. 
The Sub-Committee feels that Mazagaon Dock has come a long way from. being a ship 
repairing yard in 1960, to its current status as the premier fabrication yard .. Lf~:the country 
and the government should extend all possible partronage to the Dock in ·•~;_growth. 
MSDguese Ore India Umlted. (MOIL) ":., 
The Sub-Committee met the management of Manganese Ore India Limite~ at Bombay. 
As a part of introduction the management informed that the Company had teri major mines 
spread over the states of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh. The Company was the single 
largest producer of high grade manganese ore in the country. MOIL was also producing 
electrolytive manganese dioxide (EMD), a value added product. This was required for the 
manufacture of dry cells. 
On a specific query about the capacity utilisation of the Company, the management 
clarified that as far as MOIL was concerned, the term capacity utilisation might not be 
strictly applicable because the production of manganese ore depended on the prospects of 
steel aDd ferro alloy industry. However, after taking into consideration. the production of 
steel and ferro alloys, the Company fixed/yearly targets for the production of various grades 
~ ore and planned its strategy to. achieve the same. 

51 
The achievement in respect of target and actual production of manganese in 1995-96 
(upto October; 1995) was more than 101% while that of EMD in the same period was 95%. 
The management was quite satisfied with the-current level of production of mangenese ore 
and EMD. In .view of the likely increase in demand of EMD, the management proposed to 
enhance the capacity of the existing EMD plant from 700 tpa to 800 tpa by suitable 
modification of some of the components at an estimated cost of Rs. 90 ·lakhs. They also 
proposed to set up another EMD plant of 1200 tpa capacity by the year 1997-98, at a cost of 
Rs. 9 crores. 
' -
Simultaneously, the Company brought changes in the product mix resulting in better 
sales realisation. All these steps helped in meeting the challanges from the private sector. 
On eriquiring as to whether there was a peed for modifications in existing mining laws 
and regulations,·. the management informed that there were some-, old dumps from which 
large· quantity of saleable grades of manganese ore could be recovered. However, the work 
was of a temporary nature and it was also economically viable for departmental exploitation. 
flence, it was necessary to engage petty contractors for the extraction of ore from these 
dumps. Th~ management suggested that the engagement of contractors for dump mining 
might be allowed which would go a long way in conservation and optimum utilisation ,af this 
valuable mineral resource. The management also suggested that rule 24 of Mineral 
Concession Rules-Disposal of Application for Mining Lease, be amended by prescribing a 
time limit for disposal of mining lease applications by the State government. The 
management also wanted that proper statutory provisions be made for mining of dumps 
since it contained saleable minerals. 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the performance of the_ . Company in achieving the 
production targets in respect of both manganese ore and EMD. The Committee is equally 
happy that the Company has equipped itself to. meet. the challanges from private sector and 
fully geared to the tune of liberalised economy. The Sub-Committee would, bowever, urge 
upon the government to accommodate the suggestions of the management regarding 
amendment in mining laws or regulations so that the Company could perform better in the 
interest of the nation. 
Presentation of the Stste Government of Goa 
At Goa, the Sub-Committee started its business with a detailed discussion with officials 
of the State governm~nt of Goa on 16 November 1995. Initiating the discussion, the Industry 
Secretary to the Government of Goa informed the Sub-Committee that Goa became a state 
in 1987. Earlier, it was being administered by the Central Government and there was no 
problem of funds. Goa lost its protection umbrella after attaining the Statehood. 
Unfortunately the credit deposit ratio in the State was also very low. According to him the 
government of Goa participated through Goa, Daman & Diu Industrial Development 
Corporation (GDDIDC) for helping to acquire the land; as GDDIDC was a government 
company. It also participated through Economic Development Corporation which was an 
agency dealing with the finances to the entrepreneurs. In addition, the State government 
directly participated by bringing water and power lines, construction of roads etc. The State 
government also invited private participation in roads construction and power generation. As 
a result, eleven power stations were proposed to be set up in the next two years. 
As regards the employment generation, the state authorities informed that the State 
government had established industrial estates in the hinterland where there was no industrial 
activity earlier. In these estates about 18000 people got the employment which was expected 
to touch around 25000 in near future. Beside_s many multinationals with Indian collaboration 

52 
were functioning .in the State. During the I'ast three years, seventeen large and medium ~cale 
industries would gener.ate employment for 2626 people and. another 125 units could geli~rate 
employment for. 22;000 ·person·s: In small scale sector, the existing 651 units had provided 
employment to 3583 persons and the number was expected to touch 23,891, with 
approximately 6816 · more units coming up. 
Regarding progress of growth centres-in Goa, the State authorities informed that Goa 
had been allotted· one growth centre at Verna. The State government had spent an amount 
of Rs. 5.03 crores and the Government of India had also contributed Rs. 4.;72 crores on it. 
Large scale developments were going on in the area and the growth centre w~s functioning 
in a smooth way. The State government· had not faced any practical or financial difficulties, 
so far as the growth centre was concerned. The State government .had decided to put up a 
second growth centre at Pernem in north Goa for which the Ministry of Industry was being 
approached shortly. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Central Government would favourably consider the 
proposal of second growth centre in Goa for balanced industrial development of the State. 
On the issue of Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana, the State authorities indicated the 
following difficulties:- ' 
(i) In some of the cases banks asked for collateral security, verbally from the 
beneficiary, which was not in conformity with the rules. · 
(ii) In some cases banks directed the beneficiaries verbally to build up infrastructure 
even before sanctioning the amount. 
(iii) In the case of industries some banks refused to sanction loans on the pr~text that 
there was no potential market in the area where the party wanted to set up the unit without 
considering that the product manufactured in a particular area had demand in other area. 
'fhe Sub-Committee was given to understand that during 1994-95, the banks disbursed 
, loans· in 210 cases against· 261 sanctioned cases amounting to Rs. 141.78 lakhs. The Sub .. 
Committee feels that there seems to be some dislocation in · the implementation of the 
guidelines under the scheme. The Sub-Cormr&ittee recommends that instructions should be 
· issued to banks to implement the scheme on the basis of guidelines issued by the Government 
of India and also not to raise objections on petty grounds, once the case is recommended by 
the Task Forte Committee, wherein .-epresentative of the banks is also a member. 
'j f • 
The Sub-Committee gathered during the discussion that the entire State of Goa was 
inaustrially backward as per the Central Government norms. The details of incentives 
extended by State government of Goa to small scale entrepreneurs were as under: 
(a) The State investment subsidy @ 25% of capital cost limited to a maximum of 
Rs. 25.00 lakbs. 
(b) Exemption from sales tax for a period of twelve years or till reaChing of liability 
amount equal to the capital cost, whichever was later, for large and medium 
industries and for a period of fifteen years in respect of small scale industries. 
(c) Subsidy on diesel generating sets to SSI units @ 50% of the cost of generating set 
limited to Rs. 1.00 lakh. 
(d) Power subsidy@ 0.09 paise per unit to small scale and cottage industries which had 
a total electrical load not exceeding 20 hp. 
(e) Supply of free tender forms, exemption from earnest money deposit to small scale 
industries. 

53 
Besides, .the State authorities also indicated the following concessions extended for 
development of industries in the State:-
(1) Capital subsidy: 25% of the capital cost of the project or Rs. 25.00 lakhs whichever 
was less. 
(2) Reduction in stamp duty: The government was remitting 50% of the stamp duty 
payable under the Stamp Act in respect of bonds or mortagage deeds executed in 
favour of financial institutions. 
(3) Price preference: Price preference of 15% on the purchase made by the government 
departments was available to small scale units. · 
(4) Sales tax & Central Sales tax exemption facility: 
(i) Sales Tax Benefit Scheme had been liberalised and it had been decided to grant 
sales tax exemption facility to large and medium scale units for a period of twelve years and 
to small scale units . for a period of fifteen years or up to sales tax liability amount equal to 
the capital cost of the project, whichever was reached later. Capital cost for this purpose 
would imply the cost of fixed assets such as lands, buildings and machinery only. 
(ii) The sales tare, exemption was available up to the final point i.e. actual consumer 
to whom it was sold in Goa (subject to issue XIA/XIB by a registered deal~r). 
(iii) Certain hig\lly pOllutant industries were not eligible for sales tax exemption, 
unless the government specifically exempted them. ' 
(5) Income tax holiday: Five Year income tax holiday available till 1998 for units was 
being set up in Goa as it had been declared industrially backward. 
On tile basis of the evidence of the State government authorities and the papers submitted 
to it, the Sub-Committee comes to·· the conclusion that the State government has taken aU 
necessary steps to attract industries in the State •. The Sub-Committee hopes that. the 
industrialists and the Centra• Government would reciprocate an.d co~~inue to ext~nd all 
possible assistance to this industrially backward State. 
Goa Mineral Ore Exporters Association 
The representatives of Mineral Ore Exporters Association deposed before the Sub­
Committee that iron ore industry was the backbone of Goa. Ore was primarily produced in 
fines and not in lumps. Haemetite ore was an upgraded quality of ore. According to the 
representatives, there were about a hundred mines .in Goa owned by _private people. Ore 
was available below sea level. From the mine, ore was transferred to river heads by barges. 
The representatives submitted that unloading of cargo from barges was the main problem for 
their business. According to them the upgradation of infrastructure was required from 
mining production to the task of shipment. They felt that un.loading plant at Berth No. 9 at 
Port Trust was outdated and needed modernisation. 
Another problem was the problem of poor power situation. The representatives said 
that they were facing power crunch situation for mining production and shipment. According 
to them the quantum of power received from Korba (M.P.) and Maharashtra was not 
sufficient. Exporters were paying heavy demurrage due to lack of power as vessels were not 
easily available. 
The exporters were also critical of the denial of permission for the blending of iron ore. 
According to them the Mormugao Port Trust was not permitting them, the required 
blending of low grade reject of Bellari Hospet which could otherwise be very profitable in 
the national interest in terms of fetching foreign exchange. If permission was granted for 

54 
. ble~ding, the ore·•so produced would be a quality ore and the indigenous industry would also 
prefer to. use it .. ;, . 
' 
On a specific~ query about the working condition oC·workersllabours and welfare 
activities-undertakell· by the Association, the representatives, 'Clarified that workers were 
earning very well. Average pay of a worker came aro~nd;'four to five thousand rupees p.m. 
On the questibn of employment generation, the Sub-Committee was informed that mining 
industry was generating direct employment directly to 65000 p~~ons and indirectly to 22,000 
pef.soris. Villagers around mining areas were given employment. On the environment front, 
the Association· was planting ah9ut one million trees every ·.year .• / 
· . On the basis of the evidence the Sub-Committee feels that .{In other States the power 
c:r,unch. has al~ a.dversely atrected the predominent mining Industry in Goa. Since Goa Is 
declared as industrially backward State, the power problem needs immediate attention of the 
Union Government for its redressal. The Sub-Committee observes that it should also be well 
. , ~~ithili Union Government's consideration to examine the possibility of permission for blending 
ef lo~. Jiad+'' r~ject ot Bellari Hospet to improve the quality of ore. The Sub-Committee 
appreciates the weltate steps the Exporters Association has taken but it feels that as there is 
no room for complacency and the Association should spend more for the welfare of poor 
people in the State. 
Goa Small Industries AssOciation 
The Sub-Cbrrimittee also took an opporttmity to interact with the trade and industry 
representatives of Goa. It was gathered that there was no large or medium scale industry in 
Goa ancf-the industrialisation of the State was totally depending on small or tiny industrial 
units_. The representatives of Goa Small Industries Associati<m )li_ghlighted certain difficulties 
which they were facirig in running/setting up small indUstries in the State. 
According to the representatives of the Association, the major problem was the 
reluctance on the part of banks to extend necessary working capital. They informed the Sub­
Committee that credit-deposit ratio in Goa was very poor. But Goa which was an 
industrially backward State had a higher growth potential for the small industries owing to 
substantial capital investment in the industrial sector and the booming tourism trade which 
consumed. a lot of products manufactured by small industries. Even after obtaining sanction 
. of term finance from SFC's and SIDBI, the working capital funds from banks were not 
coming forth due to delay, excessive paper works, imposition of capital on 20% of turnover 
and imposing a low growth of turnover. The banks in Goa delayed the sanction because 
according to them the Nayak Committee norms permitted only 20% maximum finance of 
turnover to small scale industries, while actually the Committee recommended that the 
minimum lending should be 20% of the turnover. The representatives of the sm&!l scale 
industries did not accept the banks' contention that there existed no lending avenues in Goa, 
in view of substantial lending business done by cooperative banks and private financial 
institutions. 
Another problem with the banks was that they did not extend prompt help to sick units 
in Goa. The representatives informed that as per RBI guidelines the decision with regard to 
calling up or rehabilitating such an advance must be taken within six months of units' 
sickness. Banks however, advised small entrepreneurs on signs of sickness. As a result they 
are forced to use their surplus and borrow money to pay the excessive interest to banks. 
The representatives also informed about the functioning of the State level Inter 
Institution Committee, which was earlier set up to address the malfunctioning of finance 
sector. Banks had scant regard for this Committee as the senior most functionary of each 

55 
bank seldom attended the meeting of the Committee. Very few banks had filed a list of sick 
units to the Committee which was required two years back. · · 
The Sub-Committee would like to invite special attention of the Government of Indi,i 
on the following suggestions put forth by Goa Small Industries Association:-
( a) The granting of limits in principle should be done in full recognition of 
the entrepreneurs' optimism and within a weeks' time. A limit for bills 
and book debts should be extended without hesitation as the unit can 
utilise- these limits only on actual performance. 
(b) It should be made compulsory on the part of the bank to recognise 
sickness in a unit by co-ordinating with the term lending institution on a 
,g.uarterly basis. Whenever the unit defaults for two successive quart~rs 
by way of interest, repayment or irregularity to either of them, it should 
be recognised as the onset of sickness and a rehabilitation or a call up 
plan should be drawn up to be effective within six months from the 
date. 
This was an RBI guideline not implemented by the banks. 
(c) As regards the SLIIC Committee, dysfunction concerned circular of the 
Hon'ble Minister for Industries Mr. Karunakaran, should be 
immediately implemented. 
(d) The law enacted by Parliament providing fdt action against the ·large 
scale industries for utilising credit from small scale industries beyond 
sixty days needed to be amended because the small scale industrialist 
was afraid to complain. 
The large scale industry was required by law to: 
(•) Classify its suppliers into small and large units. 
(iJ) Certify that all its suppliers in the small scale sector were paid within 
sixty days of credit period. 
.,. 
Inability to produce the above duly classified and certified suppliers should 
lead to prosecution. 
(e) Enhancing excise exemption limit to Small Scale Industry to Rs. 75.00 
lakhs. ' · 
(f) Income tax exemption to Small Scale Industry units in Goa upto ten 
years from the existing period of five years. 
/ 

• 
·STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE:-11 

Background Data on tbe Visit of the 
Sub-Committee-n 
of the Department-Related ParHamentary Standing Committee on lndustty 
The Committee visited the following· places and heard the views of various 
organisations, etc. in three phases as under:-
First Phase 
The Sub-Committee visited the States of Orissa and West Bengal from the 16th to 23fd 
September, 1995. The Sub-Committee had a meeting with State Government officials an:d 
with workers unions, associations, etc. at Bhubaneshwar and heard their views. The Sub­
Committee had a meeting with the District Magistrate and other officials at Sambalpur and 
heard their views in connection with the hand-woven sqk weavers' condition and lastly 
visited Burgarh and had on the spot study of the conditions of weavers working on looms. 
The Committee thereafter moved to Calcutta. In Calcutta the Committee visited Burn 
Standard Co. and had a meeting with the officials and workers .. The Committee also heard 
the views of the West Bengal Chamber of Commerce/Confederation of Indian Industry and 
State Government officials. In West Bengal the Sub-Committee visited liSCO Plant, 
Burnpur, Alloy Steel Plant, MAMC and Durgapur Steel Plant and had a meeting with the 
officials and workers union of the said steel plants. Lastly, the Sub-Committee heard the 
views of the District Magistrate, Bankura and other officials regarding the industrial 
backwardness in the District. 
Second Phase 
The Committee visited the State of Tamil Nadu and Union Territory of Pondicherry 
from the 8th to 14th October, 1995 and visited the following places and heard the views of 
various organisations, etc. as under. 
Pondicherry 
The Sub-Committee had a meeting with the Trade and Industry Representatives and 
thereafter visited local industries and had meeting with the workers on the 9th October, 
1995. In the afternoon, the Sub-Committee had a mreting with the officials of the Union 
Territory. 
Tamil Nadu 
In the morning of the lOth October, 1995, the Sub-Committee heard the views of 
officials and workers of Hindustan Photo Films and Trade and Industry Representatives. In 
the afternoon the Sub-Committee heard the views of State Government Officials in Madras. 
From there the Sub-Committee moved to Ramanathapuram and heard the views of the 
District Magistrate and State Industry Department. On the 12th October 1995, the Sub­
Committee heard the views of the District Magistrate and repres~ntatives of the State 
Industry Department at .Erode. At Salem, in the morning of the 13th October, 1995, the 
Committee heard the views of representatives of trade and industry, District Magistrate and 
State Industry Department officials. In the afternoon, the Committee visited the Salem Steel 
Plant and had a meeting with the management of Salem Steel Plant and the workers union. 
59 

60 
Third Phase 
The Sub-Committee visited Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Calcutta from the 22nd to 
25th November, 1995. During the course of their visit, the 'sub-Committee visited the 
following places and heard the views of various representatives as under:-
On the 22nd November, 1995, the Sub-Committee had a meeting with the lead bank 
management and others and heard their views specially the management of State Bank of 
India in regard to the working of the PMRY in the Islands. 
On the 23rd November, 1995, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Industrial Development Corporation (ANDIDCO) and the 
representatives of trade and industry. In the afternoon, the Sub-Committee had a meeting 
with the representatives of Small Scale Industries Association of the Union Territory. 
In the morning of the 24th November, 1995, the Sub-Co~mittee visited the local 
industrial units at Garachara put up in the industrial sheds provided by the local 
administration. The Sub-Committee also ·.had a meeting with the officials of the Union 
Territory and beard their views. In the afternoon, the Sub-Committee had a meeting with 
the workers and officers of the Forest and Plantation Corporation and heard their views. 
Calcutta 
On the 25th November, 1995, the Committee heard the views of M/s Jessop Co. and 
the workers union of the Company. In the afternoon, the Committee visited M/s Bridge and 
Roof and with that concluded their programme of visit to various places. 
The Brief Details of the Views Expressed by the Various Public Sector Industries, State 
Government Officials, Trade Unions, Workers before the Committee during its visit to Orissa, 
West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry and the Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Capital Goods Industries 
The Committee was informed that whenever any such undertaking start losing, the 
pressure is built up on the Central Government to take over that undertaking. Most of the 
industries under BIFR are the private industries. The following reasons were advarrced for 
the sickness of the capital goods industries:-
(!) ineffective and unresponsive management at the top level; 
(2) neglect of rehabilitation programmes in the past; 
(3) inadequacy of the replacement, repair and maintenance programme; and 
(4) lack of financial assistance from the Central Government at the right time; 
The major causes for sickness of the capital goods industries are as under:-
Burn & Co. Ltd.: The company is suffering a lot due to slash of orders of wagons from 
the Railway Board. The huge stock of finished items made by the company on the orders of 
Railways is lying there .and the same is not being lifted by the Railways. The offshore 
division of the Company is totally crippled due to lack of orders from ONGC. The 
refractory units have also been facing serious problems due to inadequate orders from SAIL 
beside chronic shortage of coal and ~orking· capital problems. The representatives of the 
Company requested for (i) non-plan support of Rs. 37 crores to meet working capital 
requirement and to liquidate statutory dues. The Railways and ONGC may place orders 
with the company. The SAIL may place order on the Refractory Units for atleast 25,000 
tonnes per annum. 

61 
Indian Iron & Steel Co., Burnpur: The company submitted no less than 12 proposals but 
there is no response from the Government. The production cost of hot metal at the plant is 
one of the lowest in the country but the cost jumps up drastically in the steel making stage due 
to outdated technology and old plant equipments. This cost could be reduced by almost Rs. 
2()()(Y- per tonne by introducing new technology. The SAIL has not given free hand to 
modernise liSCO. The representatives stressed that liSCO can earn profit and repeat history 
of its golden era by its modernisation within the framework of SAIL. The most of mills are 
out-dated and need replacement or modernisation. The Company can earn a good amount of 
foreign exchange after modernisation as the Company will be able to stand in the international 
competitive market. The Committee was informed that due to the fear of closure, the work 
culture has gone up. The workers are ready to help and sacrifice for the cause of revival of the 
plant. The company needs Rs. 1100'- crores for modernisation, etc. over a period of five years 
for the sake of lakhs of people indirectly associated with the giant organisation. 
Mining and Allied Machiraery Corporation Ltd., (MAMC): The Company bas an intrinsically 
sound technological infrastructure. To make the company viable, drastic reduction in 
manpower is to be organised through VRS. The Company had already reduced the strength 
from 7700 to 4432 through VRS. Upto August, 1995, the sales tum over was Rs. 2163 lakhs: 
With some fund assistance for the working capital, the year's turnover would reach Rs. 7000 
lakhs. The Company has participated in tenders of more than Rs. 200 crores which are still 
live and under evaluation of respective customers. To achieve viability, financial restructuring, 
cash infusion of Rs. 165 crores as direct assistance from the Government in the form of equity 
is required. 
Alloy Steels Plant, Durgapur: The plant has the best of sophisticated technological 
facilities for production of 400 grades of special steels, alloy steels and stainless steels. ASP is 
operating in a fiercely competitive market where the private sector producers have a slight 
edge. The plant needs modernisation, modification and replacement of obsolete machines. 
The manpower of the plant as an austerity measure has been reduced from 8000 plus to the 
level of· 5000 plus. In the preceding years; the company was searching for customers but now 
the customers have been chasing the company. The Commitee was informed that the market 
position is better now. The Committee was requested for immediate sanction of necessary 
funds for modernisation, modification and replacement of obsolete machines. 
Hindustan Photo Films Mfg. Co. Ltd.: The company was making profit till1991-92. The 
workers infonned that due to mismanagement at the top, the company has gone sick. The 
Company is having fully integrated black. $nd white technology. The obsolete technology is to 
be changed. The current assets of the Company are less than the liability. The multinationals 
have entered into the market. This has affected the Company's 'prospects. The losses of the 
Company as on 31.3.1995 are to the tWle of &s. 218 crores. The Company is annually losing 
8-10 crores. The Company has already reduced the manpower from 4000 to 3100. The 
Company resorted to diversification without the approval of the Central Government. This 
has resulted sickness in the Company. The Company could not operate to the required level 
because of lack of finances. For opening Qf LC, the Company has to provide 100% margin 
money. The Committee was requested to help for the release of Rs. 35 crores for the 
Company to come into operation. Another Rs. 60 cror~ are required for 100% operation of 
the Company. 
Solem Steel Plant: The Salem Steel Plant is the youngest member of SAIL. lt is the first 
SAIL plant to bave ISO 9002 certification from Mls TUV-CERT Germany, in 1993. The sale 
of the plant has gone up from 547 tonnes in 1981-82 to 59352 in 1994-95. The Company has 
earned a profit of Rs. 21.14 crores during 1994-95. 

62 
Jessop & Co. Ltd., Calcutta: The Committee was informed that the Company is a 
subsidiary of Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam limited. The major item i.e., cranes and structures 
are being supplied to big industries. The Company has got the distinction of doing the crane 
repair work. The Committee was also informed that there is a salary bill of Rs. 30 crores yet 
to be paid and the Company is two months behind in making payment to the staff. The 
present · state of affairs of the Company is due to:-
(1) deart~ of order in mining and paper machinery area; 
(2) shortage of working capital; 
(3) the accumulated losses have gone very high; and 
( 4) insufficient orders from Railways for MG coach bogies. 
The Committee was informed that the Company is ·upgrading the technology 
continuously. They have already undertaken t}le revival plan. The Company is likely to get 
orders to the tune of Rs. 106 crores this year. The Company submitted their requirement to 
tide over the situation as under:-
(1) Working Capital Assistance Rs. 13 crores 
(2) Payment of Salary & Wages Rs. 12 crores 
(3) Payment of gratuity Rs. 8.56 crores 
Rs. 33.56 crores 
Besides that the Company requires Government guarantee for cash credit with SBI and 
revised pay scales for the executive. 
Recommendations of the Sub-Committee 
The Committee is of the view that most of these units are perennially sick units with 
obsolete plant and machinery. These units could not be revived due to paucity of funds. 
There has been mismanagement at ·the top level of some· of these companies. The 
modernisation and replaeement of obsolete parts is not done regularly. Before the takeover 
by the Government, these companies were making profit. The Committee is of the view that 
the work culture now has changed and there i~ a maximum cooperation between the workers 
and the management and it has started yielding results. Towards this change in work culture, 
support and co-operation has been forthcoming from all sectors-be it unions, employees, 
State and local administration. The workers have realised that their existence is linked with 
the survival of these companies. For example, the Jessop & Co. Ltd. has not paid salary for 
the last two months to the workers. The workers emphatically assured the Committee that 
they are ready to sacrifice more for the revival of the Company. The Sub-Committee is of 
the view that the Government should make use of this change in work culture and their 
cooperation with the managerlient at' this hour of need and sanction the necessary financial 
assistance for the revival of these companies. The Government should not lose this 
opportunity. The Committee was also made to understand by the management of Jessop & 
Co. Ltd. That for the present crisis the company has been held responsible. The Holding 
Company Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam Limited has not been asked to explain its role for the 
present state of affairs of the Company. The Committee desired that a meeting of the 
Holding Company may be called for the purpose. 

63 
Capital Goods Industries 
The Sub-Committee feels that the enthusiasm among the workers for a new work-culture 
for the survival of the sick units, particularly liSCO in Bumpur, MAMC at Durgapur, Jessop & 
Co. at Calcutta, Bum Standard, West Bengal, Hindustan Photo Films, Ooty, Alloy Steel Plant, 
Durgapur needs to be promoted further and for this the Government should make all sincere 
afforts to the redressing of the problems which presently beset the workers. The Government 
should arrange additional financial resources to provide budgetary support to these units so that 
they become commercially viable and profit earning. The Committee is of the opinion that the. 
workers at present are ready to fully cooperate and this naturally indicates towards the 
possibility of reviving these industries provided Government is determined to help, The 
Committee has also noted that MAMC at Durgapur which was incurring huge losses about a 
year back has now drastically reduced its losses and surviving only on the orders it is getting 
without the support of any financial institutions. The Committee notes the fact that this 
company in the public sector was created for manufacturing of underground coal mining 
equipments but at a later stage Govemment policy was changed ftom underground mining to 
open cast mining. This naturally led to the reduction of orders received by the company. 
It is observed by the Committee that Government orders are not given to the public sector 
companies. Moreover these companies have also to compete with private sector to get orderS 
and that sometimes it so happens that for want of Government orders as in the case of Bum 
Standard, which is manufacturing wagons, these Companies have suffered. MAMC was set up 
mainly to cater to the equipment needs of Coal India Limited and other undertakings. But these 
undertakings did not place the sufficient orders with MAMC. In some cases even after 
execution of the work, due payments are not made to the companies and sometimes delivery of 
the material is not accepted. The Committee is of the opinion that some mechanism should be 
devised at a high level to protect the public sector undertakings which are capable and the 
quality goods can be produced with certain preferential treatment for giving of orders. 
The Committee has also noticed that the post of Chief Executive of many of the public 
sector undertakings, including Director level positions have been lying vacant for months and 
these undertakings are being looked after by the Joint Secretaries of the Ministry as additional 
charge. The perception of the experts and skilled professiOnals and that of the bureaucrats is 
always different, as a result the growth of the companies and their competitiveness is ·being 
compromised. If the public sector has to be made commercially viable and strive t()wal'ds 
excellence, it is necessary that immediate steps should be taken to de link the bureaucracy from 
the professional jobs. 
Industrial Backwardness and Working of Small Scsle Industries . 
Orissa: The representatives of the Small Scale Industries Association informed that the 
small scale industries have no separate forum to .seek justice promptly, except going to a court of 
Law where justice is invariably delayed abnormally and consequently denied. The Committee 
was, therefore, requested for the setting up of a tribunal for small scale industries. They also 
requested that the small scale sector with investment of below 20 lakhs be treated as a special 
category for the purpose of taxation. As the State has been declared a backward State; the 
representatives requested for the following concessions:-
(!) the limit of small scale sector be raised from Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 2 crores; 
(2) the .central excise rate may be enhanced from. R!i. 30 lakhs to Rs. 60 lakhs; 
(3) as the state is not having any growth centre, it may be declared as a no industry district; 
( 4) as most of districts are in the coastal belt and others are in the hilly .areas. without 
. . . ' ~ , ' 
' . ... 

64 
adequate transport facilities and the transportation is difficult and costly, transport 
subsidy be introduced for carrying goods from hilly areas; 
(S) BIFR be introduced to revive sick small scale units as is being done in the case of 
larse and medium scale industries; 
(6) the rate of interest by banks may be reduced from 10--19% to 10% on SSI units; 
(7) the branches of Export Promotion Council be set up in the State; 
(8) an lSI testing unit may be set up in the State and also a DGSD branch office may 
be set up; and 
(9) the SIDBI is sanctioning loans for more than Rs. 60 lakhs. May be asked to 
s~m,.;t!~n loans less than Rs. 30 lakhs to help SSI units. 
The t<.:~•1·e~entatives informed the Committee that the basic reasons for the 
backwat·:int~ in the State. These are as under:-
(1) lack of infrastructure in the field of transportation, communication, etc.; 
(2) low exploitation of minerals due to shortage of power; 
(3) lack of support from the financial institutions and banks to develop the industries; 
(4) exemption of income tax is not available for setting up industries in the backward 
regions; and 
(S) the Sambalpur-Talchar railway line be completed to improve transport facilities. 
The Collector of Sambalpur informed the Committee that there was much scope in the 
district for the development of tourism industry near the Hirakud Dam. This might be on 
tho pattern of Vrindavan Garden. There was a scope for investment in the . area of 
serkulture industry. The airstrip in Sambalpur might be developed. The necessary land is 
available for the purpose. The Sambalpuri Bastralaya Handloom Cooperative Society had 
4ntwrt the attention of the Committee to the following demands:-
(1) upto 1988-89, 20% rebate was allowed on sale of handloom fabrics. The 
Go'v~rnment introduced a Market Development' Assistance to be equally shared by 
State and Centre @15% of the cash credit limit sanctioned by the financing bank to 
meet the working capital. The Scheme has · been further modified for the year 
1995-96. The assistance available to the handloom sector is too less as compared to 
the rebate scheme of 1988-89; 
(2) that the amount given to the workers for the construction of sheds be raised from 
Rs. 4000/- to Rs. 8000/-; 
(3) the State Government may provide money to the workers for replacement of 
accessories for looms; and 
{4) that a subsidy of 50% by the Centre and 50% by the State may be provided for 
setting up new looms. 
The Committee was also informed that there is a large scope for exploitation of 
minerals deposits in the State and the Central Government can earn a-lot thereby. The 
Committee was also informed that the transmission losses are to the tune of 30%. 
West BengQl: The representatives of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry made the 
following suggestions:-
(!) the Sales Tax rate&llaws may be made uniform for all the States to avoid unhealthy 
competition; 

65 
(2) telecommunication facilities and road net-work be improved; 
(3) the modernisation of liSCO may not be delayed as the company has large 
infrastructure; 
(4) the excise duty on steel re-rolling mills may be levied at the raw-material stage as 
before; 
(5) the items reserved for SSI sector may not be de-reserved. The SIDBI may provide 
more direct assistance to the SSI units in the State; 
(6) the Calcutta Port needs restructuring. The Calcutta-Haldia complex may also be 
developed; and 
(7) the movement of goods from one State to another faces so much hurdles in terms of 
permits. This may be looked into. 
The representatives of the State Government informed that the industrial development 
in the State was by the large smooth. The Committee was informed that militant trade 
unionism was prevalent in the State but the things have considerably changed now. The 
Committee was informed that the Calcutta Port was most expensive and the ships having the 
carrying capacity of 8000 tonnes weight could not enter the port. The labour charges were 
also too high. The Committee might look into it. 
The District Magistrate, Burdhman informed that all industries were sick in the area. 
The Mafia Raj was there and the economy had collapsed. The small scale industries had 
completely finished. The SSI u11its were suffering because of delayed payment by the 
medium and large scale establishments. 
The District Magistrate, Bankura informed the Committee that Bankura is an 
undulating terrain of laterite soil. Having rainfall of 1260 mm. in a year, yet this region have 
got charaCteristic of sub-humid zone due to run off rain water. Hence, most of the populace 
have to depend on mono-crop. Eventually job creation for a large portion of the working 
force could not be ensured throughout the year. The number of SSI units functioning in the 
District is 3081 employing 17,740 persons. The reasons for the backwardness of the District 
are as under:-
(1) Shortage of water is a major cause; 
(2) lack of infrastructure facilities i.e.' metal road, powet and communication, etc.; 
(3) the banks are not cooperating in gtanting loan for the setting up new units; 
( 4) the District is not having any growth centre; 
(5) the number of unemployed people in the District is on the high side; 
(6) the mining industry has a scope for improvement but there is no Central help in this 
regard; 
(7) ~he ancilliary industries do not get payment in time and that is the reason for which 
they are ·suffering. 
The Committee was also informed that the idle manpower could be absorbed by setting 
up cottage and small scale industries. The vocational institutions might be opened to meet 
the demand of high professional and skilled manpower for industries to be set up in the 
region. The District has a good treasure of handicrafts. The large industries might be asked 
to create more ancilliary industries for the SSI units. The District is famous for its handloom 
sarees like "Baluchari". The Government might make all efforts for the development of 
handloom industries in the District. The Committee was informed that the District was 

66 
pre-dominantly agricultural-based having reserves for industrial raw materials. As such there 
was plenty of scope for development. The District· is· one of the five no industry districts in · 
the State and as such it deserves special attention from the State as well as the Central 
Government. Of late the private industries are playing a major' role for the development of 
the District. 
Pondicherry: The representatives of Trade and Industry informed the Committee that the 
licencing procedure had to be simplified as several clearances were to be obtained before 
setting up an industry. 50oo jndu,stri~s were yet to be provided ground water. The tax 
benefits in comparison to Goa and Silvasa were less. The representatives of the Pondicherry 
Industries Association submitted as under:-
(1) Sadarapet Industrial Estate was estal]lished 10 years back but the roads were still 
unfit for transportation; 
(2) there was a long waiting list for telephone connection and more so the working of 
telephones was not satisfactory; 
(3) the power position was very bad and it went off at least 4-5 times a day; 
( 4) the water supplied to the Industrial Estate was not potable; 
(5) the SAIL was not supplying stock to the SSI units less than 40-50 MT. It was not 
possible for SSI units to purchase that much stock at one time; 
(6) the investment subsidy and seed capital assistance might be re-introduced; 
(7) the small scale and medium scale industries might be brought under the single 
window system; 
(8) the extraction of ground water was not allowed as the water level was going down; 
and 
(9) the collateral security demanded by the banks was now to the tune of 200% for 
small scale industries which was detrimental to the growth of SSI units. 
The Committee was. also requested that Sales Tax Exemption might be extended upto 
10 years as in Karaikal and other States (being backward area category). Transport subsidy 
might be granted for the industries. In the absence of Central Subsidy and Income Tax 
holiday since 1989 to 1992, alternative benefits should be provided to the industries. The 
House Tax might not be applicable to industries in the Industrial Estate. The Committee 
was also informed that no industrial policy had been announced so far. The industries might 
be represented on the Committee formed on industrial policy. The main drawback for the 
industrial backwardness was that one person was holding charge of 2-3 departments resulting 
in inefficiency and neglect of important issues. The liberalisation poti_ey introduced by the 
Centre either not implemented properly or being mis-interpretated by the State 
Government. 
The Committee was further requested that the rate of. interest for development of 
industries in backward areas 'A' category might be reduced further. The convertion of metre 
gauge into broad gauge might be done immediately enabling faster movement of passenger 
and goods traffic. · 
Tamil Nadu: The officials of the State Government of Tamil-Nadu informed the CQijlmittee 
that Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation Limited (TIDCO) ·had been 
established with the following objects in order to improve the Jndustrial development in the 
state:- · 
(1) identification of new industrial opportunities in the State; 

' 
67 
(2) fonnulation of the new project concepts based on the available resources and the 
, needs of the State; 
(3) identification of technology both indigenous and foreign for successful 
implementation of the project; 
( 4) assisting the private promoter in obtaining various Government approvals; and 
(5) offering further assi~tance, . after commissioning, for trouble shooting and 
stablization, to reach profitable operations. 
The TIDCO lias been implementing projects in diversified areas such as manufacture of 
cement, steel, fertilizers, chemicals, petro-ch~micals, drugs and fonnulations, marine1igro 
chemicals, engineering goods, etc. The representatives infonned the Committee that the 
Government finnly believed that rapid industrialisation was possible only through a 
successful policy relating to small scale industries. The Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment 
Corporation proposed to constitute a Venture Capital Fund to promote new technologies. 
The Committee was further informed that the following had been identified as Thrust 
Sectors for further industrial growth:-
(1) Leather 
(2) Textiles and Hosieries 
(3) Electronics and software 
( 4) Auto components 
(5) Drugs and Phannaceuticals 
(6) Petro-chemicals and industrial alcohol based Organic Chemicals 
(7) Argo-based industries and food processing industries 
(8) Export oriented uints and Sea Food, etc. 
The Committee was informed that for the clearance of industrial licences two high 
powered Committees had been constituted as under:-
(1) For 50 crores aqd above, the Committee was to be chaired by the Chief Minister; 
(2) below Rs. SO crores, the Committee was to be chaired IJ.Y the Chief Secretary. 
The Committee was requested to help in the clearance of the proposal for 
modernisation of Madras Port which was congested one. They also requested for the 
pr-ovision of a cargo handling complex. The Committee was requested that the excise duty 
exemption be raised from Rs. 60 lakhs to 75 lakhs. The Committee was also infonned that 
for speedy issue of licences to SSI units, the forms had been simplifed. It was brought to the 
notice of the Committee that there was competition between the States to provide more and 
more concessions. This should be discouraged for healthy competition. They also requested 
that the sick SSI units might be given assistance by the banks. It was also pointed out that 
four State industries were under BIFR. These industries might be· revived. The Committee 
was infonned that out of the 42 industries in the State 75% were in the profit making. The 
work culture was much better now. The NTC units in the State were better than before. The 
Committee was further informed that T ACID had been established to develop new 
industrial growth centres/complexes in the State with fully integrated on-side and off-site 
infrastructure facilities and to fill up gaps in infrastructure in. the existing industrial areas. 
The facilities like water, power, smooth transportation, drainage, street lighting etc. would 
be provided in the growth centres. The following incentives would be available for new 
units:-
(1) a capital subsidy of 15% on fixed assets subject to a ceiling of Rs. 15/.. lakhs; 
(2) a subsidy of l5°(o of the value of generators purchased and installed subject to a 
ceiling of Rs. S/.. lakhs; 
(3) the units where more than 30% of the total workers employed are women shall be 

68 
eligible for an additional capital subsidy of 5% of investment on Fixed Assets 
subject to a ceiling of Rs. 5I. lakhs; and 
(4) deferral of Sales Tax for 9 years to the full extent of total investment made in Fixed 
Assets. · · 
The Tamil Nadu Small And Tiny Industries Association submitted their problems to the 
Committee as under:-
(!) the lands purchased in the name of imlustry, it is aske~ to pay a double stamp duty 
at present. This is a retrograde step for emergence of new industries; 
(2) the building plan may be approved by the Single Window Committee itself. The 
Committee may be empowered to clear all formalities i.e., licences, etc.; 
(3) units proposed to be started in the developed industrial areas might be freed from 
· licensing formalities; 
(4) low tension limits to be increased from 150 to 200 Horse Power to facilitate the 
expansion of the existing units; the uninterrupted power supply to SSI units might 
be ensured; 
(5) the SSI units were not able to release their bills even after 6 months. This might be 
looked into; 
(6) the Salex Tax on cast iron castings might be brought to a level of 4% maximum as 
was in vogue in the neighbouring States; 
(7) the working of the District Industries Centres may be reorganised in such a way that 
they may act as promotional agencies and may be staffed adequately; and 
(8) the Government may come forward with a sanction of subsidies on higher purchase 
machinery and on leasing. 
. At Erode, the Collector informed the Committee that 11 hikh women were engaged in 
agro-based industries. The textile units and EOU industries were also coming up. The land 
- for the purpose had already been acquired. The IRDP schetne was working well. The 
CQaunittee was informed by the representatives of the State industry that 22 sanctions were 
necessary to start a new industry. One had to run from pillar to post. It was a frustration for 
the new entrepreneurs. The Turmeric industries were very popular. The people were going 
to set up Hosiery industries. The m, Polytechnic trained persons had set up industries in 
SSI units. The "Shakti Masala" had been given the President of India Award for excellance. 
At Salem, the Collector informed the Committee that the Airport might be made 
functional. The Sago-based fabrics had tremendous scope for export. The marketing facilities 
for power-loom might be created. In Salem one man is operating one loom. Salem is central 
place. It is an ideal . place for cargo. The place has export potentialities. Madurai might be 
connected by a B.G. line for speedy transportation. The Bangalore Sa!em Railway Li~:,;; 
might .also be. converted irlto Broad Gauge. The .National Highway 7 might be wident..;:. from 
Bangalore to Kanya Kumari. There was no research facilities in the District to Lnprove the 
products. The Committee was also requested for the following:-
(!) Salem-Karur B.G. line 
(2) Over-bridge at Malabar 
(3) Direct export facilities 
(4) Basic facilities for garment export 
· , (S) Fashion Technology Centre 
( 6) Dyeing units 
(7) . Testing Labs for Salem 
(8) Imported machines are required for. silk production to complete with China and 
other countries 

69 
(9) the power supply JDay be improved. 
The Andaman &: Nicobar Islands: The Chainnan of ANIIDCO informed the Committee 
that the Company started working w.e.f. 19.1.1990. The main objective of the Company 
was to develop and commercially exploit the natural resources of the Territory for the 
balanced and environmentally sound development of the territory, operating on sound 
business principles. The share capital of the Company was Rs. SO crores. The main trade 
was tourism and fishing. The following· suggestions were put forth before the Committee:-
(!) There was no substantial development in the field of tourism in spite of the fact 
that the Island could offer a rich tourism water sports; 
(2) The main drawback for the low turaover of tourists was the short length of the 
Port Blair runway and only 737 Boeing with low capacity could land presently; 
(3) At present 9 islands had been earmarked for foreign tourists. The restriction might 
be removed to improve the financial position of the Island; 
(4) The tourists faced so many difficulties in getting booking by air for the Island; 
(5) A free port might be set up; 
(6) A huge investment was required in the field of feuy services; . 
(7) A modern Ship Building Yard might be set up in the ·Island to cater employment 
to the people. 
The Chairman of ANITDCO infonned the Committee that in order to promote 
tourism, they would either purchase an aircraft or go in for a joint venture in this regard. 
To attract more tourists, a Restaurant was being build having all the modern facilities. A 
Guest House was proposed to be build at Wandoor. The Island might also develop house 
boats as in J&K from tourists point of view. There was a proposal to start a Bazar on 
Wheels. A waste-paper re-cycling unit was proposed to be set up to create employment. 
Waste Paper 128M. Ton is available for the purpose. Efforts to eaten more fish might also 
be made. At present the Island was not catching more than 39 lakhs tonnes of fish. A raw 
processing plant is beins set up for export of fish with a 250 MT capacity. 
The representatives of the Small Scale Industries Association informed tb~· Committee 
about the following problems:- · 
(1) The companies had to ke.ep their tmished goods in the· godowns for want of 
containers and thereby the cost production escalates; 
(2) There was shortage of water and electricity; 
(3) The ANIIDCO might provide ~II type of loans ·to enterpreneurs; 
(4) Infrastructure facilities such as construction of Jetties, availability of containers, 
installation of higher capac1ty shore-crane, availability of barges, etc. be created; 
(5) The excise duty might be lowered·from 20% to 10% and the Tax Holiday might 
be extended for the existing industries as declared in the case of new industries; 
( 6) The Central Government might expedite the approval of the Capital Investment 
and Island Transport Subsidy Scheme, 1995 formulated by the Island; 
(7) Export Permit System for shipment of Saw timber from A&N Islands to mainland 
might be given; · . . · 
(8) Transport ·subsidy on sawn timber from Island to mai~and .might be given; .. 
(9) Improvement of Industrial Estate at Garachanna and c;onstruction· of ~o~ 
industrial sheds; 
(10) Preference might be given to local SSI units for Government purchases; 
(11) Adequate representation of the Associations in all Management Committees · 
which frame1n~:mitor· policies for SSI units; 

70 
(12) The price subsidy offered on Timber Logs to Saw Mills might be passed on to SSI 
units as they were the actual users of the timber. 
The Committee also visited the Industrial Estate, Garacharma on 24.11.1995. The 
management of the industrial units drew the attention of. the Committee to the following 
problems:-
(!) water was not supplied regularly to the units; 
(2) there was a frequent power cut; 
(3) the infrastructure facilities like road, "drainage system etc. might be very poor and 
inadequate; and , 
(4) more sheds might be constructed with requisite facilities. 
The Committee had a meeting with the officials of the UT. The Chief Secretary 
informed the Committee that the UT had been declared as industrially backward and placed 
under category 'A'. The Committee was informed that in spite of a number of constraints on 
resources, there had been a steady development of Small and Village Industries in UT. 
From about 10 units in 1978 it had now 650 units and about 4000 persons were employed 
therein. The Committee was informed that more industrial sheds were to be constructed. 
Three more industrial estates had been .planned. All the required facilities would be there. A 
Standing Technical Committee was proposed to be set up for the identification of industries 
for location and promotion. The Committee would prepare a list of desirable and 
undesirable industries and it would be reviewed periodically. The SSI units had generated 
larger employment. A special care was being taken for the tiny units. The Committee was 
informed that with the growth of industries, sickness in industries was also increasing. 
Necessary corrective steps had been taken in this regard. The Central Scheme for Margain 
Money for the revival of small units would be implemented. In order to promote exports, 
the following steps had . been ·taken:-· 
(1) adequate priority to exporting units for registration and other aids; 
(2) giving recognition to meritorious units by way of granting awards etc.; 
(3) providing warehousing facilities, etc."; 
( 4) encouraging earning of foreign exchange through export of technology and export 
services within the policy of the Government; 
(5) identification and encouraging units for 100% export performance; 
(6) concessional finance upto Rs. 4.50 lakhs to tiny and SSI;for acquiring land and 
machinery, etc. and a working loan of Rs. 0.50 lac at J09k interest for the tiny 
units; 
(7) more power would be provided to Garacharma Industrial· Estate and a sub-Station 
was being set up; and 
(8) for speedy development of SSI sectors, ANIIDCO would stand for guarantee for 
collateral security. 
. The workers, however, informed the Committee that except .wood-based industries 
, there was no scope for other industries. The shell industry was also not coming up because 
' of certain restraints put by the Government. The raw material was also not available. The 
electricity and water might be supplied at subsidised rates. They also requested the 
1 Committee that work relating to body building of buses might be entrusted to ANIIDCO in 
order to generate more employment to the local people. A training programme might be 
started in the field of tourism: ·The COmmittee was informed that marine-based products, 
which apparently had good potential had surprisingly not seen much development as per 
expectation. 
The officers of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development 

71 
Corporation Ltd. infonned the Committee that there was not much scope for setting up of 
more industries as no barrend land was available. There was enough scope for plantation 
and also there was scope for navigation. The officers also desired that the practice of supply 
of forest produce to industry at concessional rate might be stopped. The Company was 
carrying harvesting and regeneration operations at Little Andaman and North Andaman and 
maintaining the plantation of red-oil palm and rubber. The Government was also not in 
favour of leasing any land. The Committee was also infonned that setting up of refinery was 
not feasible in the Island. The quantum of timber to be harvested annually was fixed by the 
Cer.tral Government. The Company was, however, in the process to finalise identifiable 
diversification schemes both in scope and expansion. 
Recommendations of the Committee 
Orissa: The Committee is of the view that as the State has been declared as backward State 
the SSI units with an investment below 20 lakhs be treated as a special category for the 
purposes of taxation. The Committee has also come to understand that as there is no forum 
for redressal of justice for SSI sector, a Tribunal may be set up for the purpose. The 
following are the recommendations of the Committee for the State:-
(1) infrastructure facilities in the field of transport and communication may be 
improved; 
(2) being a rich state so far as the availability of mineral and other natural wealth is 
concerned, the resources have not been exploited to the desired level. The 
Government may take concrete steps in this regard. Adequate power supply may be 
made available for the purpose; 
(3) the limit of small scale sector be raised from Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 2 crores; 
( 4) the growth centres may be established by declaring the State as 'no industry 
district'; 
(5) BIFR may be introduced to revive the SSI units; 
(6) SIDBI may sanction loans to SSI units below Rs. 30 lakhs also to the help the 
sector; 
(7) the lSI, an export promotion council and DGS&D may be established in the State; 
(8) the banks may provide sufficient support to the SSI units; 
(9) the place near Hirakud Dam may be developed for tourism on the pattern of 
Vrindavan Garden; 
(10) the air-strip at Sambalpur may be improved; 
(11) the special stress may be laid in the field of agro-based and handloom sector;· 
(12) the State Government may take steps to reduce the theft of .electricity which is 
38% now; · 
(13) the Central Government may introduce special norms for the dt;,velopment of the 
under-developed States like Orissa; 
(14) the central excise rate may be enhanced from Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 60 lakhs; 
(15) the important rail links may be provided for speedy transportation; and 
(16) the work culture in the State may be improved. 
West Bengal-
(1) telecommunications and road net·work may be improved; 
(?) the Calcutta Port may be restructured and may be made cost-effective and trouble­
free. The Calcutta-Haldia Port Complex may also be developed; 
(3) the banks and financial institutions may play a positive role in the development of 
SSI units; 
.\ 

72 
(4) altthe industries in the Bardhaman District are sick due 'to Mafia Raj there. The 
SSI units are suffering due to delayed payment by the medium & large scale 
industries. The State Government may take necessary steps in this regard and the 
work culture may be improved; and 
(S) •the State Government may pay a special attention for providing of infrastructure 
facilities i.e., water, metal road, power and communication etc. in the Bankura 
District as this District is the most backward one because it is situated on a laterite · 
and rocky soil and cannot retain water; the idle man-power may be absorbed by 
setting up of cottage and small scale industries; the District is famous for 
"Baluchari" Saree. Th~. State Qovemment may, therefQre, not lose the opportunity 
for the development of handloom industries. The agricultural reserves and industrial 
raw material may be utilised fully. 
Pondicherry-
(1) the licensing procedure in the UT may be simplified; 
(2) the tax benefits to SSI units may be enhanced keeping in view the benefits available 
in Goa and Silvasa; 
(3) suitable roads may be provided .in the Sadarapet Industrial Estates and special 
steps may be taken to provide power to the Estates as the electridty goes away 4-S 
time a day; 
(4) the SAIL may provide steel to SSI units less than 30 MT at a time also; 
(S) the small and medium· Scale industries may be brought under the single window 
system; 
(6) the UT administration may fonnulate the industrial policy; 
(7) the Sales Tax Exempti~n may be extended further being a backward area and the 
· transport subsidy h'iay also be provided; 
(8) at present one person is holding charge of three or four departments resulting in 
inefficiency and neglect of important issues; sufficient staff may be provided in this 
regard; 
(9) · the rate of interest for development of industries may be reduced further as the 
area has been classified as Backward • A'; and 
(10) the Minis,try of Railways may convert the metre gauge lines into broad gauge as 
requesteo by the UT administration for speedy movement of passenger and goods 
traffic. 
Tamil Nadu-
(1) the Co1JU11ittee is of the view that by and large the industrial development in the 
State is reasonable; 
\'. 
(2) the Madras :Port~which is congested may be .modernised; a cargo handling complex 
may also be provided; 
(3) the four State inqustries which are under BIFR may be revived; 
(4) the building plans 1or the industry and licences, etc. may be cleared by the Single 
· Window Committee itself; 
(S) the units proposed to be started in the developed industrial· area may be freed from 
licensing policies; 
(6) in Erode twenty-two sanctions are required to start a new industry; it is a frustration 

73 
for the new entrepreneurs. This may be simplified. In the Distiict 11 lakh women 
are engaged. The State Government may take special efforts for the development of 
agro-based, EOU and turmeric industries. The Committee is glad to know that 
"Shakti Masala" has won the President of India Award, for excellence; 
(7) the Salem Airport may be made functional; 
(8) the Government may provide necessary help in the field of Sago-based and power­
loom industries for export. The marketing facilities may also be created; 
(9) the Bangalore-Salem and Salem-Kailii railway lines may be converted into B.G. 
line; and 
(10) the National Highway from Bangalore to Kanya Kumari may be widened. 
The Andaman & Nicobar Islands-
(!) The Central Government may consider the proposal of UT to operate its services to 
Bangkok and Singapore to improve the financial position; 
(2) the water sport facilities may be created in the Island to attract more tourists; 
(3) the runway of Port Blair airport may be increased so that aircrafts with higher 
capacity load may also land; 
(4) the Central Government may take steps to ensure that the tourists do ndt face any 
difficulty in getting bookings for the Islands; · 
(5) a free port may be established; 
(6) the ferry services may be improved by investing more therein; 
(7) a modem ship building yard may be set up to cater more employment to the 
people; 
(8) the Island may also develop house boats on the pattern of J&K to attract more 
tourists; 
(9) there should not be any restriction on the foreign tourists for visiting the various 
Islands; 
(10) the sufficient containers may be provided so that the finished goods may be 
transported to the mainland without keeping it further in the Island; 
(11) the ANIIDCO may provide all type of loans to the entrepreneurs; 
(12) the preference may be given to the local SSI units for Government purchases; 
(13) the excise duty may be lowered from 20 per cent to 10 per cent and the tax holding 
may be extended for the existing industries also. 
(14) the Central Government may accord approval to the Capital Investment and Island 
Transport Subsidy Scheme, 1995 of the UT; 
(15) the export permit system for shipment of Saw timber to the mainland may be 
abolished; 
(16) the infrastructure facilities like water, uninterrupted power, drainage and pucca 
roads may be provided in the Industrial Estate, Garacharma; 
(17) the ANIIDCO may undertake the job of construction of Buses' Bodies in the 
Island to create more jobs for the people living in the Islands; 
(18) the forest extraction is being done on selective basis and hence timber available for 
the UT is less than the requirement. The Central Government may take necessary 
steps in this regard; 

74 
(19) some big patches ar:e availaple in the Island, the Government may use these 
patches for plantation. The Wasteland Board may provide the necessary funds for 
the same; and 
(20) the Islands situated in the UT are in the same line of Malaysia. The Government 
may use the Malaysian seeds for plantation, to increase the output thereof. 
lndusJJ_ial Backwardness-
/// (1) The Committee is of the opinion that to combat the industrial backwardness, the 
infrastructural development in a package made should be strengthened assured 
power supply, road ~d rail linkages telecom facilities, providing timebound single 
window system clearance should be assured for any entrepreneur so that he may 
avail himself of the Government concessions in the backward areas. 
(2) No entrepreneur will like to invest his hardearned m~ney in a backwa:rd ·area 
unless there is enough motivation for him to do so. This should be looked into by 
the appropriate authorities who should develop package of incentives. 
(3) The Committee noted that there were widespread complaints from the ·trading 
community and their associations. That the financial institutions were not that 
responsive to invest in the backward areas. The Government should make it 
compulsory that a certain part of the money deposited with financial institutions is 
compulsory invested in the backward regions; For this a percentage can also · be 
fixed. The Commi~ee also noted that in some of the States, CD ratio allows 
prospect of large inyestment_ in that region. There ~ere also complaints about 
environment clearance which was delaying the projects and escalating the price. 
The Committee is of the view that in built mechanism should be created so that 
environment clearance is expedited and takes minim'um time. 
(4) The Committee feels that the transport subsidy for the Island territories should 
continue and should apply to all the units without any restriction. 
Raw Material- ·For industrialisation in the backward areas, raw materials which are 
controlled by the State/Central Government should be assured. Government should explore 
the possibilities of encouraging investment in tne..food processing units and should also make 
efforts to create marketing facilities for the farmeis;·This naturally would have cumulative 
effect on the generation of employment, utilisation of fruits and vegetables and would add 
strength to the rural economy. 
Working of PMRY 
In Orissa, the representatives of the workers' union informed the Committee that the 
progress in regard to the working of PMR Y was not satisfactory as the banks were not 
advancing money to the beneficiaries. The Collector of Sambalpur informed the Committee 
that the responsibility for the recovery of advances from PMRY beneficiaries had been fixed 
on the junior level officers of the banks and as such they were reluctant in advancing money 
to the beneficiaries. The banks generally did not understand the scpeme and its importance 
in the upliftment of the lower strata of society. The bank officials were not keen to finance 
the Scheme. In the year 1994-95, 400 cas~s were sanctioned and disbursement was made for 
96 cases only. The representatives requested the Committee as under:-
(1) the orientation courses might be started for the entrepreneurs; 
(2) The banks might not insist for collateral security for granting loan under PMRY; 
(3) the banks might be given the target and if they did not complete it, the entries 
might be made in the confidential reports (C.Rs) of the concerned officers; and 
(4) the banks officials were under the fear that if the loan was not recovered, the 
entries would be made in their C.Rs. 

'~:' '' -
75 
In Calcutta, the:Committee was informed that the Banks were more interested in giving 
fiHancial help to the bigger industries than the SSI units. In Tamil Nadu the implementation 
under PMRY was above average. In Pondicherry, the performance of PMRY was improving 
year by year. In regard to Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the Committee was informed that a 
Task Force had been constituted to process the applications. The Task Force Committee met 
fortnightly for selection of the candidates under the Scheme. The performance was being 
monitored at the District level and State level committees headed by the D.C. and Chief 
Secretary, respectively. 
The Committee was informed of the following constraints being faced by the Banks in 
the implementation of PMRY:-
(1) Dearth of, enthusiastic entrepreneurs; 
(2) the required number of applications were not received; 
(3) the persons selected under the Scheme were later on found ineligible; 
(4) there was an increase in the income level; · · 
(5) lack of infrastructural facilities; and 
(6) non-availability of the Scheme in view of the limited existing scope. 
The officials of the State Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank officials 
should not have any kind of fear and they would not be hauled up in case of non-recovery of 
loan. The Committee was also informed that the State Bank of India would be able to 
sanction 100 per cent cases recommended to it during the current year. 
Recommendations of the Committee 
(1) the restriction on family income may be raised from Rs. 24,000/- to Rs. 30,000/­
per annum; 
(2) the restriction of 30 per cent on business activities may be removed; 
(3) the amount of training fund may be raised from Rs. 1000/- to Rs. 1200/- per 
beneficiary; 
(4)' the Task Force Committees may be constituted to process the applications and it 
may meet fortnightly. 30 days time may be given to the banks in sanctioning of the 
case after its submission by the Task Force Committee. The training may be 
completed in four weeks; 
(5) maximum three months time be taken by the banks in the disbursement of the 
Loan and in reviewing cases one month more may be taken; 
{6) the cooperative banks may also be associated with the Scheme; 
(7) the applicants may be educated about the Scheme and the formalities to be 
completed. The applicants may be asked to furnish information at one time and 
not in piece meal; 
(8) the fear may be removed from the minds of the bank officials that they will not be 
hauled up in case of non-recovery of the loan advanced by them under the 
Scheme; 
(9) the orientation courses may be started for the entrepreneurs; 
(10) the bank may not insist for collateral security for the grant of loan under PMRY. 
The State administration may stand for collateral security. In A&N Islands, 
ANIIDCO had agreed to stand for guarantee; 
(11) the banks may be given the target under the Scheme and if they do not complete 
it., the entries may be made in the C.Rs. of the concerned officers; 
(12) the bank officials who understand the Scheme and are trained enough in the field 
may be posted for the purpose; 

76 
(13) the lead banks in the respective StatesiUT may co-ordinate the work relating to 
the sanctioning of loans under the Scheme and watch their performance and issue 
instructions from time to time in regard thereto; and 
(14) in the circular issued by the State Bank of India, Calcutta on 30.11.1993, it has 
been indicated that if a member of the family is a defaulter to a bank/financial 
institution, other member of the same family will not be eligible for assistance 
under the Scheme. The Committee feel that in case the father is a defaulter and 
the son is doing his business separately and not dependent upon his· father, the 
said restriction may not come in his way. 
The Committee also enquired about the PMRY, a Central Government project to 
provide self-employment to the educated youths by establishing various types of small sector 
industrial units, etc. and discussed with the officials of the banks and the State Government 
authoriti.es and others. The Committee arrived at the conclusion that generally the attitude 
of the banks is not positive in such investments. The Committee is of the view that the 
Government should monitor the PMRY advances regularly so t'bat the very purpose of 
socio-economic development contemplated by the C.entral Government for removing the 
poverty from the rural masses is not defeated. The Committee also appreciates that after the 
Committee's interaction with authorities and representatives of various organisations 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Tamil Nadu, things have shown some improvement in this 
direction but at the same time the Ministry should remain vigilant as regards the 
implementation of this Scheme. 

STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-III 

., 

Study Note on the visit of Sub-Committee Ill of the . Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry to U.P. from 22nd to ~8th September, 1995 
The Sub-Committee III of the D.R.P.S.C. Committee on Industry was constituted to 
study the problems of Industrialisation in backward areas and Capital Goods Industry. The 
Sub-Committee consisted of seven members, namely:-
1. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
2. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
3. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
4. Shri Manjay Lal 
5. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
6. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
7. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
Shri Naval Kishore Rai was the Convenor of the Sub-Committee. 
2. The Sub-Committee visited U.P. from 22nd to 28th September, 1995 for the purpose 
and held discussions with the representatives of Chambers of Commerce and Industries, 
Officers of the State Industry an~ other Departments,· District authorities of Varanasi, 
Mirzapur, Alla~abad, Jhansi, Agra, Firozabad and l.ucknow and other workers 
organisations. The salient features of the outcome of the study are as under:-
Meeting with Representatives of State Industry Department, Vam#J-it 
On 23rd September, 1995 the Sub-Committee held its first ~eetin~.!'::ith representatives 
of State Industry Department where it was informed that although' Varanasi is well 
connected to various major cities of the country but not much head way has been made in 
the field of industrial development. The Sub-Committee was apprised that the main reason 
for the backwardness is insufficient infrastructure, shortage of power, non-availability of 
working loan and withdrawal of subsidy. It was also informed that to increase the industrial 
activities sales tax exemption for 8 years has been provided to small entrepreneurs· and ·all' · · 
the land under Industrial Estate has been allotted. It was further informed that in SSI there 
are three sick units, revival of which have been undertaken. On the status of handier~ in 
the region, the Sub-Committee was informed that Carpet, Moti, Zari, Banarsi Silk Saree, 
wooden toys and embroidery are few handicrafts which are exported to various countries. To 
keep this handicraft alive, various steps such as grant of subsidy, welfare activitres and 
prevention of exploitation of weavers· are being taken care of. 
In PMRY it was apprised that the ..target is largest in U.P. The Sub-Committee asked 
for a report in the matter since 1993 which the representatives agreed to supply. · 
Meeting with Trade and Industry Representatives, Varanasi 
In its next meeting with the Trade and Industries representatives the Sub-Committee 
was informed about the scores of problems being faced by entrepreneures. 
Firstly, there is lack of fi'nance/working capital. The entrepreneures represented that 
banks are not cooperating and are asking for equal collateral securities. Secondly, there is 
problem of marketing since the Government is the main buyer 'of products which is unable 
to buy these products. Thirdly, the entrepreneures pointed out towards the erratic power 
supply and bad road conditions which are counter productive to industrial Growth. Fourthly, 
79 
'· . 

80 
the entrepreneures demanded that steps may also be taken to modernise/update the 
technology and improve the. quality of products. 
The entrepreneures also apprised the Sub-Committee that recommendations of various 
committees e.g. Nayak Committee, Patel Committee set up in past on different matters were 
never accepted. They also demanded representation in various committees and establishment 
of export promotion council and export processing zone in VaranasL The entrepreneures 
also complained about complicated bye-laws and administrative procedure and favoured for 
uniform sales tax system. 
At ·Jast the entrepreneures demanded to delcare the area as zero industrial belt to 
improve the industrial growth in the region. 
Meeling wltlt Worten u,u,, of BHEL, Vlii'GIItUi 
The ,'S{e.t>Committee met with the workers union of BHEL where it came to know that 
increa$e ht bonus and income tax limits were their major demand. The another problem 
which the;; ;~u.b-Committee was .informed about that there was no reservation in the Central 
School for the children of BHEL employees. The workers also demanded that the ~:esidential 
colonies of the worken which presently are at three different places may be brought to one 
place. They also complained that accommodation is not available to all the employees of the 
company. 
Meetinf witll M...,...IU II/ BHBL, Vt~~~~~-.si 
The Sub.Committee held its meeting with management of BHEL where it was informed 
that his unit of BHBL ia a heavy equipment repain plant supplying spares and performing 
repair works in various power stations. This plant also developed the technique for repair of 
Turbo Generator in 1990 and right now this unit is developing 711 various spares and 
repairing 110 types of bearings. It was also informed that to keep itself in the race in the 
cllanged scenario it expanded its activities so that it can undertake repaits of turbine rotors. 
The Sub.Committee came to know that there were three phases of the plant and at 
present only one is in operation and the viability of the second phase which is motor repair 
plant is being studied. Tbe Sub-Committee observed that due to liberalisation the plant is 
fad~ some tuff·time as there was decrease in orders due to presence of similar companies 
in the field. 
M6etiq wUit the Repnllnlflli,es of TrtUI.t a11d llldustry, Mil'zapur 
~t Mirzapur on 24th September, 1995 the Sub-Committee's first meeting was held with 
the Trade and Industry representatives.where it came to understand that Mirzapur, which is 
world famous for its · carpet weaving industry, is also known for Brassware and 
Aluminiumware industry. In this meeting, diverse problems of Mirzapur wet:e brought into 
the awareness of the Sub-Committee, viz, problems relating to raw m~terial, effect of 
western propaganda on carpet exports, recognisation of Bronze metal utensils industry, 
infrastructural problems; viz, electricity, telecommunication, roads, water transport etc. 
The Sub-Committee was apprised · that Mirzapur's Brassware and Aluminiumware 
industriea were facing grave problems in acquirUlg raw material, whi~h is ·mainly imported 
from abroad. Hence, more active coordination from central agencies is needed in this 
respect. The Sub-Committee was told .that for importing the raw material in O.G.L., the 
duty payable is SS%. However, in other neighbouring countries, .such a· duty is either not 
there, or is just lSo/o. Hence, this duty needs to be rationalised, in order to benefit the 
growth of industries. 
It was also suggested to the Sub·Committee that the Government should ensure 

81 
imparting of proper training, and better technology for the betterment of the area's bartan 
(utensils) industry. It would, besides improving quality and promoting cost effectiveness, 
promote exports. Hence, an industrial training centre needs to be opened in the region. The 
Sub-Committee was also told that the local small scale industry was also plagued by high 
rate (18% p.a.) of interest on loans given by banks. The trade representatives recommended 
that the interest rate should be rationalised @ 10% p.a. 
The Sub-Committee was suggested, that in order to remove mass unemployment, 
Government should encourage setting up of large and medium scale industries in the region; 
viz, food processing, metal alloy, garments and apparel, and other ancilliaries. Mining can 
also be encouraged in the region. 
The thrust of the discussion then shifted on to Mirzapur's famous carpet weaving 
industry. The industry, which till recently had been a major foreign exchange earner for 
India, is now sagging under the false western propaganda on child labour, blown up beyond 
all reasonable proportions. 
In this context, the Sub-Committee came to understand that the work-force in this 
industry consists of both, migratory population from Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and as far as 
Nepal (around five lakhs), ~nd the natives of Mirzapur. The majority of workers consist of 
children. The Sub-Committee could comprehend that what the foreign countries were 
decrying as exploitation of bonded child labour was in fact, their misunderstanding of the 
Indian context of 'putting out system', where the traders advance money to craftsmen to 
produce for'themselves. While bonded labour is by compulsion, the labour involved here is 
traditional and especialised. 
The Sub-Committee suggested that the traders of Mirzapur should form their association 
and should work with administration to reduce the hours of work of child labour and 
implementation of· Government Scheme. 
It was also represented to the Sub-Committee the Mirzapur lacks even in basic 
infrastructure, viz, roads, transport, electricity, potable water, telecommunications and 
health facilities. To promote Mirzapur's linkage with the country in order to promote its 
marketing and tourism, it was suggested that important trains passing through this district 
should have a stoppage here. A fast shuttle .service should be started, linking Allahabad­
Mirzapur-Varanasi. It was further suggested that a washing plant for carpet industry also 
needs to be set up there. 
Meeting with D.M. and Representatives of Industry Department, MirZJJpur 
The next meeting of the Sub-Committee at Mirzapur was with the district officials. 
Various issues such as infrastructure development, raw material, PMRY, Cooperative sector, 
K.V.I.C., TRYCEM Yojana, DRDA training, etc. came up for discussion. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that Mirzapur has four tehsils and three 
Municipal Boards. Its total area of 4952 sq. kms. has been divided into 12 development 
blOcks. Carpet weaving, Bronzeware, Chinaware and Plaster of Paris Bust making are its 
main SSI's. The district has only one large scale and two medium scale industries, viz, 
manufacturing cement and blanket yam, flour respectively. 
The Officials told the Sub-Committee that the child labour problem, which. was 
adversely affecting the carpet industry was most severe in Mirzapur's remote areas, which 
were not connected by transport. 
The Sub-Committee was told that problem of child labour coming from other States had 
been considerebly checked sinee 1992. The Sub-Committee was told that child labour was 
' 

84 
I 
BIFR there is a fall in the medical facilities being provided to workers. The Sub-Committee 
also observed that VRS is not favourite among employees. 
Meeting with MaMgement of Bhllral Pumps and Compre66ors Lt4., Naini, Allahabad 
At the outset, the Sub-Committee was briefly apprised about the plant. The Sub­
Committee was informed that the plant was set up for import substitute and design 
engineering is the soul of the company. 
The Management informed that. the main reasons for loss in the company are:­
(iJ some wrong investments, 
(ii) low capacity utilisation, 
(iii) non-availability of raw material in time, and 
(iv) surplus man-power. 
The management also deposed that delay in supply of finished products is being 
minimised. 
The management accepted that due to liberalisation the competition in the market has 
increased. Contrary to the assertions made by the workers; the management deposed that 
the ratio of executives: employees is 5:8. The Management told that no appointment was 
being made now-a-days and the manpower in .the company has been reduced approximately 
to 300 by VRS. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that BPCL has intensified its activities and 
besides various other things it is planning to manufacture Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) 
compressores and Kits to be used on automobiles. BP€L has also entered in the highly 
sophisticated and specialise(;) field of nuclear' pumps manufacturing. 
Meeting with the Represenltllives of Trade and Industry, Jlumsi 
At Jhansi, on 26th september, 1995, the Sub-Committee's first meeting was held with 
the trade and industry representatives. The Sub-Committee came to understand that 
Bundelkhand region is highly backward in industrialisation. The industries presently 
functioning with the exception of BHEL are on the bJ"ink of sickness. Industrial development 
is at present more on Government records than in reality. 
The Sub-~mittee was apprised that Government had proposed development of 
growth centres in Jhansi as early as 1989, on about 1500 acres of land entailing an 
investment of Rs. 30 crores. However, Goven1ment policy changed and this scheme was 
limited to 500 acres and for last four years, no effective steps to implement the growth 
centre scheme have been taken. As a marked contrast, regions .of M.P. located near Jhansi 
have developed many industrial areas and are now attracting investment and industries at 
the cost of the latter. However, UPSIDC, the Sub-Committee was tol~, presently insists that 
developed industrial land is abundantly available and it is the industries which are failing to 
take advantag~ of it. The trade representatives, thus, pleaded that unless the basic 
infrastructure is developed, aH other subsidies like power, capital, sales tax etc. cannot be 
taken advantage of. Thus there is a necessity to start a growth centre at the earliest and for 
giving the accompanying subsidies for the next five years. 
The Sub-Committee also came to understand that the conditions of the industries still 
functioning is moving from bad to worse. More than 90% of the industrial units have either 
been closed down or are on the brink of sickness. Many factors work in tandem to account 
for this, viz, lack of raw materials, marketing infrastructure, trained labourers, high 
electricity cost, anomalous tax structure as compared to the bordering Madhya Pradesh. 

8S 
Jhansi's Geographical ·situation together with the inaction of nodal Government agency 
UPFC in planning and implementing rehabilitation packages have also contributed in no less 
way to Jhansi's industrial sickness. The Sub-Committee was told that State Financial 
Institutions demand 100% collateral security for sanctioning loans and exercise severe 
stringency at its recovery placing this backward region at par with industrially developed 
areas. Thus, help from banks and financial institutions is also lacking. 
The Sub-Committee was also requested to recommend for setting up of Bundelkhand 
Industrial Area Development Authority on the lines of NOIDA, so that specific policies for 
industrial development can be .formula~ed. The Sub-Committee .was also apprised that non­
availability of electricity· due to overloading of transformers is resulting in depletion of 
industries. It was pointed out that a general improvement in elC!=tricity combined with tariff 
concessions would also encourage power based capital goods industries such as cement plant, 
induction furnace, rolling mill etc. 
The Sub-Committee learnt that in Mauranipur district, famous for production of 
terrycot garments, about 10,000 handlpowerlooms are in operation employing about 20,000 
people of weaker section. These poor weavers are being immensely exploited by middlemen 
who, while giving them a meagre profit of 2S paise per metre, themselves get one rupee per 
metre profit in the market. Hence, there is a need to save them fronrthe clutches of the 
frandulent brokers by forming a cooperative for marketing their products and ensuring 
adequate remuneration to them. 
The Sub-Committee also learnt that there are vast untapped resources in the region 
whose tapping can boost the regions' economic potentialities. Thus in this regard, the granite 
base stone crushing, fresh water fishing and tourism industries may be encouraged. 
Finally, the Sub-Committee learnt of the negligible contribution of the profit earning 
BliEL towards the development of ancilliary units and the economy of the region. The Sub­
Committee was informed that out of the 6 ancilliary units of BHEl. 4 are closed due to 
wrong policy of BHEL (only 20% supply order is given at very low rate). Furthet BHEL is 
not purchasing even S% of its total purchase from SSis in Jhansi. Same is the position of 
railway workshop which is not even giving 1% supply order ·to SSis. 
The entrepreneures also complained about low CD ratio of about 36%. They also 
demanded that in view of the large potential for stone crushing industry a Stone Crushing 
Zone be established. 
Meetinl witlJ D.M., RepiWe~Jilltlves ot State badustty Departmeat ud DRM IWlwap, J1wJsl 
At its meeting, the Sub-Committee was informed that Jhansi is a backward area as 
compared to other plac:es like ·Bhopal, NaSPur, Gwalior having similar geographic:al 
conditions. The .repreaentatives accepted that the CD ratio of banks is low and they are not 
forthcoming to take risk besides askili) 100% collateral security on loan. On shortage of 
power the representatives informed that the matter was being taken up with power 
Corporation. Efforts are also being taken to improve the· telerom faciliti~ 
Regarding establishment of Growth Centre, the representatives of Government of India 
told that the State Government had written that it is not .required whereas the contention of 
D.M. and Add. Director, Industries was that the Growth Centre is very much required for 
the development of the area. The Sub-Committee directed the Regional Manager UPSIDC 
to provide a copy of the letter written by the State Government in this regard to Central 
Government. 
The Sub-Committee observed that in PMRY the performance is satisfactory wherein 
loans to more that 60% cases have been distributed last year. 

, 
86 
The D.R,M. Railways informed that since the supply order is given by way of open 
tender at its head quarters at Bombay there is no scope for giving preference to local SS 
units in supply order to railways workshop. 
The Sub-Committee had been apprised that poor infrastructural facilities, viz, erratic 
power supply, telecommunication, development of industrial land were also the driving force 
behind industrial sickness. In this regard, too, it found the situation far from satisfactory. 
The power officials tol~ the Sub-Committee that average power supply in Bu:itdelkhand 
region is good whereas the true picture is that PQwer is not available and industries are 
closing down on that account. A sub-station at· Mawanipur, for which even the budgetary 
allocation has been made, has not yet been installed despite several commitments made by 
the power department in Udyog Bandhu me~tings. 
Similar is the disfunctional state of the telecommunications system. The Sub-Committee 
asked both the Power and telecommunications'· officials to provide latest facts and figures on 
the projects executed by them till date in their respective departments. 
a·~-· 
Meeting with Management of BHEL, .lbfUJsi 
. . l . ~ 
In its third meeting with the Management of BHEL, the Sub:-Committee was apprised 
that it is flourishing, set-up with an aniiUal tUrnover of 226 crore rupees. Its workforce 
consists of 1200 industrial workers, 200 officers, 200 supervisors and a supporting staff o-f 250 
and it is perhaps the_ number one ij~EL plant in the country. 
The Sub-Committee was told that due attention is paid on the welfare of employees by 
BHEL. A well establishec;l township exists near the plant with all the supporting amenities. 
It has about 1100 houses, full-fledged 40 bed's hospital, and four schools. The BHEL Mahila 
Samiti runs a provision· store, a g~s agency and gives employment to widows. 52% of the 
employees get residential facility: Others have. either their own houses or take house 
building advance. ;: · 
The Sub-Committee. was f~ld by the trade representatives and the state officials that 
BHEL was not according encouragement to local SSis' and ancilliary development, BHEL's 
local purchasing is very low and the company, as a matter of policy, buys direct from mills. 
Out of the total unit purchase of 155 crore rupees, the total local purchase accounted for is 
between Rs. 1-2 lacs pnly. _ . 
The Sub-Comrilfuee learnt that being an. ISO ~001 certified company, BHEL subjects all 
its purchases to strict quality control through a vendor evalution system. Denying the charge 
of not encouraging ancilliary development, BHEL. stressed that six ancilliary units are 
functioning and around 25 SSis' are directly benefitting from the business offered by BHEL 
in the form of off-loading supplies on a regular basis. The SSis' are given a total annual 
business of approx. Rs. 5 crore from BHEL. 
However, the Sub-Committee was apprised by BHEL officials thM the business of SSls' 
with it suffered due to lack of adequate handling facilities e.g. cranes and lack of efforts to 
supply BHEL on time. 
Meeting with Management of Bharat Leather Corporation, Agra 
On 27th September in its meeting with Management of BLC the Sub-Committee was 
informed that initially the main object of the corporation was to perform development 
activities for leather industry but later on in 1981 it was turned into a commercial enterprise 
and aCtivities were mainly restricted to trading in leather footwear and leather goods. In 
1984 the ~corporation commissioned its Package Assistance Scheme wherein artisans were 
provided with all manufacturing facilities to manufacture footwear in lieu of service charges. 

87 
The Sub-Committee was informed that with the increase in demand for Direct Injection 
Process (DIP) for sole making, a DIP plant was commissioned, in 1990 under Package 
Assistance Scheme which proved to be the most profitable venture and is continuously 
paying profit to the corporation. 
Even after this, the Sub-Committee was apprised that .the· <2orp~ration incurred 
continuous losses m~inly due to overstaffing and low level activitiest'{itiS facing difficulty in 
marketing). The management told the Sub-Committee that orders <Jre procured after giving 
hefty commission, which is not possible in case of a public sector undertaking. The 
management also proposed to make BLC as one of the subsidiary company of any big PSU. 
The Sub-Committ~e also came to know that the accumulated losses have exceeded even the 
net worth of the ·corporation. 
\ 
The Sub-Committee observed that besides all theses the performance of the corporation 
in 1994-95 was very impressive and its total receipt had crossed 6 crores but the operational 
losses could not be reduced due to high input cost. The management also apprised the Sub­
Committee about the order book position (orders worth rupees 35 lakh are pending) and 
expected orders to the company. The management further informed that a detailed revival 
plan is under the active consideration of the Government and right now Government oi 
India is providing non-plan assistance depending upon cash loss to run the corporation. 
Meeting with Workers Union of Bharat Leather Corporation, Agra 
In its meeting with workers union the Sub-Committee was informed that the corporation 
is running into losses due to:-
(i) inefficient management; 
(ii) lack of coordination between management and the workers; and 
(iii) no proper budgetary support from the Ministry. 
The workers demanded that a full time Managing Director must be appointed for BLC. 
They complained that their LTC has been stopped and under VRS efficient workers are 
quiting. The Sub-Committee was further informed that workers are not given opportunity to 
show their efficiency and so much so they art not given even a pair of shoes in one year. · 
The workers demanded that meeting must be-conducted between management and workers 
at regular intervals and welfare scheme may be introduced to motivate the workers. 
Meeting with Representatives of Industry Department, Agra 
In its meeting with representatives of industry department, the Sub-Committee was 
informed that the main industries of the area are leather and foundaries and right now there 
is stagnation in these industries mainly due to Taj Trepezium Zone. 
It was told that in total there are 350 industries out of which one is sick and 31 are 
closed for want of proper pollution control. The Sub-Committee observed that in PMRY the 
performance was v. ry low since during last year, out of 73% approved cases loan to only 
27% applicants wa~ actually disbursed. 
():J the Sub-Committee's intervention the representatives of banks assured that action 
on pending cases would be initiated and detail in the respect would also be supplied to the 
Sub-Committee. 

88 
The Su~Committce also observed that the CD ratio of banks in the district was also not 
very gOod (it was only 45%). On Sub-Committee's specific querry about why the RBI 
guidelines were not followed, .the representatives assured to supply the details. The Sub­
Committee also demanded details about functioning to Task Force and Cooperative in the 
district. 
MeetliJg wltb D.M. Representatives of llldrutry Department~ Representatives of Trade and 
lrJdustry and Workers Union, Firozabad · · 
After completing its business at Agra Oil'" 27th September, 1995, the Sub-Committee 
reached Firozabad, where it met jointly with the district officials, workers unions and trade 
and industry representatives. The Sub-Committee came to understand that Firozabad, which 
specialises in glass industry, is facing diverse problems. The region has four large and 
medium scale industries with a gross capital investment of 1~ crore rupees, giving 
employment to about 3415 people. The Small and tiny sector having 2789 registered SSI 
units, involving capital investment worth 4150.85 lakh rupees and employing about 56,202 
people, however, dominates the industrial spectrum of the region. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that pollution to which the smoke emitting chimneys 
of Firozabad are contributing as much as the Mathura refinery, is giving sleepless nights to 
the districts . entrepreneures. Due to the area's location in the Taj Trapezium zone, where 
polluting industries are now banned, these units are facing threat of closure or re-location. 
The Sub-Committee was apprised that Vardarajan Committee Report had clarified that the 
Taj was being mainly affected by the Sodium Carbonate content of the smoke. Therefore, if 
sufficient electricity and gas is· provided in the region, they could switch Qver to better 
technology and thus tide over the pollution problem altogether. The Sub-Committee was 
told that the glass industry of Ferozabad was also facing ·the problem of sales tax which is 
also being imposed on the raw material,. thus raising the cost of production .. The 
enterpreneures further pleaded that the new Provident Fund Law, which necessitated 
deduction of P.F. even if a labour had worked for a single day was also creating problems 
for the industry. The labour too, the Sub-Committee was told, did not want his P.F. to be 
deducted, since he did not want a permanent enlistment which would only block his money. 
The Sub-Committee was told that coal, the basic source of energy for majority of these 
industrial units was in the hands of the Government. Apart from coal being of sub-standard 
quality there was an acute shortage of coal which is available in· open black market. The 
Sub-Committee directed both the trade and industry representatives to give copies of their · 
correspondence made with. Government and the district administration, in this regard. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that the condition of glass development centre 
too, is not good. Inspite of having spent crores of rupees on it, no development in glass 
industry has been made from it. Thus, its aim of making a model project has not been 
fulfilled. Though some foreign experts came and offered technology for upgradation and 
modernisation of Firozabad's glass industry, the Sub-Committee was told that it entailed an 
investment of 18--50 lakh rupees~ which was beyond the potential of the regions' 
entrepreneures. 
The Sub-Committee was told that the Railway Coal Siding, .located in the centre of the 
city was also a source of problem, since the movement of trucks damage the roads, besides 
causing freqhent traffic jams; 
The Sub-Committee was apprised that the glass industry was facing problems in 

89 
procuring raw material. The companies which sell soda-ash increase their rates at will four 
to five times every year. Hence, government should exercise some control over these 
companies. Firozabad which sold its products both within India and abroad, the Sub­
Committee was told, would benefit a lot, if its Railway station was expanded and stopage 
of important trains was allowed there. 
The Sub-Committee was apprised by the D.I.C. officials that besides glass, Firozabad 
also had other SSI units viz. food processing, iron, chemicals, paper, rubber and plastic, 
machinery and machine parts, wood, hoisery garments, leather and tannery, cotton and 
textiles, Tobacco and other miscellaneous products. 
Industrial areas have been developed by D.I.C. at Firozabad, Shikohabad, Ussayani 
and Tundla. Thus, plots I sheds have been allotted at Firozabad and Shikohabad. Industries 
have already begun production on the allotted plots I sheds. The Sub-Committee also 
found that out of the 3442 people trained under the entrepreneurial development 
programme between 1989 till 1994-95, only 157 have been able to open their own 
industries. Targets hav.e also not sufficiently. been met in PMRY loan disbursal. In 1994-95, 
out of the target of 302 only 296 applications were sanctioned and only 197 loans were 
distributed. In 1995~96, out of the target of 393, only 44 applications were sanctioned and 
only one loan given by the bank. 
The Sub-Committee was told that an Industrial Training Centre was imparting training 
in General Mechanic and Electrician courses for the duration of one year. This institution 
was also imparting training under TRYCE~. 
Meeting with the Representatives of Workers Union, Scooter India Ltd., Luc/fiJOW 
The Sub-Committee held its meeting with the representatives of workers union where 
it came to know that the main demand of workers was their pay revision. The workers 
also represented that the company was referred to BIFR in 1992 and now the position is 
improving. The workers also complained that no executive has so far been retrenched. The 
Sub-Committee came to know that executive worker ratio was very high and there is no 
appointment of technk:al experts in the company. 
Meeting with tbe Ma~numt o( Scooter India Ltd., Ludulow 
~, . , I 
The Sub-Committ~~ in its meeting with the management of SIL came to .know that 
SIL's most profitable/saleable product is "Vikram" (a three wheeler) and right now the 
company is making UOO Vikram per year. The Sub-Committee was 'further informed that 
the company is planning to increase its productJon of Vikram to 1800 peJ year. Apart from 
this the company is also going to launch new products in the market for which it has 
negotiated for collaboration with Piaggio, Italy. 
The Sub-Committe~ also informed that the company was planning to improve its 
technology and quality in order to make its presence felt in the market. The management 
agreed that the pay scales of workers are due for revision. 
Meeting with Offlclals of State Government, Lucknow 
The Sub-Committee held its concluding meeting with the officials of the State 
Government where it was informed that in U.P., Meerut is the most industrially developed 
area and handicraft of Moradabad, Mirzapur and Firozabad are famous for export. The 
Chief Secretary, Industry also informed that under the new industrial policy of the State, 
various initiatives have &een taken to develop an industrial environment in the State such 
as introduction of a more simplified and rationalised tax in the nap1e of Trade Tax in place 
of sales tax; introduction of MODVAT with regard to Trade Ta.x
11
on selected basis; various 
,, 
(f 

90 
exemptions on Trade Tax; creation of State Equity Fund for State participation to ~ncourage 
new medium· and large units. 
Under PMRY it was told that disbursement is 60% and action has been initiated to 
disburse the amount in pending approved cases. On Sub-Committee's observation that 
guidelines of RBI are not followed in distributing loan under PMRY, the representatives of 
RBI replied in negative stating that no complaint of this nature has ever been reported to 
RBI. ' 
The Sub-Committee was of the vtew that once a project has been approved by Task 
Force, the same project should not be rejected by the bank on the ground of its being non 
viable. The Sub-Committee also impressed upon the officials to implement the Singl~ 
Window Scheme in such a way where in one form and in one place all the requirements 
relating to establishment of an enterprise such as Finance, power, land, pollution control etc. 
are cleared. The officials assured to attempt in the manner suggested by the Sub-Committee. 
On the development of Growth Centres it was informed that under the Growth Centre 
Scheme 1988, the State of UP has been allotted 8 Growth Centres, out of which six Growth 
Centres at Jhansi, Shahajanpur, Moradabad, Bulandshahar, Jaunpur and Gorakhpur have 
been approved and the remaining two at Etawah and. Pauri-Garhwal are under appraisal. It 
was further informed that for Growth Centre at Moradabad, land could not be acquired and 
the Government was trying to acquire land near Gajn\ula. Regarding Growth Centre at 
Jhansi the Sub-Committee observed that even after release of funds (Rs. 50 lakhs by Central 
Government and Rs. 63 lakh taken by State Government), the expenditure reported on this 
Growth Centre is nil and the State Government had requested for cancellation of the 
approval granted to this centre pleading that implementation of this centre would not be 
possible because of insufficient demand for industrial plots. The Sub-Committee found the 
arguments contrary to the opinion expressed by the district administration in Jhansi. Later in 
light of the opinion expressed by the Sub-Committee the Official agreed to review its 
decision on implementation of Growth Centre at Jhansi. 
The Sub-Committee was apprised that 40% of the industrial units financed by 
U.P.S.F.C. are sick out of which 50% alone are sick due to working capital. To improve the 
position U.P.S.F.C. has started its own working capital scheme. The Sub-Committee also 
expressed it~ concern over the low CD ratio in the State which is 38% and directed that 
concrete steps may be taken to i.mprove this ratio. • 
On the question of pollution contro.l; the Sub-Committee was told that under the Taj 
Trapezium there are ~07 units in the Agra-Fero~d belt affecting Taj .Mah'at Out of this 
104 units have closecf down and most of remaining industries have imfal1ed pollutioll' control 
devke. . 
At last the Sub-Committee directed the Officials to send a detailed note on report of. 
PMRY, power position, sick units, Growth Centres, KVIC, CD ratio"for the examination by 
the Sub-Committee. 
On the basis of the eviden<,;,e tendered in Varanasi, the Sub-Committee observed that 
Varanasi has a vast potential of exporting its handicrafts such as Silk Sarees, Zari 
embroidary and Carpets. 
Accordingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that incentives may be given to promote 
export of these handicrafts items besides nltodernisationlupgradation of the technology in 
this field. On the functioning of.BH_EL's Heavy Equipment Repair Plant, Varanasi, the Sub­
Committee observed that this plant of BHEL is not -working according to the reputation of 
BHEL and presently facing competition due to similar companies in the field. The Sub-

91 
Committee therefore, felt that BHEL must aggravate its activities to stay in the race. The 
Sub-Committee further observed that BHEL, Varanasi has three phases and even after 10 
years of its establish.ment only one phase is working. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the viability of the second phase may be studied and it may be started at 
the earliest. 
On child labour problem in Mirzapur, the Sub-Committee understood that one of the 
main factor accounting for child labour is the abject poverty and economic backwardness of 
this region. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that steps may be taken to impart 
education to as many children as possible. It also recommends that schemes for training and 
employment generation formulated by the CentraVState Government in this regard may be 
implemented in right earnest and working hours of children may be reduced. 
The Sub-Committee felt that carpet industry is the main industry of Mirzapur and 
therefore there is an urgent need for fixing minimum wages in this field. The Sub-Committee 
further recommeds that steps, to send the Children in carpet industry, to schools may be 
taken and they may be prevented from exploitation. Further, for improving industrial 
scenario of Mirzapur, the Sub-Committee recommends that import duty on raw material for 
Brass and Aluminium Ware industries may be reduced and Government should ensure 
proper training and better technology for these industries. 
In Allahabad, the Sub-Committee feels that there is very heavy rush on old Yamuna 
bridge and there is an urgent need to build a new Yamuna bridge (up stream of existing 
bridge) connecting Naini. It also feels that Allahabad may be brought on the air map of 
India and flight to atleast, New Delhi may be started. The Sub-Committee further observes 
that in view of availability of best Silica Sand in Allahabad, there is a vast potential for 
developing glass industry. The Sub-Committee also express its· concern over the high 
percentage ( 46%) of sick Small Scale Units in Allahabad and recommends that elaborate 
plan may be chalked out to revive them. On observing that most of the plots/sheds in 
industrial area of. Pratapgarh are vacant, the Sub-Committee recommends that it may be 
declared as zero industry district. 
On Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Naini the Sub-Committee observed that 
the executive employees ratio is very high in the company which is counter productive and 
therefore should be brought down by VRS. The Sub-Committee further obser-Ved that delay 
in supply effect the reputation of a company. Accordingly every effort may be made to fulfil 
the order in time. 
For Jhansi the Sub-Committee observed that a Growth Centre under Growth Centres 
Scheme was sanctioned in 1989 but due to change in· the policy, the State Government 
decided to shift it. In this regard the Sub-Committee recommends that there is an urgent 
need for developing a Growth Centre at Jhansi. Accordingly the Stat~ Government may be 
asked to review its decision on shifting Growth Centre from Jhansi. 
The Sub-Committee feels that the role of BHEL, Jhansi, one of the premier 
organisation of the country, in developing small scale and ancilliary units, has not been very 
encouraging. Nor the Sub-Committee finds that there is any help from the Railway 
Workshop, Jhansi. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee feels that there may be an agreeme!.lt 
between the State Government and BHEL for assured supply orders to local entrepreneurs. 
A similar agreement may also be worked out with Railways. The Sub-Committee feels that · 
local entrepreneur also have to equip themselves to be capable of fulfilling the supply orders 
of BHEL and Railway workshop. 
For the growth of Bharat Leather Corporation, the Sub-Committee feels that there is an 

92 
urgent need to establish emporia and other retail outlets in various cities. The Sub­
Committee furthet feels that a policy may be formulated wherein all the Central and State 
Government :Qepartments and PSU's rnay be directed to purchase a fixed percentage of 
safety and uniform shoes from Bharat Leather Corporation. 
The Sub-ComJilittee observes that air pollution by smoke emitting from chimneys of 
founderies in Firozabad are givittg sleepless nights to the entrepreneurs of Firozabad since 
under the Taj Trepeziul'n Zone most of the area of Firozabad has been declared as air 
pollution, protection area. The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends that for preventing 
air pollution, sufficient electricity artd gas may be provided to this area in order to switch 
them to better technology. 
The· Sub-Committee also feels that glass industry of Firozabad is facing problem due to 
short supply and inferior quality of coal. The Sub~Comniittee. therefore recommends that 
steps may be initiated to make good quality coal available in Firozabad. The Sub-Committee 
feels that the Glass Industry Oevelopment Centre is also not functioning satisfactorily in the 
field of development of glass industry. The Centre has· to aggravate its activities to make its 
presence felt in the region. The Sub-Committee further recommends that the Centre/State 
Government may plan to exercise some control over the companies which are supplying 
soda-ash to glass indu~try so that the rise in prices can be checked. 
Apart from these regional problems, the Sub-Committee also noticed some common 
problems accounting for backwardness of the areas it had visited. 
The Sub-Committee feels that finance (either term loan or working capital) is the major 
problem of all the areas it had visited. The Sub-Committee observed that banks are not 
cooperating and ate reluctant to give loan besides· demanding 100% collateral securities. 
Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that there is a need to have proper guidelines 
for banks with regard to distribution of loan. 
The Sub-Committee also feels that many boardering areas in Uttar Pradesh are being 
affected due to different sales tax in other States. · TherefOre,· ·the · Sub-Committee 
recommends that the Central Government may consider inftoducing a uri'fform sales tax 
system throughout the country. The Sub-Committee also recommends that anotHer 
important reason for backwardness in the State is the under developed infrastructure. 
Accordingly, there is a need to set up an Infrastructure Development Fund with the help of 
Central Government for developing infrastructure in the State. 
The Sub-Committee observes that the power supply position is pathetic in most of the 
areas of the State and needs to be improved. The Sub-Committee is of the view that single 
window scheme may be initiated in its right earnest and there should be simplified bye-laws 
and administrative procedure for giving a boost to the industrial progress in the State. The 
Sub-Committee feels that there is a need to improve the CID ratio of banks in the State 
since banks are not ready to take risk and are investing the money out of the State. 
_ Study note on the visit of the Sub-Committee-Ill of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Indu,St(y to Bihar from 4th to lOth November, 1995 
The Sub-Committee-III of the D.R.P.S.C. Committee on Industry was constituted to 
study the problems of Industrialisation in backward areas and Capital Goods Industry. The 
Sub-Committee consisted of seven members, namely:-
1. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
2. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
3. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
4. Shri Manjay Lal 

93 
5. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
6. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
7. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
Shri Naval Kishore Rai was the Convenor of the Sub-Committe~. 
2. The Sub-Committee visited Bihar from 4th to 11th November, 1995 for the purpose 
and held disc;:ussions with the representatives of Chambers of Commerce and Industries, 
Officers of the State Industry and other Departments, District authorities of Patna, Ranchi, 
Bokaro, Mu:zaffarpur and Sitamarhi and other workers organisations. The salient features of 
the outcome of the study are as under:-
Brleling wltb the omcJaJs of the State GovernmeDt 
On 4th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee held its first meeitng with the Officials of 
the State Government where it apprised them about the purpose and objectives of the visit. 
The Sub-Committee also directed that representatives of various concerned department may 
be present in the concluding meeting of the Sub-Committee with the State Government on 
lOth November, 1995 so that matter concerning their department can be clarified then and 
there. The Sub-Committee directed that meeting with the representatives of the concerned 
Industrial Area Development Authorities where the Sub-Committee is visiting may be 
arranged at the respective places of visit of the Sub-Committee and the representatives of 
remaining Industrial Area Development Authority of places where the Sub-Committee is not 
visiting may appear at the meeting at Patna on lOth November, 1995. · 
On learning that matter regarding approval of the Growth Centre for Bihar is pending 
with IFCI the Sub-Commi~tee directed that representatives of IFCI may also be called from 
New Delhi to appear before the Sub-Committee at its meeting with State Government 
officials on lOth November, 1995 so that matter can be sorted out in the presence of State 
Government officials. 
Meeting with Worhers Unions HEC, Ranclli 
On 5th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee reached Ranchi, where it met with the 
worker's unions of HEC. The Sub-Committee cam~ to understand that once a prestigious 
profit making organisation and pride to nation, HEC is now on the verge of death. 
As a natural corollary to the company's sad state, the Sub-Committee came to 
understand that diverse labour problems have cropped up. The employees of HEC are 
facing a very tough time as all the facilities extended to them have been curtailed/suspended 
due t.o shortage of funds. · 
The workers apprised that their wage revision is pending for last four years and they are 
not getting L.T.A., leave encashment and due D.A. point anymore. For the last two years 
even salaries to workers have not been paid in time and the casual workers have not been 
regularised. The managem~nt was not able to deposit CPF and even the transport subsidy 
has been withdrawn. The Sub-Committee was told that due to a fear psyschosis in workers 
that HEC will not run, the work force is fast depleting and many experienced workers have 
opted for VRS resulting in qualitative degradation of work. Even some foreign trained 
technicians have been given .administrative jobs rather than technical work showing lack of 
professionalism in regard to utilisation of work force. 
The Sub-Committee was also apprised that unorganised labourers engaged in the plant 
are given minimum wages fixed for the construction work rather than that of engineering 
industry which is higher. 
The Sub-Committee also came to understand that due to deteriorated state of HEC the 

94 
basic civic amenities to workers are also affected. In plant hospital at Ranchi where the 
facilities used to be very good, qualified doctors have left under V.R.S. and doctors present 
are also indulging in private practice resulting, only those patients -who attend their private 
clinics get good medicines (though free of cost) from the hospital. Majority of medicines are 
not available at the plant hospital and though HEC reimburses for the local purchase, the 
procedure is time consuming and causes a lot of inconvenience to workers. There are also 
apprehensions that the hospital may be given to some private organisation. At the township, 
the petty maintenance works are not being attended to. 
The representatives of Trade Unions told that no land has been· allotted for their office 
and there are cases of disciplinary action on workers on anonymous complaints. 
The workers, naturally apprehensive about their fate, pleaded that­
( a) sufficient work order may be provided to HEC, 
(b) financial aid may be given to the compauy immediately, 
(c) HEC may be taken out from B.I.F.R. 
Meeting with Trade and Industry Representatives, Ranchi 
The second meeting of Sub-Committee at Ranchi was with the Trade and Industry 
Representatives where it came to understand that the industrialists are facing diverse 
problem, in setting up/runmng successfully their industrial units. Firstly, there is a prevalent 
insecurity among the entrepreneurs, due to law and order problem in the region which is not 
conducive to industrialist for installing industrial units. Secondly there's lack of adequate 
basic infrastructure in the State. The poor condition of roads results in high costs of 
transportation of raw materials and finished products. The supply of power to industriaL 
units is very erratic and is moving from bad to worse and above all there are draconian rules 
of minimum guarantee, and minimum electricity charges which again contribute to higher 
cost of production and poor productivity. Telecom services are also not upto the mark in the 
region. The industrial areas are not well connected by local and STDIISD lines and there is 
frequent breakdown of the system. 
The entrepreneurs also told the Sub-Committee about rampant corruption in the local 
bureaucracy, including RIADA. There the attitude of officials is not to guide but to grab the 
entrepreneurs the moment they commit a mistake and rules are interpreted in such a way so 
as to corner the entrepreneurs. 
Contrary to assertions made by the State Government there is still widespread 
prevalence of Inspector Raj, and the entrepreneurs are invariably harassed and threatened 
by the inspecting officials from various department such as Labour, Sales Tax and Central 
Exdse, Pollution Control, Transport and there are many administrative procedural wrangles 
which are not existing in other States. Thus in place of producing anything worthwhile, the 
entrepreneurs are mentally engaged in these activities only. The attitude of Bihar State 
Financial Corporation, too, is more of a Money-lender than that of an agency for industrial 
development. Its rehabilitation programmes are neither timely nor constructive. The 
industrialists feel that they should be given representation in its Board of Directors. 
The entrepreneurs did not approve the recent policy of deducting P.F. of worker who 
has worked in an establishment a single day and stated that this scheme is not favourite even 
among the workers. 
Another big problem faced by the industrialists is the shortage of coal, though the area 
is situated on the pit-head of coal reserves. This problem is actue during rainy season and 
whatever the entrepreneurs manage to get is at high rates. 

95 
The present state of HEC is also affecting the industries in and around Ranchi, since 
most of them are its ancilliaries or are indirectly dependant on HEC. 
Apart from this the entrepreneurs stated that there are no compelling reasons for 
entrepreneurs to start industry in the region and in order to allure the entrepreneurs the 
Government should give certain incentives such as-
(i) tax holiday for Jharkhand area and more powers to Jharkhand Autonomous Council; 
(ii) uniform tax system throughout the country; 
(iii) modernisation of Ranchi airport for night landing; 
(iv) maintenance of National highway by Central Government; 
(v) offices of all major Central Government in Ranchi; 
(vi) settlement of E.S.I. cases in Ranchi not in Patna; 
(vii) increase in railways facilities and availability of wagons; 
(viii) simplified administrative procedure and restriction on the visit of Government 
Officials in the industries. 
On the basis of the evidence tendered, the Sub-Committee observed that one of the 
main reasons for the sickness in industrial units in and around Ranchi is the sickness in 
HEC. Therefore revival of HEC is must for the health of units in and around Ranchi. 
Besides this, the sub-Committee observed that erratic power supply is contributing to further 
sickness in the industrial units and therefore needs to be improved. The entrepreneurs are 
also suffering due to different tax structure in different States. Accordingly the Sub­
Committee recommends that there should be a uniform tax structure throughout the 
country. The Sub-Committee further recommends that development of infrastructure such as 
good road conditions, modernisation of airport, availability of wagons and increase in 
Railway facilities are the need of the hour for creating industrial atmosphere. 
On the functioning of RIADA the Sub-Committee observed that it should hetp the 
entrepreneurs instead of engaging them in procedure wrangles. For this the Sub-Committee 
recommends that administrative procedure may be simplified and the visit of Government 
Officials may be reduced to once in a year. 
The Sub-Committee also observed that functioning of SISI is not satisfactory and 
therefore recommends that it must aggravate its activities to help out the entrepreneurs. 
IHeeting with District Collector and Representatives of State Industry Department, Ranchi 
The Sub-Committee held its next meeting with District Collector and representatives of 
states industry department where it was informed that in Ranchi there are mainly 
engineering and mineral industries with other units which have also started in the area. The 
performance of Ranchi in achievement of PMRY is good and last year, (1994-95) out of the 
target of 900 loan 427 proposals were actually disbursed. The Sub-Committee observed that 
working of SIS!, inspite of running certain EDP, is not very satisfactory. There was a testing 
lab at Ranchi which has been shifted to Dhanbad due to which entrepreneurs of Ranchi are 
facing difficulties. 
The recoveries of B.S.F.C. are not good and out of the 414 units financed by it, 217 are 
sick mostly due to working capital. B.S.F.C. is also considering the rehabilitation of these 
sick units and is also starting to give working capital from this year. 
On the working of RIADA the Sub-Committee was informed that all the land under it 

96 
has not been allotted and there is no sickness in the industrial area under it. The Sub­
Committee examined the issue of sickness and found that it is contradictory to the statement 
given by B.S.F.C. which has also financed certain units presently sick under RIADA. The 
Sub-Committee asked for a report in the matter. 
The Sub-Committee also came to know that among other things unpleasant state of 
HEC is one of the root cause of sickness among the industries in the regic;m besides power. 
About the local industries and handicraft the Sub-Committee came to know that 
production of vegetable, honey, lac and mushroom has increased. in the area. The 
production of handicraft has also increased and the administration is helping in providing 
· market to these products. Keeping in view the good harvest of vegetable and fruits the 
adminsitration requested that a booklet on food processing industries, giving details about 
the cost of various food processing units and procedure for establishing it, may be made 
available to develop the said industries in the area. 
On financing by Banks in PMRY and other proposal the Sub-Committee was informed 
that Banks are reluctant to give· loan due to 
(i) bad recoveries 
(ii) non functioning of big industries 
(iii) too much loaning. 
The administration was of the opinion that in PMRY it has moved proposal· to forward 
projects of ITI graduates who are already .trained. 
Meeting with Management ol HEC, Ranchi 
On 6th November, 1995, the Sub-Committee met with the Management of HEC, 
Ranchi where it came to understand the HEC needs financial help from Central 
Government, for its revival. The Management stated that it was also trying to improve its 
internal financial condition with active cooperation of its workers. The Sub-Committee was 
told that the Corporation was engaged in the manufacture and supply of capital equipments, 
machine tools and spares needed for the core sector industries, namely, Steel, Coal, 
Cement, Power, Defence, Aluminium, Ship buildina, Railway, etc. The Corporation has 
been a major contributor in the indigenisation and expansion of steel plants and has also t. 
played a significant role in the modernisation ·Of the coal sector in the Country. It has so far, 
the Sub-Committee was told, supplied over one lakh ton of Mining Equipments to coal 
mining industries the Corporation is among the few exclusive companies in the world to 
manufacture draglines. It has a turnkey project division which has succesfully completed 
projects in different core sectors of the economy, viz, Steel, Coal, Power, Cement besides 
carrying out modernisation of a cement plant in Bangladesh. Currently it is engaged in the 
execution of Raw Material Handling Plant at Rourkela Steel Plant. 
The Management also gave the details of the equipment supplied by it to Railways, 
Aluminium Industry, Ship Building, Sugar Industry, Cement and Defence Industries. 
The Management then represented to the Sub-Committee about the problems being 
faced by it and the assistance it needed from Government. Firstly, it pleaded that to revive 
operations of HEC, Group of Ministries had taken a decision to given certain financial 
assistance to company according to whicb for 1995-96 interest free loan to compensate cash 
losses of Rs. 80.61 crores were sanctioned. 
This decision of Group of Ministries was communicated to BIFR to which the company 
has been referred. The Sub-Committee· was further informed that du.ring the current year 
only 18 crores has been released by the Government. The management further submitted 
that despite the Government's intentions, efforts made by the company, and suggestion from 

97 
BIFR, the attitude of the S.B.I., sole bankers to HEC, poses a series concern in the revival 
of the company. To bring their point home, the management informed that S.B.I. has 
adjusted Rs.2.7 crores as 15% deduction (adjustment against the frozen account) and 
Rs. 8.84 crores against interest leviable as on September, 1995, thus taking away Rs. 11.6 
crores out of the funds of Rs. 18 crores provided by the Government for Salary/Wages. 
Despite the assurance that the company's performance is improving and therefore the 15% 
of collection would adequately service the interest burden is not accepted by the Bank. 
To compound the problems, bank is now planning to further restrict HEC's ability to 
utilise fund fully. This gives a feeling as if bank is behaving in a manner to negate the 
purpose of the Government's financial assistance to the company and therefore its revival. 
The management pleaded that instead of restricting HEC's ability to utilise its funds 
properly the S.B.I. should help the company within the guarantees provided by Government 
and RBI guidelines. Secondly, the company pleaded that Coal India Ltd., which was 
extensively using equipments supplied by HEC, is now turning towards foreign countries. 
The Government should direct CIL, to continue buying its equipments from HEC which are 
no less efficient than any other product. Thirdly, the company informed that it was running 
into problems with B.S.E.B. to which the Chairman, B.S.E.B. has agreed to consider 
sympathetically .. Fourthly, the management pleaded that the revised performance targets for 
1995-96 can be achieved if the balance amount of Rs. 62.61 crores is released by 
Government immediately. 
The Sub-Committee was told that the last year was an year of darkness for the'·eompariy 
since many good ·supply orders could not be procured. The morale of the workers was'vely­
low. The Sub-Committee was told that employees had responded f~vourable to VRS as a 
result of which manpower, which was 17421 in 1991-92, had come down to 11763 asop _l:St 
November, 1995. The company proposed to release another 200 emplo)'ees in the,~r,emaining 
part of the year. Hence, with the coming down of employtpen~.',_qQSt, .which was 
extraordinarily high, the profitability of the company was ·Uk~W' -~:~ljSe:· ·:: · 
•' .. ',.(, 
On the Sub-Committee enquiry, about the time by when the: ·cq~an)' would come out 
of B.l.F.R., the representatives of the Ministry informed that by March 1996 it's revival may 
be notified. _,.,. 
The Sub-Committee enquired that while in its brief note the company had SUl~Rf that: it- ·- ' 
was facing problems in Order Booking in the past 2-3 years ~ to recessionA!r,ct\Pitjf· 
Goods Market, besides its other diverse problem,. it had also sta~that as on l.ll.9S.~ittiatt ·' 
booked orders··w<>rth Rs. •459.2· ciores. This seemed to be a contradictory statemeR:t~ The 
Management replied that the figures stated were not of a single o~der, but of orcb's bo()ked 
in a continuous process from the last year till date. 
The Sub-Committee advised HEC not to ~eep orders pending, since non-execution of 
orders in time would only erode the goodwill of the company. /fhe Management ,tol4 the 
Sub-Committee that the order was pending due to lack of certain. equipments wnicb. ~uld . 
not be purchased due to non·availability of finance. . : ·· 
The Management had, during the discussion, stated, that it was giving speciai irt~tiv~·· 
for raising production. On a clarification the Sub-Committee and was told by HEC 
management, that incentives were offered to workmen to achieve or to exceed targets set for 
production. 
The Sub-Committee then enquired about the staffing pattern in HEC and came to learn 
that HEC had about 3000 officers and 8000 workmen, with Officers: workmen tJltio of 1:3 
(approx.). 
',· 
'. 
·" 

98 
The Management was quick to clarify that 1500 'officers' were still working as 'Kamgars' 
and had been promoted only for 'status' and hence, officer: worker ratio of 1:6 was still 
being maintained. They added, that more people would retire and workmen to officer ratio 
would further decline to 1:9. 
To further clarify the matter in this regard, the Sub-Committee enquired about the 
officer worker ratio in 1991-92, when the strength of workforce was 18,000, and came to 
know that at that time, there were 4000 Officers and 14000 workers. It seemed to the Sub­
Committee that in VRS out of the 4000 workforce relieved, more workmen were released, 
than officers. lbe Sub-Committee also learnt that at present 6000 people out of 11000 
consisted of Non-technical workmen. Hence, the actual ratio that emerged was 1 officer to 2 
workmtn. which is highly unproductive for a companys' financial health. The Sub­
Committee :also conveyed to HEC Management about reports from workers unions, that 
whi!e on one hand it was re-appointing engineers, on the other hand apprentices were not 
being ~.bs.;rbed. The Sub-Committee directed the management to supply details of the 
staffing pattern, with break up of the various grades of the work force. The Sub-Committee 
'also learnt, that HEC had not followed Government's guidelines with respect to recruitment 
of S.C./S.Ts. It also pleaded ignorance about reservations of O.B.Cs. in promotions. The 
Sub-Committee asked for details in this regard. The Management told the Sub-Committee 
that the company had 28 workers unions and till date, there had been no major problem of 
labour unrest, except an agitation during the initial months of the current financial year, 
where the workers demanded payment of Interim relief, pending wage revision, payment of 
Leave Travel Allowance and Leav,e encashment. The Sub-Committee came to kn<;>w that 
there had been no elections for union ana suggested that HEC should soon hold election to 
raise the morale of its wortt·force. Contrary to the assertions made by workers the Sub­
Committee was inforaned that the unorganised labour engaged in the plant are paid 
minimum wages fixed for engineering industry rather than of construction workers. The Sub­
Committee was also informed that under VRS useful workers are generally not released and 
are persuuded to stuy. 
On 1.he point of purchase of scrap on higher rate the Sub-Committee was told that 
previoul>ly due to mistake it was valued high but now it is valued properly and being 
.,urchaStJ from Dokaro Steel Plant. 
On the basis of the evidence tendered the Sub-Committee observed that HEC is a 
mother industry to many industries and a pride to the nation. Accordingly its affairs should 
not be left at the mercy of any Bank. The Sub-Committee therefore recommends that 
Government of India should intervene in the matter and restrict S.B.I. in negating 
Government efforts to revive HEC. 'The Sub-Committee further recommends that right now 
HEC is in financial crunch therefore the balance amount of Rs. 62.61 crores sanctioned for 
the yeur 1995-96 may be released immediately so that revised performance targets for 1995-
96 can be achieved. ·"' 
The Sub-Committee also felt that ratio of Officer and workers in HEC is on highecsi'de 
which is counter productive to the company's financial health. Accordingly the Sub­
Committee recommends that the ratio m~y be brought down by way of V.R.S. 
The Sub-Commitlee observed that in recruitment and promotion of S.Cs!S.Ts and 
OBCs the Government policies are not strictly adhered to. Accordingly there must be close 
monitoring of these policies by Government and the management may be asked to explain 
the reasons for this and keeping back-log of vacancies. 
Lastly, the Sub-Committee felt that reference of HEC to BIFR has adversely affected 

99 
its reputation which has resulted in constant down fall in the work order. Accordingly to 
improve its reputation the HEC may be taken out from BIFR as soon as possible. 
Meeting with Workers Union, Bokaro Steel Plant, Bokaro 
On 7th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee met with the Workers' Union of Bokaro 
Steel Plant where it came to understand that Bokaro Steel Plant is infested with 
problems of working class like violations of labour laws, and highhandedness.: of the 
Management towards the workers. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that the provisions made in the Industrial 
Disputes Act for the speedy disposal of labour cases within three months are not being 
adhered to. There are abundant cases of· termination of service of the workers without 
enquiry. An agrieved workman has to undergo a gruelling process of making 
representation to the Management, awaiting for conciliation proceeding, awaiting for 
reference by the State Government and only. then he can go to the Labour Court or 
Tribunal. Thus, labour cases drag for as long as ten years, by which time the victim 
labourer looses both his hope and his power of resistance. Hence, the worker~pleaded 
before the Sub-Committee that they should be directly allowed to go to the ·Labour 
Court or Tribunal. 
The workers also told the Sub-Committee that the Management of Bokaro Steel 
Plant was flouting section 10 of Contract Labour (Abolition and Regulation) Act, 1971 
by employing contract labour in jobs of permanent/perennial nature. 
These workers are paid minimum wages of the State and stand no chance of 
promotion, hike in salary, provident fund or any othe,r benefits. The contractors keep on 
changing, but the labour contracted often continuously works for 20-30 years. Moreover •. 
the wages paid by Bokaro Steel Plant to the contract workers, (Rs. 3V-. per day). is also 
not at par with other steel plants (Rourkela Steel Plant pays its contract workitS· @Rs. 
701- per day, which is more than the prescribed wage by the Government or'Orissa). 
Hence, the workers unions' pleaded before the Sub-Committee to get justice done to 
these contract workers by trying to get their services regularised, and/or at least get them 
parity of wages with other steel plants. The Sub-Conuni.ttee was also apprised about the 
malpractice of cheating contract workers at the time of disbursement of their wages, 
where they are made to sign on more amount than what they are receiving. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that in case of accidents during werk, 
compensation is paid to the worker/his nominee, but the fact finding committee of such 
accident does not fix responsibility on the person(s) causing such accidents! M,any 
accidents the unions pointed out, occured due to out-dated and worn-ouf machinery 
which has already surpassed its life but has not been changed. The unions demanded that 
one dependant of the worker should be given employment in case of h'is death/disability 
during accident, or retirement, safe and pollution free working place should be provided 
to workers; measures should be expedited to stop such accidents; good quality indi1strial 
uniforms like shoes, clothes and other safety appliance~ should be provided to workers. 
The Sub-Committee was also told that there is no arrangement for routine medical 
check-up of the workers, to treat industrial diseases which subsequently develop into 
chronic nature and take the life of workers. Hence, the unions asked for provision of 
better medical facilities, procurement of' life-saving drugs, necessary medical equipments, 
beds and appointment of medical specialist, so that occupational diseases to workers in 
such hazardous places like Blast furnance, coke ovens, etc. can be identified in their 
primary stage~ and their life can be saved. 

•• 
100 
Besides highlighting their problems and the highhandedness of the Management, the 
workers' unions of Bokaro Steel Plant also apprised the Sub-Committee about; 
·' !.it> 
(i) irregularities in awarding contract works of c"apital repair of different units of the 
Plant ,by the concerned officials of the unit to their henchmen without prior 
approval of the Factory Inspector of the· Government of Bihar. 
(ii) modernisation works worth thousands of crores have been awarded to foreign 
companies bu'tthey in turn, have awarded the same works to local contractors and 
themselves siphoned-off large commission. 
(iii) there are also some irregularities as workers' unions pointed out, in auction of 
scrap steel by Bokaro Steel Plant. 
Meeting with Trade and Industries Representatives, Bokaro 
. ' -
· The second meeting of the Sub-Committee on 7th November, 1995 was with the trade 
and industry representatives of Bokaro where the Sub-Committee was given to understand 
that the development of BIADA industrial units has been stagrtant since long. The 
representatives of. Chamber of Commeree expressed their opinion, that better 
encouragement by BSL is warranted, so that these an~illiary units can flourish. The 
·entrepreneurs deposed before the Sub-Committee that according to the guidelines of Bureau 
of Public Enterprises (BPE) it is the duty of the BSL to promote development of industrial 
units and give working orders to the established units. But unfortunately these guidelines are 
never adhered to. Even the policies formulated and decision taken by the Plant Level 
Committee (PLC) constituted by BPE and Development Commissioner, Small Scale 
Industries for the development of ancilliary and sick and dependent industrial units, were 
neglected. 
Mostly, adhoc and unsystematic arrangement is resorted to while placing orders and no 
concrete method is adopted to in this respect. Resultantly the local industrial units are 
working in constant insecurity since two· 'decades and have to run for day to day order. 
Hence, the BIADA Chamber of Industries conveyed to the Sub-Committee, their demand 
for assured orders from BSL for at least five years, to ensure the development of local 
ancilliary enterprises in the· region. The Sub-Committee also learned that erratic power 
supply in Bokaro Industrial Areas and failure of financial institutions to provide timely loans. 
and work.ng capital have also contributed to the present state of sickness in BIADA 
·.·industrial units. 
' ~' : ; ' 
The BlADA has also not been farsignated as they have not been consistent in adhering 
to fixed policies and systems for all-round development of industrial units. 
The representatives of Chamber of Commerce also complained about harassment by · 
BSL. The products manufactured though approved by the BSL quality control team, on 
inspection, are returned subsequently and orders are cancelled by BSL on ground of poor 
quality. They also face difficulties in securing working capital from banks, which insist on 
collateral security while sanctioning loans in clear violation of R.B.I. guidelines. 
Besides the above, difficulties of general nature such as bad road condition, shortage of 
water and law and ori:ler problem ·were also mentioned by the entrepreneurs quring the 
meeting. · 
Meeting with Managenumt of .llokaro Steel Pla11t 
At 4.30 P:~. qn. 7th N~vember, 1995 the Sub·Committee met with the Management of 
Bokaro Steel Plant. At the outset, the Sub-Committee expressed its displeasure over the . 
.' 

101 
absence of the Managing Director of Bokaro Steel Plant who proceeded to his preoccupied 
programme without informing the Secretariat about his absence in time even though he was 
aware of the Sub-Committee's visit well in advance. Thereafter, several important issues 
such as the issue of payment of annual bonus, resettlement of displaced villagers, problems· 
of workers, purchase policy, medical facilities, contribution in development of ancilliary 
units, staffing pattern, reservation policy, recruitment policy, construction works, wages, 
contract labour, modernisation of plant, relations with BIADA, leasing of BSL land and 
theft of scrap and finished material were taken up. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that BSL is currently facing serious protest 
from workers over the issue of payment of bonus, which has been delayed. The workers 
were basically demanding parity in bonus, for people eligible under the Bon~s Act 
(numerically only 10%) and. people not eligible under the act. The Management deposed 
before the Sub-Committee that an agreement has recently been reached with the workers' 
unions over the issue. 
The Sub-Committee then raised the issue of rehabilitation of displaced persons, whose 
lands have been acquired by BSL. The Management's plea that they had solve<;t all cases of 
rehabilitation, was found contrary to the assertion made by workers unions and Trade 
Organisations in their memorandum to the Sub-Committee. When this was pointed out, the 
Management stated that re-settlement of people was the responsibility of the State 
Government of Bihar, in return of which BSL had paid the whole compensation to it and 
further stated that apart from this whatever will be claimed should be borne by the Bihar 
Government according to their agreement with the State Government. The Sub-Committee 
asked the Management to supply a brief in the matter. 
On the specific question of maintaining parity with its Rourkela Plant in payment of 
minimum wages to daily wages workers BSP Management clarified that minimum wages 
being paid to workers, were different in all the States, and BSP was paying the minimum 
wages fixed by Bihar Government. 
The Sub-Committee also asked BSL the reasons for its declining orders to HEC, 
Ranchi, once its 'mother organisation' and the Management assured that they are trying to 
give as much as possil?l~ ~,o ,~EC. 
Quoting from the brief given by BSP, that it is spending Rs. 4000 per workers per year 
on medicine, and was maintaining a 900 bed hospital the Sub-Committee enquired about the 
% ratio of money spent on establishment: and medicine separately. The Sub-Committee 
came to understand that out of the total hospital budget of Rs 24 cJ,'ores per ye~r, only Rs. 6 
crores are bejng spent on medicine. Thus, BSP is spending only 25% of money'qn medicine 
as against 75% on establishment costs. The Sub-Committee directed the Man.agement to 
supply the. break-up of amount spent on medicine and establishment for the last tbif!e years. 
Medicines are purchased from market by limited tender ,policy and are not being purchased 
from IDPL BSP Management accounts for it by stating that the latter is not in a po~ition to 
supply medicines on time. When BSP Managemen~ .was asked about the reasons for not 
opting for open tender policy for buying medicines, the Sub-Committee was told that with 
50-60 companies competing for a single medicine e.g. Ampicillin, it would not be possible to 
buy the best quality medicine at the lowest cost. The Sub-Committee conveyed to BSP the 
representation made by workers' Unions, that since the instances of industrial diseases are 
rising it should have made compulsary medical check-up for workers every year. l3SP. 
Management, replied that compulsory medical check-Qp is a regular feature, and the' 
attendence of workers had risen from 15% to 45% as previously workers not attending such 
check-up were being compulsarily forced to do so, 

102 
The Sub-Committee asked Management about its staffing pattern and enquired whether 
guidelines-of Government of India were being followed for recruitment of SC/STs. The Sub­
Committee came to understand that B.S.L. holds recruitment drives for SOSTs through 
employment exchanges but STs were generally more forthcoming than SCs. The Sub­
Committee directed B.S.L. to send details about its staffing pattern, recruitment drives for SCI 
STs, reservation in promotions, reservation for O.B.C.s, recruitment policy and details of 
recruitment made in last three years and the numbers of casual workers in last three years. 
The Sub-Committee next enquired about the purchase policy of B.S.L. where it came to 
know that for purchasing goods worth above Rupees one crore, open tender policy is being 
followed, while in other cases, purchase are made by limited tender based on quality control for 
which B.S.L. had registered parties. The Sub-Committee directed B.S.L. to give a report on it, 
for the last three years. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that for purchase of cloth, B.S.L. had tried to 
prefer NTC and KVIC but they did not respond. 
The Sub-Committee further enquired about the procedure of civil construction in BSP and 
came to understand that maximum construction work in BSP has been given to H.S.C.L., and 
little work is given through open/limited tenders to small contractors. The Sub-Committee 
directed the Management to submit the details in this regard thereto for the last three years 
about the civil construction undertaken in BSL. 
The Sub-Committee enquired from BSL about the pre-dominant existence of contract 
labour, which did not got minimum wages, medical facilities or bonus and which worked for 
even twenty years without completing five years of regular service and directed to submit a 
detailed report on the issue. 
On the relationship of Management of BSL with BIADA the Sub-Committee observed 
that many of the decisions of Plant Level Committee for development of ancilliary industries are 
not implemented. The Management denied this fact to which the Sub-Crunmittee directed the 
Management to submit a report on the implementation' of the decisions taken 'in PLC during the 
last ten years. 
The Sub-Committee further desired to have details of the policy of the B.S.P. in leasing out 
its land to private parties and directed the Management to report in the matter. 
On the incidents of theft of the steel scrap and finished material in the plant, the Sub­
Committee was informed about the cases of theft which have been registered with the police. 
The Sub-Committee's pointed query about the cases of theft which have not been registered 
with police remained unanswered by the Management to which the Sub-Committee directed the 
Management to send a report of last 10 years about the cases of theft which were registered with 
police and which were not registered. 
At last the Sub-Committee expressed its decision to visit B.S.P again to have deliberati ... 1:; 
with Managing Director on certain specific issues. 
On the basis of the evidence tendered the Sub-Committee recommends that the contract 
workers may not be engaged to the work of permanent nature which can be performed by 
regular workers. The Sub-Committee also recommends that to stop the malpractice of cheating 
contract workers at the time of disbursement of wages, the principal employer may be asked to 
open pay counters specifying venue, date and time so that it can be monitored. The Sub­
Committee is of the view that accidents in any establishments can not be ruled out but utmost 
care should be taken that it should not happen due to outdated and worn out machinery. The 
Sub-Committee further recommends that routine medical check up every year may be made 
compulsory for evey worker to protect the workers from chronic occupational diseases. 
The Sub-Committee observed that ancilliary units in Bokaro are not flourishing the way 

103 
they should be in the present sound position of B.S.P. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that -
(i) reservation of jobs/orders may be annually fixed for the BIADA units; 
(ii) a high level technical and bureaucratic Committee may be formed to study the 
basic hindrances in the way of development of BIADA units and to monitor their 
functioning; 
(iii) a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between B.S.L., BIADA units and 
Government of Bihar may be signed on an annual basis for procurement of 
orders; 
(iv) existing units could be encouraged for enhancing their capacity and diversifying 
into manufacture of other related items required by B.S.P. and which presently · 
are being supplied from outside BIADA; 
(v) a technical cell for development, improvement and monitoring of the 
manufacturing process and quality control may be formulated; 
(vi) training may be imparted to entrepreneurs and employees of BIADA units for 
enhancement of productivity, quality · improvement and Human Resqurce 
Development by B.S.P. Training Department. 
In addition to above the Sub-Committee also feels that implementation of the decision 
taken· by Plant Level Committee (PLC) is also necessary for the development of BIADA 
units. The Sub-Committee further feels that steps may be expidited to stop incidents of theft 
in BSL. 
Meeting with Workers Union, IDPL, Muzaffarpur 
On 8th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee met with the workers union of IDPL at 
Muzaffarpur where it was apprised that the Muzaffarpur unit of IDPL is an alcohal based 
organic chemicals manufacturing plant producing Acetaldehyde, Acetic Acid, Methl-Ethyl 
Pyridine and Niacinamide starting from Ethyl Alcohol as the principal raw material which is 
abundantly available indigenously in North Bihar from the bye-product of sugar mills, i.e. 
molasses. The plant has locational advantages of four alcohol producing distilleries and 28 
sugar mills within the radius of 150 kms. Althou~ the plant started its business with the aim 
of providing "Medicines for Millions", today however, it is seeking medicines for its own 
health, as it has been declared sick and referred to B.I.F.R. for reviv.al. The Muzaffarpur 
unit is thus on the verge of closure . 
.In course of its deliberations with the workers' union, the Sub-Committee came to know 
about some of the reasons for the losses suffered by the Company. 
Fir$1ly, M/s. A.B. Bofors (Sweden), who had been awarded the contract for supplying 
the machines had presumably installed outdated technology and machinery, violated the 
contract, left before the production trial, and thus left the fate of the plant hanging in 
balance. The production was thereafter started by Indian engineers which was much below 
the capacity that the project, if fully completed, WO\lld have generated. Hence, this project 
was sabotaged ab initio. The workers demanded that suit for damages may be initiated 
against A.B. Bofors which left affairs of the Company in mess. 
Secondly, different captive plants viz. refrigeration, water treatment, pump house, boiler 
plants had been set up with huge investments keeping in mind the large -capacity and large 
product range. However, the under-utilisation of their capacity, due to the project's non­
completion has again accounted for wastages and losses. Heavy high capacity machines were 
set up in production which_ operate only ten days in a monthi boiler for captive power 
c \ 

104 
plant was set up for 20 MT, but since presently the plant needs 7 MT steam only, the 
fuelling cost of the boiler is higher; only one reactor out of two and only four autoclaves out 
of seven are presently being utilised. 
Due to these problems the IDPL's Muzaffarpur unit has drifted towards sickness. The 
employees are working under immense pressure and worried about their future. In this plant 
there are 183 workmen out of the total staff of 215. The Muzaffarpur unit has been declared 
as non-viable on stand-alone basis according to the lOBI report and as per the revival 
package approved by B.I.F.R. on 10.2.94, it has been converted into a separate 100% 
subsidiary of IDPL, in collaboration with State .Govermnent of Bihar. The workers' unions 
regard this as a major conspiracy by IDPL management to declare this unit as surplus and 
one which cannot work. The reduction of manpower from 327 employees to 215 in one year 
by giving VRS (45 employees) and effecting transfers (57 employees) have only enhanced 
the fears of workers. 
The. workers union told the Sub-Committee that status of subsidiary or joint venture 
with the State Government or leasing it out to private p~rties will not deliver any goods and 
will·be disastrous. They had on 24.12.93 submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister, signed 
by 21 M.P's and proposed a revival package of 15 crore rupees, in which the Muzaffarpur 
unit would be run by a cooperative management of workers and engineers. But nothing 
came of it. In the given situation, the workers feel that the best way of revival of the unit is 
its merger with HOCL, as suggested in the revised viability report submitted by lOBI on 
24th May, 1993, and approved by B.I.F,R. on lOth February, 1994. 
Meeting with Management of IDPL, Muzatrarpur 
The Sub-Committee held its next meeting with the Management of IDPL wherein it 
came to know that contrary to the expectations of the workers the Management wants to 
make IDPL Muzaffarpur, a totally 100% subsidiary of IDPL in collaboration with· State 
Government. The Management also informed that HOCL has not shown any response . to 
take over IDPL Muzaffarpur unit. · 
On the specific direction of the Sub-Committee, the Management was asked to supply 
details in respect of staffing pattern, purchase policy (with purchasing details in last t~ree 
years) aJ1d also details of VRS so far taken by employees in the units. 
On the basis of the evidence tendered, the Sub-Committee observed that the affairs of 
IDPL is in shambles because of the wrong policy in installing the project .a~g held .to some 
extent the A.B. Bofors responsible for it who left the projects before .th~-·trial production 
could start. Further the Sub-Committee observed that for revival . Qf JDPL if the State 
Government is not interested the matter may be taken up with' HOCL. 
Meeting with · Workers Union, Bharat Wagon and EngineerifM Limited, Muzaffarpur 
~-
The Sub-Committee met with the workers union of .8harat Wagon and Engineering 
Limited a profit making and dividend paying compan~.,iP-"1993-94 but its position since last 
year is shaking when the Railways drastically-cut its railway wagon procurement from Bharat 
Wagon and Engineering Limited. Even the worke..S"'were worried about the future the 
company blaming Central Government for the present state of affairs. 
The Sub-Committee came to understa.W. that for last two years the order for wagons 
given to Bharat Wagon and Engineering ~ited have t>een curtailed and so much so that 
the company is without work for last five months. Moreover whatever supply order of 
,}vagons that had been given to Bharat W1;1gon and Engineering Limited at the beginning of 
:~his year was given at much lmver tate of Rs. 72,000 per wagon resulting in higher cost of 
'.production. The work~t:S felt that tl!e Government has acted in -a' p~-an- manner in giving a 

105 
supply order of 1600 wagons to a Private Company which has also committed vast irregularities 
in execution of the supply order. The workers also complained about the withdrawal of subsidy 
being given to Bharat Wagon and Engineering Limited. The SU;b-Committee was also told that 
Bharat Wagon and Engineering Umited which is under financial crunch has invested a sum of 
rupees one crore in installing short blast equipment which is not functioning. The Company has 
further suffered loss due to erratic power supply position. 
The Sub-Committee was also apprised that the number of workers under Bharat Wagon 
and Engineering Limited is fast depleting and new recruitment has been stopped with h.o 
developmental schemes for their welfare launched by the Management. The workers had 
reached an agreement with the Management in1992 for enhancement of salary. But till ,now, 
their arears have not been paid. The workers also desired participation in Management and are 
against any sort of production linked wage agreement. 
Meeting with Management of Bharat Wagon and Engineering "Limited, Muzalfarpur 
On 8th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee held its ~eeting with Management of 
B.W.E.L. which apprised the Sub-Committee about the main reasons for co~pany going into 
losses. Two years back B.W.E.L. was a profit making company, but n,ow the position has 
deteriorated to such an extent that the company is in financial crunch:· ·As apprised by the 
workers the Sub-Committee came to know that the present state of affairs in the Company is 
due to steep fall in the supply order of wagons and during the year it was without work for few 
months. 
. I· 
The Sub-Committee also observed that the company is capable of delivering goods if .. 
sufficient supply order is given to it. The Sub-Committeewas also informed that the Company 
has also undertaken some diversification efforts in non-wagon industries impact of which will be 
available in coming years. 
The Management also explained as regard to production linked policy that the minimum 
wages of the workers will not be disturbed and the workers will get additional amount if the 
production is more .. 
. Few qu~stibns on the details of purchase in last three years, reservation policy and the 
extent of civil' construction undertaken remained unanswered and the Management assured to 
send ·the· detailed . reply on the issues. . , u 
On the basis of the evidence t~ndered the Sub-Committee observed that B.W.E.L>ik· 
capable of producing good quality wagons provided regular supply order of wagons is given to~ , 
it. The S4b-Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the fact that there is shortage of. 
wagons in the country, regular supply order of wagons may be given to B.W.E.L. which is 
otherwise necessary to save the company from drifting towards sicknes~. The Sub-Committee 
also observed that some information asked for from B.W.E.L. has not been received and 
accordingly, recommendation on t~os~ matters will be given after the same has been received. 
Meeting with Representatives of State Industry Department, Muzalfarpur 
On 8th November, 1995 the Sub-Committee met with the Officials of State Industry 
department where it came to know that 3.84 units financed by B.S.F.C. are sick and 82 have 
been closed. The recovery position ofthe B.S.F.C. is also not very good. The Sub-Committee 
also came to knoW that the land given to North Bihar Industrial Deve~?pment Authority has not 
been fully disbursed and there is still 52 acres of land pending· disbursement. The Sub­
Coi:1mittee also enquired about the progress in the direction of establishing Growth Centre in 
Muzaffarpur but no satisfactory reply was given because of which the Sub~Committee directed 
the Official to send a detailed report in the matter. 

106 
The representatives of K. V.I. C. also informed that the production of Lie hi is very large 
in the area and, therefore, processing centre for honey extraction can be developed. For this 
purpose the K. V.I.C. has also, initiated for bee-keeping. The Sub-Committee was also 
informed that the plight of weavers in the area is miserable due to shortage of raw material 
and lack of finance and there is no work for weavers. 
Meeting with Workers Union, Sitamarhi 
On 9th November, 1995, the first meeting of the Sub-Committee was with the 
representatives of workers union. The Riga Sugar Mill Workers' Union represented that 
bonus limited of Rs. 3500/- is not sufficient since most of the workers are getting a higher 
salary and also that Fourth Pay Commission for workers of sugar industry be constituted at 
the earliest. On the specific question of using the same workers by rotation in Riga Sugar 
Mill in its distillery and fertiliser factory the union's representative answered in negative. In 
the absence of any other major industry in Sitamarhi district of North Bihar, almost 30,000 
workers are employed in Bidi Industry. But neither the State nor the Central Government is 
taking care of them. They are not even paid the minimum wages fixed by the Government 
of Bihar and nave no working capital of their own. Hence, they are victims of great 
exploitation. · 
The Bidi workers' union complained that in the hospital there is always shortage of 
medicine. Central Government take control of the hospital and ambulance is always under 
repairs. Bidi workers further represented to the Sub-Committee that the rising price of 
Tendu Patta and Tobacco and the basic raw-materials for the industry> be controlled. Steps 
alsc()ieed to be taken to establish their cooperative and to make W;Qrking capital easily 
accessible to J3idi workers, through banks. ;,~~'~. 
The district local transport union apprised the Sub-CoJ,Ilmittee that transportation 
system in Sitamarhi is predominantly road based and there has been no significant 
~ · development of railways. Hence, Banks and financial institutions should provide adequate 
finance for this industry, as it will generate employment and faster trade. Secondly, the 
union apprised the Sub-Committee about the dilapidated condition of roads which have not 
been repaired since long. Since Sonbarsa and Meethapur of Sitamarhi district touch the 
Nepal border, the highway should be declared as International Highway and maintained 
accordingly. They also demanded a railway ov~rbridge at Mehsaul railway crossing and the 
Bus-depot furnished with facilities of water, electricity toilet and rest house be constructed 
and located adjac~nt to the railway station and the city main market. All these steps, they 
pleaded would further boost trade and commerce and tourist flow in and through Sitamarhi. 
Sitamarhi district weavers' union represented to the Sub-Committee about the massive. 
exploitation facea by weavers. Out of 10,000 weaverS in th.e district only about a thousand 
are able to secure work, and that too, only in accordance with seasonal demand. They have 
not been given the service card and other facilities by the labour department. Their illiteracy 
rate is as high as 99% and in the absence of any medical facility educational economic and 
social welfare, .fhey have nothing to lose except their lives. The union also gave suggestions 
that the weavers could be given proper training under TRYCEM and training centres could 
.be opened for them. The weavers may also be provided working capital through banks to 
start ·their own work. 
Workers of the Bihar Laghu Udyog Nigam pointed out that banks are proving to be the 
main fiimterance in the industrialisation of the area and demanded that action against branch 
manager of bank may be initiated if he flouts the RBI guidelines. 
While demanding a broad guage railway line in Sitamarhi the workers were in a very 

107 
agitated mood. They further apprised that the region has a large potential for establishing 
sugar and Khandsari Mills and therefore it should be a thrust industry for the area. It was 
also mentioned that Sitamarhi harvests a good vegetable and fruit crop and therefore 
incentives for establishing food processing industries may be given to invite entrepreneurs. 
Afeeting with Representatives of Trade & Industry Sitamarhi 
The representatives of Trade and Industry Association told the Sub-Committee that 
Sitamarhi is almost an industryless place because except Riga Sugar Mill, and a few SSI's 
and Khadi and Village Industries' Units, there is no other industry. There are many rice and 
sugar mills, which are rusting, though raw material is abundant. They pleaded that if 
Government took some initiative, this situation can be reversed and Sitamarhi may become 
a rice and sugar SLlrplus district, and give employment to many people. 
The Sub-Committee was told by trade and industry representative that though D.l.C. is 
working in the district, it has done nothing to develop industries there. Industrialists who do 
(once in a blue moon) come to invest, face many obstacles in their way and are scared away 
due to official apathy and red-tapism. Thus, no industrial enviornmentworth its name exists, 
and its creation, the Sub-Committee feels, is the need of the hour. 
Giving their suggestions about the potential industries that could be set-up in the area, 
the entrepreneurs apprised the Sub-Committee that straw-board, H.D.P.E. Bags, solvent 
extraction plant, leather, bone crushing units could be set up. Establishment of women 
Polytechinc was also demanded, in order to productively harness the dorment potential of 
women. 
Entrepreneurs pointed out about the difficulties faced in installing Khandsari units due 
to harassment by financial institution and monopolistic attitude of Riga Sugar Mill. The Sub­
Committee also came to know that due to this attitude of Riga Sugar Mill few farmers 
growing sugarcane in their fields are also suffering. The Management of Riga is neither 
procuring sugarcane from their fields nor it is freeing them from its reserve area. 
Afeeting with District Megistrste and State Industry Department, Sitamarhi 
The Sub-Committee met with officials of the State Industry Department where it was 
given to understand that the land alfotted to industrial estates has not been fully disbursed 
and a seminar is being organised with all concerned lead banks and cooperatives to disburse 
the remaining 14 acres of land within one month. The Sub-Committee observed that the role 
of D.l.C. in creating an atmosphere for development of industries is not very encouraging. 
The Official also informed the Sub-.Committee that the cost of production of items, such as 
fish, food, poultry, etc. is higher in Bihar due to lack of subsidy (other States are. giving 
subsidy). This alongwith lack of infrastructure and finance are also responsible for industrial 
backwardness of the area. The working of Cooperative Department was not satisfactory in 
so far as they had no industry based programme, nor programme for unorganised labourer 
has ever been organised. Besides this there are cases of fake societies registered with the 
department. In P.M.R.Y. the Sub-Committee came to know that last year the performance 
was 40% of the target whereas this year it is yet to accelerate. 
On the basis of its meeting with the workers union representatives of the Trade and 
Industry Department the Sub-Committee observed that Sitamarhi district of north Bihar has 
a large potential for development of Sugar and Khandsari Mills but at present there is only 
one big sugar industry i.e. Riga Sugar Mill. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that 
some concrete steps need to be taken to promote more such mills in the are'a. Keeping in 
view the good harvest of vegetable and fruits, the Sub-Committee also recommends that 
incentives may be given for starting food processing units in the area. 

108 
In the field of developing infrastructure the Sub-Committee felt that there is long 
pending genuine demand for broad guage railway line from Dharbhanga Narkatiya Ganj 
and new line from Muzaffarpur to Sitamarhi which if acceeded to may give a boost to 
trade activities in the area. The road condition may also be improved for the purpose 
and the road to Sitamarhi may be declared a National Highway. 
The Sub-Committee further observed that the plight of the bidi workers and weavers 
in the area needs to be considered sympathetically. 
The Sub-Committee showed its concern on the attitude of Riga Sugar Mill towards 
the conditions of Sugarcane growing farmers of Sonbarsa, Parihar, Susand, Pupsi Bajpats, 
Naupur and Runi Saidpur which are under Riga Sugar Mill's reserve area and from 
whom it is not purchasing sugarcane. The Sub-Committe, therefore, recommends that 
either these farmers may be freed from the reserved area of Riga Sugar Mill or the Riga 
Sugar Mill should buy sugarcane from these farmers. The Sub-Committee felt that Riga 
Sugar Mill must take other routine welfare measures like Kisan Bhavan etc. for the 
benefits of farmer who are supplying them sugarcane. 
The Sub-Committee further recommended that subsidy in certain industries may be 
given by the State Government to invite entrepreneurs in the area. The Sub-Committee 
also suggested that in P.M.R. Y. providing loan to a group of person instead of individual 
may be considered to make it competitive and preference in loan may be given for 
establishing vanety of enterprises rather than same type of enterprise. 
Meeting with the Officials of Government of Biha1· 
The final meeting of the Sub-Committee was held on the lOth November,. 1995 with 
the State Government officials, where it was apprised that the Chief Minister has recently 
taken a lot of initiatives for the creation of industrial environment and promotion of 
industrial development in Bihar. Thus new Industrial Policy was announced by the State 
Government which came into force on September 1, 1995, with the aim and objectives of 
creating on environment for optimal utilisation of State's agro climatic, mineral and 
human resources; reviving potentially viable and closed industries; boosting exports; 
providing quality infrastructure and simplifying procedure to expedite and impart 
transparency in decision making. 
The Sub-Committee came to understand that Bihar is currently facing vast magnitude 
of problems. For the improvement of infrastructure, Government is taking steps for 
improving telecom, power, transport, roads, etc. Role of private sector has been utilised 
in the concept of Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) for development of infrastructure in the 
State. Except in few parts of the State, the power position is not good. The Sub­
Committee was informed that Government is actively going to seek help from private 
sector for power generation and distribution. Further the Government would encourage 
setting up of captive power plant to meet the existing as well as future demand for 
power of industrial unit and would review the tariff rate besides granting certain 
exemption/incentives to new units. 
The Sub-Committee was. told that under the new policy for attracting investment for 
sustaining industrial development, the State Government is going to allow sales tax 
incentive to new units. The earlier ceiling of Rs. 15 crores on industries for aid has also 
been removed and new units get sales tax deferment benefit on purchase of raw materials 
and finished goods for 8-10 years, irrespective of their investment. This is a big 
advantage and in many industries like telecommunication, computer software/hardware 
and electronics, its limit is 300% of the fixed investment. The freight equalis,ltion policy, 

109 
due to which Bihar's industries were not gaining from proximity to raw material like coal, 
iron ore,. etc., has been abolished. Policies regarding coal have also been modified. 
The Sub-Committee was told that the Chief Minister had a campaign during which 
Industrialists were apprised about investment climate in Bihar. In a single day, 80 proposals, 
for eOO crores worth of investment have been received 31 MoU's worth Rs. 7700 crores were 
received from foreign countries. 5-6 companies, the Sub-Committee was apprised, were 
already in Patna to work out modalities regarding project implementation. 
In industrial policy administration too simplification has taken place and single window 
system both at State and district level has been introduced with the Industrial Development 
Commissioner and Collector, respectively as Chairman. The Chief Minister holds an open­
House every month in which problems of industrialists are solved. An Industrial Investment 
Promotion Board under the Chairmanship of Chief Minister is soon going to be constituted. 
An Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary comprising 
concerned Departmental Secretaries for coordination and expediting decision making 
relating to investment proposals has been formed. 
The Sub-Committee was told that for simplification of the procedure for land allotment 
for industrial purposes, power has been decentralised upto the level of Collectors in the 
district, who would be authorised to allot upto 5 acres of Government land and land above it 
would be leased to the entrepreneurs with the approval of the Empowered Committee. 
Hence, the land allotment will no-longer get delayed due to red-tapism. Similarly, procedure 
in electricity department have also been simplified- Entrepreneurs no longer require 
permission to use Diesel Generating sets upto 500 K.V.A. capacity. There is exemption 
from electricity duty for 5 years on captive power generation up to 25 M. W. for own 
consumption to industrial units. 
Deliberating upon the possible causes of industrial sickness, the State Government 
officials opined before the Sub-Committee that the negative approach of the banks was a 
major cause for industrial sickness. There is either inadequate finance or no finance. During 
the last 4-5 months, the Chief Minister advised the General Manager of banks to increase 
their Cash Deposit ratio. Bank of India has assured to increase its investments in the State. 
Such commitments are being deliberated with other banks also. The officials requested the 
Sub-Committee to pursue the matter with Finance Ministry in this regard thereto. 
The Sub-Committee was apprised that in P.M.R.Y. about Rs. 200 crores of annual 
investment can be made, to generate employment through establishment of micro enterprises 
in the rural as well as urban areas. About 22000 applications are received every year. Last 
year 11000 cases were sanctioned but only in 7000 cases loans were actually disbursed. Thus, 
there is about 50% gap in target, sanction ratio, and about 40% in sanction: disbursement 
ratio. One reason for this state of affairs is that branch managers are not cooperating. Thus, 
banks are not doing their job up.to the mark and this is growing into a major problem. 
The Sub-Committee was then apprised about Growth Centres. U:nder the Growth 
Centre Scheme, 1988, the State was allotted six Growth Centres out of which two centres, 
namely, Hazaribagh and Begusarai have been finally approved and a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs 
each has been released to these two centres on 3rd May, 1995. Representatives of IFCI 
informed that Chhapra is also going to be approved soon. The official requested the Sub­
Committee to make efforts for expediting sanctions for Growth Centres at Bhagalpur 
(pending since May, 1994), Muzaffarpur (pending since April, 1993) and Darbhanga 
(pending since, April, 1994). The Sub-Committee had called IFCI officials in this meeting, 
and referred this issue immediately to them. IFCI officials apprised the Sub-Committee that 

110 
reports regaramg Chhapra, Muzaffarpur and Bhagalpur were ready. They assured to the 
Sub-Committee that by 25th November, 1995 fonnal sanction to these Growth Centres will 
be sent to Ministry of Industry. The Sub-Committee was apprised by IFCI · officials that 
Darbhanga's sanction is getting delayed due to the fact that the site chosen for Growth 
Centre there, is located in flood prone area. The Sub-Committee directed IFCI to 
coordinate its site inspection in Darbhanga with State Government officials, and to sort out 
the issue at the earliest. The IFCI asked for one months' time to finalise Darbhanga Growth 
Centre. The State Government officials then apprised that the sum of Rs. 50 lakhs per 
Growth Centre released by Ministry of Industry was far too insufficient and demanded a 
sum of Rs. 5 crores towards the Growth Centre which has been sanctioned. The official 
substantiated their demand by stating that unless 80% of the total cost of the land is not 
deposited, the land can not be acquired and the cost of required land is too higher. 
The Sub-Committee then observed that disbursement in P.M.R.Y. by Banks in Bihar is 
quite low. Relating their problems, when the .Bank officials accounted for delay in training 
as one of the reasons, the Sub-Committee was not satisfied. The Convenor intervened and 
queried, that lead bankers are present in the task~force at district level with District 
Megistrate as head, to accord sanction to projects in P.M.R.Y. Then, there should be no 
reason for bankers to !ater on shelve a project as 'unviable' which had been approved by the 
task-force. The Sub-Committee also observed that R.B.I. guidelines on P.M.R.Y., are not 
being adhered to in the State due to callousness of banks. On a specific question whether 
the officials were receiving complaints about non-compliance of R.B.I. nonns by banks with 
respect to P.M.R.Y., the officials answered in the affirmative. 
The lead banks officials were informed that D.C. of Ranchi had complained that in 
violation of R.B.I. norms banks were demanding collateral guarantee in disbursing loans 
under P.M.R.Y. The lead banks assured that an enquiry would be conducted, and clarified 
that banks in Bihar had been given clear instructions not to demand any security or 
guarantee for P.M.R.Y. loan disbursement. 
The Sub-Committee then enquired about the position of I.I.D. (Integrated 
Infrastructure Development) in the State and came to understand that four_ projects at 
Fatwah (Patna), Belchampa (Daltonganj), Kumarbagh (West Champaran) and Alamnagar 
(Madhepura) have been formulated. Each centre envisages an investment of Rs. 5 crores on 
development of infrastructure. The Sub·Committee directed the state officials to give a 
report on the achievements made in this regard. 
The Sub-Committee came to Wlderstand that Khadi and Village Industries Sector 
employs 3.45 lakh people in the State. Government of India pays for the establishment cost 
of the Khadi Board but the funds given by Government are not enough and the State 
Government also has to supplement. 
The Sub-Committee conveyed to the officials the general complaint of SSI's that (i) 
Head Quarter of big industries set up in Bihar should be located in the·state, and (ii) sale of 
scrap outside the State should be regulated to give preference to its consumers within Bihar. 
The Commissioner of Industries replied that industries cannot be pressurised to locate their 
Head Quarter in the State and denied that any losses in terms of taxation, excise etc. were 
incurred by the State due to this fact. For Scrap sale, the Commissioner asserted that though 
no such law for reserving scrap for units in the State existed he had, nevertheless, written to 
the Managing Director of Bokaro Steel Plant to give preference to Bihar's units before 
sending it outside. 
The Sub-Committee took up the case of non-payment of subsidies to K.V.I. for the last 
two years at the district level, due to which it was becoming sick. The Commissioner of 

111 . 
Industries replied that two crore rupees had been received from the State Government 
alongwith claims from 40 districts. Verification process was underway. The money has been 
placed in a special account. 
The State officials pleaded that for North ·and Central Bihar, which are rich in sugar 
production, they had got 28 application for setting up sugar mills, since 1991. But the 
Ministry of Industry had sanctioned only one application which was a pathetic situation. 
They further pleaded that Government of India was overlooking Bihar for declaration of 
certain areas as backward areas and giving them tax exemptions. They stated that Bihar had 
65 areas with industrial backwardness. The Sub-Committee was fm1her apprised that 
Industry in Bihar was facing a severe shortage of working capital which was further 
contributing to industrial backwardness. The Sub-Committee apprised the officials that there 
were several small Khandsari units which were being exploited e.g. Riga Sugar Mills in 
Sitamarhi had kept five prakhands reserved for itself. The mill owner had stated on record 
before the Sub-Committee that he would neither put up Kantas there, nor dereserve it. The 
officials promised to take action in the matter. 
The Sub--Committee was further apprised that by March the State would also take 
decision to privatise the sugar mills owned by it. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that a world bank project with Rs. 1.55 Million is 
soon going to begin to increase efficiency of Bihar's current power projects. They will give 
report on investment programme, load forecast and least-cost option. 
The Sub-Committee also enquired about non-conventional energy projects and was told 
that they were not commercially viable for the State. Nevertheless, bio-gas plants are there, 
and the State is seeking to develop wind power. 
Thereafter, the Sub-Committee asked from General Manager telephones the reason for 
Bihar being at the bottom of telecom facilities with only 3 'lakh connections. General 
Manager pointed out !ack of coordination at State level. He assured that if the Secretary of 
Industry gives a copy of the planned projects, Telephone Department would take action to 
develop the hfrastructure accordingly. He asserted that telephones were available in Ran chi 
and P:.otn;.J on demand and big cities were having electronic exchanages with sophisticated 
':~quipment. The Sub-Committee agreed that while it would be true of big cities, but the 
picture was hardly rosy in villages, where it was sometimes difficult even to communicate 
between one block and another, within the same district. Waiting lists in villages and district, 
it was pointed out were large. The Sub-Committee did not agree to the submission of 
General Manager telephones that cabling had been done in 50% of the State. The Sub­
Committee asked him to submit a detailed report. 
The Sub-Committee felt that irregularities were committed in the allotment of industrial 
land. The state officials denied this. The Sub-Committee suggested the state officials to hold 
camps for allotment of industrial land. The state official answered in the affirmative and 
informed the Sub--Committee about their renewed effort regarding infrastructural 
upgradation, viz., roads, water supply schemes. A Committee under the Chief-Secretary of 
the State was trying to work out rehabilitation of 18 sick corporations and some mergers 
were consequently, likely to take place. 
The state officials represented to the Sub-Committee that th:? most important ·financial 
organisation of the State, B.S.F.C., is itself facing sickness du~ to bad recoveries. 75% of 
units financed by B.S.F.C. are in bad shape. The care for rehabilitation of B.S.F.C. has 
been pending with I.D.B.I. for last two months. There are also, scores of medium and SSI 
units in the State, which are sick. A proposal is under way, to make a Committee under the 

112 
Directorate of Industries to work out a revival package for the SSI units which are outside 
the" purview ·of BIFR. 
On the basis 9f the evidence tendered, the Sub-Committee observed that the condition 
of industrial units in Bihar is in bad shape due to scores of reasons, main being the shortage 
of funds and erratic power supply position in the State. 
The Sub-Committee observed that the other reason for backwardness in the region is 
the deteriorated conditions of big industries on which many small and medium industries 
were dependant. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that banks must increase 
their finance in the State to give a new lease to the industries. The Sub-Committee also feels 
that improvement in the power supply position is equally important alongwith the finance. 
The Sub-Committee lauded the provisions of New Industrial Policy, 1995 of the Government 
of Bihar wherein elaborate plans for creating industrial environment has been laid down. 
But on the other hand the Sub-Committee is apprehensive that these aim and objectives of 
new industrial policy must not glow on papers only but put into practice to change the 
industrial scenario of the State of Bihar. For this the Sub-Committee desired that the 
Central Government should also extend its cooperation by way of incentives to make it a 
success. The Sub-Committee further observed that the various industrial areas development 
authorities which were created for acquisition of land and development of infrastructure in 
their respective areas have not worked upto the expectation. Accordingly the Sub­
Committee recommends that instead of having offices at different places, these authorities 
may be monitored from one place which win also reduce the establi~hment cost. These 
Authorities must shed their bureaucratic attitude and help in develoqing an environment 
conducive to industrial growth in the State. f 
The Sub-Committee also observed that in view of the good harvest of vegetables and 
fruits in few districts, steps need to be taken to exploit this potential by way of establishing 
food processing units in these areas. 
The Sub-Committee feels that there is urgent need to consider ena·t~ing a uniform tax 
structure throughout the country since in many parts of the country entrepreneurs are 
suffering due to different tax structure ·in different States. 
The Sub-Committee further recommends that the head of a public sector undertaking 
must be for a full term and there should not be any time gap arrangement since it is not 
good for the health of the public sector undertaking. 
On observing the conditions of sick public sector undertakings under the control of the 
State Government, the Sub-Committee recommends that some amount of NRF may also be 
provided for workers of these public sector undertakings. 
Lastly the Sub-Committee recommends that to improVe disbursement of loan under 
PMRY, performance of bank particularly branch manager's performance may be entered in 
their annual performance report since this would encourage them to work harder. Secondly, 
the Branch Manager of banks fear that if loan under PMRY is given without security, 
recovery will not be made and they will face problem. Hence, the Sub-Committee feels that 
this accountability procedure about fixing responsibility needs to be modified and if they 
follow RBI guidelines and then a loan is not recovered, personal responsibility should not be 
fixed. 
Study Report of visit of Sub-Committee III of Department-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry to Gurgaon, Patna, Dhanbad and Bokaro during 9th to 12th January, 
1996 -
The Sub-Committee-III in its first visit to Bihar in November, 1995 had covered Patna, 

113 
Ranchi, Muzaffarpur and Sitamarhi. However that visit to Bihar turned out to be incomplete 
due to certain reasons, one being that the visit to Dhanbad had to be postponed due to pr~~· 
occupation of the local Administration in rescuing trapped miners. Even in Bokaro, the Sub­
Committee could not hold deliberations properly in the absence of the Managing Director of 
Bokaro Steel Plant. Certain vital issues raised by the Committee remained unanswered and 
the Sub-Committee had decided to visit Bokaro again to clarify these issues. 
In this lag of visit the Sub-Committee started its business with discussion with workers 
and management of Maruti Udyog Limited, Gurgaon on 9th January, 1996. On lOth 
Jaimary, the Sub-Committee left for Patna where it met with the officials of Industry 
Department of Central Government and the State Government · in connection with 
development of six Growth Centres approved for Bihar and als9 the progress of Integrated 
Infrastructural Development Scheme. The Sub-Committee left the same day for Dhanbad 
and on 11th January it held discussion with ·District Collector, Dhanbad followed by two 
separate discussions with management and workers of Bharat Coking Coal Limited. 
On 12th January, 1996 while at Bokaro, the Sub-Committee held detailed discussions 
with managements of Hindustan Steel Works Construction Limited, Bharat Refractories 
Limited and Bokaro Steel Plant respectively. 
The details of study visit are given in succeeding pages. 
Visit of Maruti Udyog Ltd. at Gurgaon 
The Sub-Committee III started its business on 9th January, 1996 with some internal 
discussion at Delhi and left for Gurgaon for visit to Maruti Udyog Ltd. at Gurgaon. The 
Convenor of this Sub-Committee Shri Naval Kishore Rai could not attend the visit due to 
his pre-occupation at Patna and in his absence Shri Manjay Lal, MP presided over the 
meeting of Sub-Committee at Gurgaon. 
The Sub-Committee visited various units of the Plant and noted that use of latest 
automobile technology in the plant has helped in manufacturing of cars by Maruti Udyog 
Ltd. In October, 1995 the plant capacity of 200,000 unit per annum was enhanced to 
2,50,000 units per annum. 
The Sub-Committee gathered that Maruti Workers Employees Union is the only 
workers union of this company. At present 3800 workers are the ·members of this union. The 
representatives of the union informed the Sub-Committee that workers put in 7% hour out 
of eight (8) working time in a day, which is a unique thing. They informed the Sub­
Committee that after the liberalisation, large number of facilities for workers have been ' 
curtailed. Increased dearness amount has not been released by the management till now and 
those who have crossed the bonus ceilings could not get the amount despite Government's 
instructions on this behalf. The Sub-Committee was informed by the workers that the union 
had opposed at the time of increase of equity share of Suzuki and the management of 
Maruti had also assured that every thing would normalise gradually but till date nothing has 
come out from management side. The Sub-Committee was given to understand that out of 
50% of equity of Maruti, only 0.26% is to be given to Maruti employees mutual fund and 
Government of India is not thinking any amendment on this equity pact. At present there 
are no union's activity due to the suspension of nine employees. The represeg.tatives of 
workers union requested the Sub-Committee to look into this matter sympathetically and 
recommend their case. 
The Sub-Committee, thereafter, met with the management of Maruti Udyog Ltd. The 
Sub-Committee was informed by the management that the company was established as a 
Government company in February, 1981. At that time target of equity was proposed to 
/ 

114 
60:40. But that time none of any foreign company was ready to sign on this 40% equity. So 
considering the recession in automobile industry in the country at that time a joint venture 
agreement was signed with Suzuki motor company of Japan in October, 1982, by which Suzuki 
acquired 26% share of the equity, with an option to increase it to 40% after five years. Suzuki 
exercised this option in 1987 by increasing its equity to 40%. Suzuki Motor Corporation 
further increased equity to 50% in the year 1992 converting Maruti Udyog Ltd. into a non· 
Government company. At present Maruti's total equity is Rs. 1322.92 million. Maruti Udyog 
Ltd. is at present adopting the managerial practice of Japan. This year Maruti's profit is Rs. 
600 crores; last year it was Rs. 265 crores. This year total domestic production target is 2.75 
lakhs units. The Sub·Committee was informed that the company is not able to fulfil the 
d'emands of cars. At present demand is 2.75 lakh car per annum. Maruti 800 and its OMNI 
cars are in great demand. Besides car financing process has also helped its marketing. The 
Sub-Committee was informed that to meet the demands of the customers and to provide them 
with ex,:dlent service, the company has developed an extensive marketing and after sales 
servi.::e ne:·.vork. At present the company has 133 dealers, 31 spare parts stockists and over 700 
Maruti authorised service stations spread all over the country. Maruti has now started exports 
of its cars. Till August, 1995, the company has exported over 90,000 vehicles to more then 70 
countries, and 80% of its exports has been to Europe. The Sub·Committee was informed that 
more than 250 ancillary units have been developed by Maruti. This year the company will buy 
parts and other items worth Rs. 3200 crores from the vendors. When enquired about the 
relation with the workers, the management informed that the relation are harmonious and the 
company have established a suggestion scheme and quality circles for the purpose. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that when the Maruti Company was launched, 
excise duty was around Rs. 6000 per car which has gone up around Rs. 49000 per car and this 
is the main reason of price hike of the Maruti car. The Sub·Committee was informed that so 
far as the design and research work is concerned, all design and research are being done by 
the Suzuki Motor Corporation which wants its royalty and this is the main reason of increase 
of equity shares of Suzuki. 
f...feeti1J6 with State Government Officials of Bihar regarding Growth Centres and Integrated 
lnfrastructural Development Centres 
On lOth January, 1996 while at Patna the Sub·Committee first met with the Officials of 
Industry Department of the Central Government and the State Government on the 
development of Growth Centres and Integrated Infrastructural Development Scheme in 
Bihar. The Sub-Committee was informed that out of the six Growth Centres allotted for 
Bihar, two Growth Centres viz., Begusarai and Hazaribagh have been sanctioned and the 
Central Government has released a sum of Rupees 50 Lakhs to each of these centres. It was 
further informed that appraisal reports in respect of Growth Centres at Bhagalpur, Chhapra 
and Muzaffarpur have been received from IFCI and the Ministry of Industry has sought 
clarification on certain points from the State Government. On being asked to specify the 
points on which the Ministry of Industry have sought clarifications, the State Government 
officials informed that IFCI wants an agreement from State Government on the availability of 
requisite electricity. The lFCI further seeks State Government comments as to why 
agricultural land is being acquired for these Centres and lastly the IFCI also wants to be 
convinced about presence of perennial water resource for the Centres. 
The Sub-Committee impressed upon the State Government officials to expedite their 
replies to objections raised by IFCI. The Sub-Committee strongly recommends that much 
awaited appraisal report from IFCI, regarding Growth Centre at Darbhanga may be expedited 
on urgent basis. 

115 
The next item in the agenda was Integrated Infrastructure Development Scheme. The 
Sub-Committee has been given to understand that the Scheme was initiated in June, 1992 
for promoting and strengthening small, tiny and village Industries in ruraVbackward areas 
with active participation of State Government/financial institutions. Under the Scheme 50 
Centres are proposed to be set up at the cost of Rupees 5 crores which will be paid by the 
Government of India and SIDBI in ratio of 2:3. The State Officials infonned that the State 
Government has selected Fatuha (Patna), Belchampa (Garhwa), Alamnagar (Madhepura) 
and Gopalganj for Integrated Infrastructure Dcvel"pment Scheme. BITCo had been 
authorised to prepare project report for the LI.D. Scheme in June, 1994. IADA Patna, 
Ranchi, Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur was selected nodal agency for implementation of the 
Integrated Infrastructure Development Scheme. BITCo has prepared the project report of 
Integrated infrastructure Development Scheme at Fatuha (Patna) and Belchampa 
(Garhwa). 
The Sub-Committee noted that Government of India has been communicating with State 
Government on the issue of setting up liD centres but no response coming forth. The Sub· 
Committee further noted that the State Government has not even sent its report on the liD 
centre for Sitamarhi to Government of India. The Sub-Committee urges upon State 
Government to explore the possibilities of setting up of more liD Centres in the State in the 
interest of overall industrial development of the State. 
Bharat Coldng Coal Limited (BCCL) 
\ 
The Sub-Committee met the workers .and management of BCCL at Dhanbad with 
regard to the status of the company in overall industrial scenario of the State. 
The Sub-Committee gathered that the coal region of the company is spread from 
Bardhman to Ranchi in an area of 300 kms. The production is 30 mt. per annum. Around 
4.5 mt. of coal is sent to steel plants through washeries. At present 6 to 7 mt. coking coal 
is imported as the internal availability of the same is very less. The company is incurring 
loss to the tune of Rs. 350 crores per year .and presently referred to BIFR. There is 30% 
coking coal and rest non-coking coal. About 40 mt. good quality coal is under fire. The 
management informed that world bank has extended aid for controlling the fire. The 
project report is being prepared. According to the management, if the population of Jharia 
is evacuated, the mines could live for 50 lllOre years. 
Highlighting the reasons for losses, the management pointed out that SAIL is not 
extending the required cooperation. SAIL is paying Rs. 3300/t on coal imported from 
Australia while it pays only Rs. 1500/t to BCCL. According to the management if SAIL 
agrees to pay Rs. 2000/t BCCL could not go to BIFR. Thus SAIL is earning profits at 
BCCL's losses. 
Other problems include a number of coal theft cases. Though the company is bearing 
Rs. 2 crores per month wages bill of CISF still the small theft cases here and there have 
been very difficult to be controlled. The management further mentioned about the 
depleted condition of 92 washeries. These washeries have lost efficiency and atleast 55 
crores are required for their modernisation·. The management also informed that the work 
culture and the discipline in the company is very bad. 
While interacting with the workers union the Sub-Committee gathered that company's 
production can be increased by inviting workers participation in management. On the 
question of mechanisation and planning the workers wanted both mechanised and semi 
mechanised patterns on the lines of China. The workers further wanted that open cast 
mining be suspended and better working condition for workers be created. As regards· 

116 
work culture the unions felt that the same can be improved by workers participation 111 
management. 
The Sub-Committee feels that it is still time to improve the work culture. For this the 
management and the workers should sit together and set up a joint committee to monitor 
the same~ 
Meeting with District Collector, Dhanbad on Industrial backwardness 
At Dhanbad, the Sub-Committee first met the District authorities about the overall 
industrial status of the district. The District Collector informed that in Dhanbad there are 6 
large scale, 26 medium scale industries and about 4076 (435 SSI units and 3641 Tring units) 
registered units out of 435, 106 SSI units are sick. No foreign investment has so far come in 
the district. However NRis have been suggested to set up Food Processing Industry. 
Under Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana last year out of a target of 1250 cases only in 302 
cases loan could be disbursed. This year the target is 1719 out of which disbursment has 
been done in only 147 cases. That means only 11.6% achievement. The District Collector 
informed that the reasons for poor performance is that bank's efficiency is calculated with 
.deposits it has and not by disbursments. The district authorities have brought to the notice 
of different agencies the poor performance of banks. 
When asked whether any utilisation survey has been undertaken in respect of the 
disbursed cases, the District Collector replied that all units are working. The District 
Collector however made it clear that the banks are notaccountable to State Government 
and if district authorities are to be asked about Stattbovernment's performance on PMR Y 
some con.trol on banks could be desirable at district level. 
The Sub-Committee feels that the District Collector may be empowered to analyse the 
performance of banks under the scheme. The Sub-Committee equally feels it important that 
bank authorities should also realise the seriousness of the scheme and cooperate with district 
authorities to the maximum possible in making the scheme a success. 
The Sub-Committee was very disappointed togather that the CD ratio in the district is 
18%. It wonders as to how the area can industrially grow with such a low CD ratio. The 
Sub-Committee suggested to the bank representative that a meeting of district bankers be 
held on urgent bases and a note on reasons and suggestions for improving CD ratio be 
prepared and sent for consideration of State Government, Central Government and the Sub­
Committee. 
In a communication subsequently sent to the Sub-Committee the Bank of India, 
Dhanbad indicated following suggestions for improvement in CD ratio:-, 
1. Identification of potential units in the District; 
2. Injection of working capital and term loan as per requirement; 
3. Financing in aggressive manner to Self-Help Group for prospective projects; 
4. Removal of Bank notion for non-recovery of debts; 
5. Adequate powers to be vested with the individual banks 111 line with the Non­
Banking Financial Companies; 
6. Setting up proper industrial climate in the District; 
7. Government sympathy for adequate power supply. This is one of the major 
impediments for industrial growth and improvement in Credit Deposit Ratio; 
8. Adequate linkage of coal and timely delivery should be ensured by CIUBCCL; 

117 
9. Infra-structural development is to be strengthened; 
10. Setting up commercial trade complexes at strategic places like, Jharia, Chirkunda, 
Katrasgharh, Kirkend and Bank More; and 
11. Composite plan for industrial growth, service oriented industries along side G.T. Road. 
-Viz : transport repair shops/ garage motel facilities, breakdown van etc. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Central as well as the State Government would take 
note of the aforesaid suggestions and devise some concrete method in consultation with the 
Bank Authorities to improve the CD ratio. 
Hindustan Steel Wol'lfS Construction Limited (HSCL) 
The · management informed the Sub-Committee that Hindustan Steel Works 
Construction Limited ~as incorporated in the year 1964 with the primary objective of 
creation of public sector organisation capable of undertaking complete construction of 
modern integrated steel plants from the stage of site investigation to the stage of 
commissioning of the plant. Pooling up the available expertise and know-how in the 
company today has within its ambit of activities a wide range of specialised work in steel 
sector, power plants, dam construction, bridge, coal handling plants, underground 
communication and transport system, industrial and township e,omplexes etc. involving high 
degree of planning, coordination and sophisticated construction techniques. 
Elaborating the highlights of the company the management informed that the company 
earned profit till 1977-78. However slowing down of construction tempo in steel plants 
coupled with unplanned requirement of workforce resulted in accumulated losses. Turn 
around started from 1994-95 under a no profit no loss situation. The turnover of the 
company has risen from Rs. 239 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 390 crores in 1994-95 with a 
projection of Rs. 411 crores in 1995-96. Even under the existing financial strain, HSCL 
generated Rs. 380 crores which takes care of 97% of direct annual expenditure. 
The management informed that last year Bokaro Steel Plant gave an order of Rs. 117 
crores which is not sufficient enough. Highlighting the turnover position of the company the 
management indicated that the company has taken up I completed certain important 
assignments such as Reheating Furnace No.4, Modernisation Package of Continous Casting 
Plant and Rebuilding of Coke Over Battery No. 4. The management pleaded before the 
Committee that a little work support from SAIL awarding even 25% of its annual outlay of 
additional, modification and repair works I operational jobs approximately valued at Rs. 200 
crores only will enable the company to gainfully engage its workforce. On the front of Non­
Steel Sector, HSCL has completed prestigious work of International Stadium at Cochin. 
The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that HSCL directly employs over 
14000 employees and indirectly supports half a lakh contract workforce besides other 
ancillary support services. Out of this technical strength of the company is 2100. There has 
been no recruitment in the company during last five years. Infact there is an excess man­
power of six thousand. 
On the basis of the evidence of the Management and the papers I document submitted 
before it, the Sub-Committee has come to the conclusion that the company is faced with the 
problems such as (i) Lack of adequate orders, (ii) Lack of strong technology base, (iii) Low 
Equity base and huge burden of Government loan & interest and (iv) Virtual withdrawal of 
purchase & price preference. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government of India would 
sympathetically look into these problems and come to the help of the company as. far as 
possible keeping in view the contribution of the company in the steel sector of the country. 

118 
The Committee also urge upon Government to ensure orders for the company so. that it may 
be able to strengthen its technological base. It should also be well within the consideration of 
Government of India to restore the purchase and price preference of the company. SAIL may 
perhaps be in a better position to work out some solution for revival of the company. 
Bharat Refractories Limited 
The Management informed the Sub-Committee that the Bharat Refractories Limited 
was incorporated on 22nd July, 1974 and at present it has three Units viz (i) Bhandaridah 
Refractories Plant at Bhandaridah, (ii) Ranchi Road Refra~tories Plant at Ramgarth and (iii) 
Bhilai Refractories Plant at Bhilai. The Company is incurring losses and referred to BIFR 
since 1992. BIFR had appointed IDBI as the operating agency for working out the revival 
plan. The recommendation of the BIFR on the revival plan submitted by IDBI is awaited. 
Highlighting the problems faced by the Company the Management informed that the 
Company is not getting the orders. The following major constraints were indicated:-
!. Increase in the cost of inputs such as raw materials, fuel, power, salary and wages, 
etc. Although -some of the finished products fetches higher price, the price rise is not 
in proportion to the price rise of cost of inputs, 
2. Frequent power failures particularly units situated in Bihar, 
3. Shortage of Raw Materials, 
4. Lack of Working ~apital, 
5. Accumulation of Inventory leading to liquidity problems, 
6. Lack of adequate orders, particularly for premium products such as Mag-Carbon 
Bricks, Refractories for Sliding Gate Systems, Blast Furnace Bricks and Masses etc. 
When asked, the Management indicated that help from Government I SAIL I Financial 
Institution of the following sectors would be very useful in revival of the Company:-
1. Financial: 
(A) Approval of Revival Package consisting, inter-alia:-
(a) Waiver of interest on loans to Government amounting to Rs. 60.36 crores, 
(b) Conversion of 50% of Plan Loan amounting to Rs. 39.76 crores into equity, 
(c) Conversion of Non-Plan loans amounting to Rs. 12.05 crores to '0' rate interest 
of Debentures. 
(B) Sanction of Additional working capital facilities. 
2. New Projects: 
Government to fund Refractories for Continuous Casting Project costing Rs. 2v.00 crores 
approx. This would help the Company to meet growing demand for hi-tech refractories. 
3. Marketing: 
(a) To secure more orders for Mag-Carbon Bricks, Blast Furnace Bricks and Masses. 
(b) SAIL to help in lifting the inventory of finished goods against orders. 
The Sub-Committee takes· note of immense contribution of the Company in growth of 
Steel Sector over the years. It is somewhat unusual that inordinate delay in proceedings of 
BIFR in respect of Companies like BRL leads to demotivation amongst the workers. The Sub­
Committee would urge upon Government of India to expedite the revival of the Company on 
the basis of suggestions put forth by the IDBI. 

119 
Meeting with Bokaro Steel Plant 
The Sub-Committee before visiting Bokaro Steel Plant had received answers from the 
management on a questionnaire prepared by it on the basis of a discusson earlier held with 
the management in November, 1995. Apart from that the management informed the Sub­
Committee about certain problems the plant is facing. It was given to understand that BCCL 
would not be able to supply the required quality of coal for the Coke Oven and Blast 
Furnace. Further elaborating the position of coal, the management informed that the Blast 
Furnace requires more quantity of coal. Similarly lack of coal is also adversely effecting the 
growth in hot metal sector. When enquired as to why the plant is preferring import of coal 
at a much higher price to that coal available from BCCL, the management informed that 
they will import coal only to the extent of its requirement not met by CIL. It was further 
clarified by the management that the heat value of coal is determined by the ash, fixed 
carbon, Volatile Matters and Inherent Moisture. Sulphur has no affect on heat value. 
Though Indian Coal has low sulphur, but due to presence of high ash, the heat value is low 
compared to low ash imported coking coal. 
When the Sub-Committee enquired about the constraints in extending civil works to 
HSCL, the Bokaro Steel Plant Management informed that of late HSCL has been 
transferring the work to some other agencies on contract basis which could be stopped. On 
the question of support to Hindustan Engineering Corporation the management informed 
that Bokaro Steel Plant has extended full support to HEC whenever required by giving 
Advance payment against purchase orders. Sometimes raw materials as well as bought out 
items have been provided for completion of urgent jobs although it is not stipulated in the 
scope of BSL. Apart from this regular orders are being placed by Projects Division, Project 
Modernisation as well as Contract Cell for IPU schemes. Delivery extension has been 
accorded without any financial recovery. 
On the question of future requirement of steel in the country the management informed 
that the perception of BSP about future requirement of steel in the flat product category is 
to be around 16 MT for the domestic market alone out of which HR products will comprise 
a market demand of 8.5 MT and CR products near about 7.5 MT. Considering the futuristic 
d'emand, BSP is considering to expand its capacity to the level of 5.25 MT of liquid steel 
corresponding to saleable steel production of 4.74 MT. 
The Sub-Committee thereafter enquired about the reasons of not reporting 45 theft 
cases of scrap/finished product in the plant since 1987. The management clarified that in 
most of these cases recovery of scrap has been made from outside the perimeter wall of the 
plant. In every such case an enquiry is initially made to find out and fix responsibility. But in 
these cases most of the property is found in an abandoned condition or it is being collected 
by miscreants outside the plant for petty gain. CSF regularly checks the area and wherever 
such collection is found it is brought inside the plant. 
The Sub-Committee thereafter deliberated qn the purchase policy .of the plan~ 
particularly purchase of clothes. The Sub-Committee desired that the management may 
approach National Textiles Corporation for such purchases. The management informed that 
NTC cannot meet the requirement but assured that possibilities would be explored this time. 
On the issue of deputing employees abroad for training, some discriminatory attitude of the 
management was pointed out by the Committee. The management assured that any case if 
brought to its notice would:/ be examined. 

STUDY REPORT(S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-IV 

SUNDAY, THE lOTH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
I 
The Sub-Committee-IV of Committee on Industry met at 11.30 A.M. in the Circuit 
House, Tamulpur, Guwahati. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri K. K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND STATE INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT_ 
1. Shri P. Bhuyan, A.C.S., D.C. Nalbari 
2. Slui P. Dutta, l.A.S., Director (Industry) 
3. Shri N.R. Sarma, General Manager, D.I.C., Nalbari 
4. Shri P.C. Deka, A.C.S., Circle Officer, Tamulpur 
5. Shri l3.K. Das, Joint Director (Industry) 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
The Convenor introduced the members and officers of the Sub-Committee and 
explained in brief the background and the purpose of the visit of the Sub-Committee. 
The District Magistrate, Nalbari welcomed the Committee and introduced the officials 
of his side. Shri P. Dutta, while giving a brief account of the industrial scenario of the 
district informed that Nalbari was originally a part of Kamrup and was carved out of it in 
1984 as a seperate district having a major portion of land producing paddy and jute. He also 
informed that there was a spinning mill which, due to some problem of electricity supply 
etc., remains almost closed. He also informed that there was large scope for establishing 
cane and bamboo industry in the district and SSI Units of tea waste. The district industry 
centre was set up. The area has almost no marketing facilities. Fertilizer consumption is very 
low. Remi cultivation, which is of very high quality, is six times tougher than cotton is 
proposed to be taken up under UNDP assistance. Cultivation of medicinal plants also need 
to be encouraged in the district. The Sub-Committee was also informed that some local 
people of the district were paying irrigation tax to Bhutan. However, there was no record as 
to who was collecting the said tax and there was no way to check it. It was also informed 
that due to ·lack of transport facilities, good roads, means of communications and erratic 
supply of power, the expansion of the present industrial un,its and the establishment of new 
SSI Units was suffering. 
The convenor suggested the officials that they undertake a techno-economic survey of 
the area regarding marketing so that concrete measures for industrial development of the 
123 

, I 
124 
district may be taken up. One of the members suggested that since coconuts were grown in 
the district in plenty these could be sold outside of the district as well. He also suggested 
that the farmers should be encouraged to increase the yield of coconuts. 
The meeting adjourned at 1.15 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 
Thereafter the Committee paid a visit to 3-4 small units established under the Prime 
Minister's Rozgar Yojana. The members asked certain question from the beneficiaries and 
got the first hand information. 
II 
The Committee also paid a visit to the Assam Polyester Cooperative Society Limited, 
Tulsibari, Rangia. The Committee was shown round the various units of the factory and 
Members obtained information about all the stages from the raw material to the finished 
cloth. Thereafter the Sub-Committee met at 5.00 P.M. at the Circuit House, Rangia, Assam, 
to hear the views of some important residents of the city and some officials of various 
organisations who represented trade and industry of the district. 
Shri P. Dutta apprised the Sub-Committee of the working of the various projects in the 
district. Some representatives of industry and trade demanded the establishment of a railway 
division, expansion of gypsum industry, various vegetables and other perishable food 
products, rubber, jute industry, tractor industry, li~e-stone, plastic, cement, ply-wood 
industry and the establishment of a 132 KV, power station in their district. 
It was further demanded that one modern industrial training centre should also be 
established. Shri Durgadatta Agrawala, Ex-Chairman, Municipal Board, Rangia informed 
that Rangia was surrounded by rivers which were causing heavy erosion of soil and this was 
a threat to the units situated on the bank of the rivers and demanded that this erosion 
should be stopped immediately so that industrial development of the district could be 
promoted. 
The meeting adjourned at 6.00 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

MONDAY, THE 11TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee proceeded to Bongaigaon and paid visit to various units and plants 
of the Bongaigaon Refinery and Petro.-Chemicals Limited. Then members obtained 
iofonnation from the engineers concerned on the working of the plants/units of the refinery. 
Thereafter the Committee assembled at 6.45 P.M. in the BRPL, Guest House. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Convenor 
2. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govindramt Miri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND OFFICERS OF 
BRPL 
1. Shri Aftab Ahmed, District Magistrate 
2. Shri S.B. Kar, A.D.M. 
3. Shri P. Dutta, I.A.S., Director (Industry) 
4. Shri N.K. Talukdar, Functional Manager, DIC, Sub-Centre, Bongaigaon 
5. Shri R.K. Chawla, G.M. DIC, Kokrajhar and Bongaigaon 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
Shri Aftab Ahmed welcomed the members and officers of the Committee. He also gave 
a brief account of the circumstances which prevailed in the city before its development and 
how the city reached its present state of development. 
Shri P. Dutta informed the Committee that Bongaigaon was carved out as a seperate 
district in 1989. Agriculture is the main stay of the people. There is large scope of 
employment in the district. Though BPRL is a huge industrial unit but not many ancillary 
units have been developed there. There is a large scope for developing spinning and yarn 
units. 
Among the main hurdles in the way of industrialisation was the poor condition of 
infrastructure particularly roads and power supply. The Committee itself experienced the 
first hand knowledge of almost unmotorable roads while travelling from Guwahati to 
Bongaigaon which is a national highway. Another proble~ was that of banking facilities. 
There are very few branches of banks in the district resulting in lack of banking facilities 
which affects industrial development adversely. On the power front it was informed that 
there was a Thermal Power, Unit of 60 MW capacity but due to the shortage of wagons 
resulting in short supply of coal the project is not working to its full capacity. The record of 
the central organisations functioning in the district is also not upto the mark. ' 
Regarding benefits under the PMRY, the Committee was informed that the banks 
125 

..... \'; .. 
126 
working in the district were not showing any expansion of banking facilities due to fear of 
militants. Moreover the banks were slow in sanctioning loans to the entrepreneurs whose 
names were recommended by the concerned authorities. In cases where loans had been 
sanctioned by banks, disbursement of loans was very tardy. The Committee observed that an 
indepth study should be made regarding clubbing of profit making and loss incurring units of 
one company to BIFR as has been done in the case of Hindustan Fertilizers and Hindustan 
Paper Mill. Profit making units are made to suffer at the cost of loss making units. 
The meeting then adjourned at 8.15 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks . 
__,.,.~,_?[;;:,~~,- ' ,- ,,.. 
...,_ •. , ....-..·- ...... J .. ~ - . 
I "• • I 

TUESDAY, THE 12m SEPTEMBEl, 1995 
Sub-Committee- IV paid a visit to Ashok Paper Mill, Jogighopa, Assam. The Committee 
went round the various branches/units of the mill. Approximately all the units were about to 
be commissioned by the end of October, 1995, and therefore the Committee could not see the 
mill in working condition. During discussions that followed the mill visit, the members raised 
some questions and obtained information in respect of the working of the mill. Thereafter the 
Committee proceeded to Goalpara and assembled there in the Circuit House at 12.15 P.M. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT 
1. Shri M.C. Jauhari, I.A.S., OM, Goalpara . 
2. Shri K.D. Pathak, ACS, ADM, Goalpara 
3. Shri P. Dutta, I.A.S., Director. (Industry) 
4. Shri Dilip Roy, G.~ .• DIC, Goalpara 
5. Shri U.C. Choudhury, E.E., ASEB 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
The Committee was informed that Goalpara was surrounded by Bangladesh on one side 
and Meghalaya and the river Bramputra on the other. The district has for the present no rail 
and road connection and waterway was/J,he only means of transport connecting the district 
with other parts of the State. There is -Hb major industry in the district worth mentioning. It 
has been declared no industry district. The Committee was also informed that the industrial 
backwardness of the district was due to inadequate financial assistance, lack of power supply, 
banking fucilities, good means of transport, means of tele-communications etc. The 
Committee was also informed that the district had a large scope for industries relating sheetal 
patti, herbal based medicines, food processing banana chips, granite etc. The boulder supplied 
to Bangladesh had also scope for industrial development in the district. 
The Committee was further informed that in the district there were many "one man bank 
branches" which were unable to take any decision. Therefore all cases were referred to higher 
authorities for taking decisions which resulted in undue delays. 
Regarding PMRY, the Committee was informed that banks were reluctant and resort to 
delays in sanctioning and making payment of loans sanctioned by concerned authoritie6 by 
referring these cases to regional offices. 
127 

128 
The Committee desired that the financial institutions reluctant to disburse the amount of 
loans to the beneficiaries should be lenient in giving the loans to beneficiaries. It was 
brought to the notice of the Committee that coal was present very near to Goalpara and 
there should not be any problem in setting up coal based power project in the dis trier ..... 
The meeting then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

WEDNESDAY, THE 13TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
I 
The Sub-Committee proceeded to Jagiroad and visited the Hindustan Paper Corporation 
Limited at 11.15 A.M. The Sub-Committee saw the working of various units of the plant 
there. The Committee had informal discussion with some of the officials namely Shri S.M. 
Rahman, Executive Director, Shri P.S. Nirwan, ACT, G.M. (Works) and Shri Binod Bihari, 
Deputy General Manager (P & A). The Committee was informed that Hindustan Paper 
Corporation Limited was a Public Sector Undertaking of the Government of India and was 
engaged in the manufacture of superior quality writing and printing paper. The Committee 
was also informed that though bamboo was available locally but the other raw materials like 
lime, alum, coal, china clay, soap stone, powder, salt cake rasine and other dyes and 
chemicals were not available locally. These item were not manufactured in the State and the 
Mill had to depend on other States producing these chemicals. This increases the production 
cost of the paper. The Committee was also informed that the operations of the Unit were 
not viable without financial restructuring and the Unit was not in a position to bear the 
interest burden of government loans due to poor performance in the past few years. It was 
demanded that an interest of Rs. 290.16 crores and penal interest of Rs. 186.80 crores of 
Government of India should be written-off. 
II 
The Committee met at 12.45 P.M. at Hotel Bramp~:~tra Ashok, Guwahati. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Convenor 
2. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVE OF STATE GOVERNMENT 
Shri Bizit Saikia, Minister of Industries 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT AND OTHER OFFICIALS 
1. Shri S.C. Das, Commissioner of Industries 
2. Shri M.A. Barbhuyan, Joint Secretary (Industries) 
3. Shri P. Dutta, Director (Industries) 
129 

130 
4. Shri A.K. Saharia, Additional Director (Industries) 
5. Er. I. Nath, General Manager, DIC, Kamrup 
6. Shri P. Mohanaiah, DGM, Guwahati 
7. Shri P.K. Har, General Manager, NABARD, Guwahati 
8. Shri M.H. Jhurani, DGM, SIDBI 
9. Shri S. Ganesh, G.M. IDBI, Nero, Guwahati 
10. Shri K.A. Mathew, Deputy Director, SISI, Guwahati 
11. Shri P.C. Kahoti, Manager {Technical), Assam Financial Corporation 
12. :·,i.,.ri S.K. Sorcar, Secretary, A.F.C. 
13. S.M. Rahaman, Executive Director, H.P.C. Ltd. 
14. !:.c~Ii N.D. Rajkhowa, Sr. M.(Eng.) H.P.C. Ltd. 
15. Shri M.C. Deka, Additional Director, General Administration, Handloom and 
Textiles 
16. Shri S. Kakati, Sr. Dy, Director, National Productivity Council 
17. Wg .. Cdr. (Reta.) P.C. Sarma, G.M. North Eastern Industrial and Technical 
Consultancy Organisation {NEITCO) 
18. Shri Cbairanjit Chaliha, President, All Assam Small Scale Industries Association 
19. Shri J.D. Khandelwal, Vice-President, All Assam Small Scale Association 
20. Shri H.P. Agarwal, N.E. Steel Re-rolling Association, Guwahati 
21. Shri Subhas Agarwal, Vice-President, FINER 
22. Shri S.B. Sharma, Chairman, Rice Mills Association 
23. Shri A.K. Bosthar, Joint Manager, NSIC Ltd. {NER), Guwahati 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
At the outset the Convenor explained the purpose of Committee's visit to the area and 
asked about the difficulties they had in the development and what help they expected from 
the Government of India, Ministry of Industry. 
It was informed to the Committee that although tea and oil industries were about 150 
and 100 years old respectively in the State but _they were still backward. The main reason for 
industrial backwardness was that the concerned Ministries of the Central Government had 
not been providing any backup assistance to supplement the State Government's efforts. The 
Central Government should reformulate its capital subsidy scheme. Export Promotion 
Scheme was told to be adverse to the State's interests. It was demanded that transport 
subsidy scheme should continue for some more time and disbUrsement under the scheme 
should be direct to the industrial units instead·iof through the State Government. Out of the 
four spinning mills in the State, two were closed due to problem of working capital. After 
the securities scam banks were over cautious in lending. Debt-Equity ratio was also adverse 
to the interests of the State. 
It was demanded that norms of financing should be liberalised. Special concession be 
given to the State. Tax benefits for new industries for ten years and deffered policy of 
payment of excise duty was also demanded. 
It was also mentioned to the Committee that a proposal of Gas Cracker Project was 

131 
submitted to the Central Government in 1984 and a letter of intent was issued in 1991 but 
no further progress had been made so far. 
Agro-based industries like Jute, food and vegetables processing, cement, granite 
industry have great potentional in the State. 
Trade and industry representatives were of the view that the Gov~rnment policies were 
not implemented in the true spirit. First of all existing industries should be harnessed, then 
only new one will come up. Limit for SSI Units should be increased. Preference to the 
doubling of railway broad gauge line c(>nnecting Delhi with the N.F. should be completed 
and more trains for the North-Eastern Sector were demanded. It was brought to the notice 
of the Committee that financial institutions were reluctant to finance the various projects in 
the State. While the Industrial Policy of 1991-96 talked about single window clearance, but 
in the State, entrepreneurs were made to go from one department to the other for clearance. 
North Eastern Council was not playing its role upto the expectations of the people. All 
tariffs for .power etc., should be rationalised. 
SSI Units were facing three major obstacles: (i) lack of infrastructure; (ii) lack of proper 
policy; and (iii) lack of package of incentives to provide level playing field. The ·condition of 
national highway was poor. 
The State Government of Assam was also lagging behind in comparison to other States in 
industrial policy formulation. The State h~d not developed any. industrial site worth its 
name. Though Assam was an oil producing State but the retail price of petrol in the State is 
higher than its price in Delhi. The level of industrial backwardness of the State can be 
measured from the. fact that even wax produced in Assam was sent from Assam to 
Maharashtra and the processed candles were brought to the State from there for want of any 
such processing industry in Assam. Ancillary units' development was . very poor. 
The representatives of financial institutions namely NABARD, SIDBI and others 
~nformed the . Committee that their institutions were affording the maximum possible 
financial assistance to the S.S.I units and the entrepreneurs of the N.E. region but still the 
pace of industrial development has not gained full momentum. The representatives of trade 
and industry pleaded very strongly for:-
(1) continuation of transport subsidy because the State can noi be at par with other 
developed States. 
(il) re-introduction of freight equalisation scheme in the N.E . .rqi a.w 
(in) restoration of capital investment subsidy by Central Government in addition to the 
State subsidy, as a special case. 
(iv) excise duty exemption on items produced for mass consumption. 
( v) giving preference to local industries in purchases by Central Government. 
( v1) opening and development of waterways. 
( vi1) setting up of entrepreneurial development institute on a permanent basis. 
( vii1) increasing the air services to the towns of N .E. region. 
(ix) various types of concession in dealing with banking and financial institutions. 
The meeting then adjourned at 2.35 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

WEDNESDAY, THE 13TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
After arriving from Guwahati, the Sub-Committee met at 8.15 P.M. in Hotel Pinewood, 
Shillong. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria)-in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri K.~. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govifdtam Miri 
SECRETARIAT · 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
MINISTER OF INDUSTRIES, GOVERNMENT OF MEGHALAYA 
Shri Mason Singh Sangma 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT AND OTHER OFFICIALS 
1. Shri S. K. Srivastava, lAS, Commissioner and Secretary (Industries Department) 
2. Shri S.S. Gupta, lAS, Commissioner and Secretary, Finance 
3; Shri I(.S. Krogha, lAS, Commissioner and Secretary, IPR 
.,. ·, 4. Shri Shree Ranjan, lAS, Secretary, Agriculture 
5. Shri C.D. Kagnging, lAS, Secretary, Finance 
6. Shri D.S. Prasad, Member Secretary (Technical) ME., SEB. 
7. Shri K.R. Rangad, Director (Industries) 
8. S~ J~R. Myr~h, MD, M.D:C. 
9. Shri S.D. Khengnoir, Chairman, Employment Generation Council 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
· The Committee was informed that there was shortage of infrastructural build-up in the 
State due to which there was industrial backwardness. Industrial growth centres meant for 
industrial development were also suffering due to the lack of ancillary industries. The 
Committee was apprised that the infrastructural build-up was promotional and ·· not 
commercial. The State Government was willing to contribute its ,share in the industrial 
development but the -State had not been receiving any feed . back from the Central 
Government. 
Finance was the most important requirement for industrial growth. There existed the 
North-Eastern Development Bank. However, financial provisions for the priority sector of 
industry were required but all efforts made so far were not meaningful. More financial 
concessions was required to be given to industries in the North-Eastern region. Giving an 
example, it was stated that a comprehensive proposal for the industrial development of the 
region had been pending with the Central Government for the last about more than eight 
months. The grant component which was important for the sustenance of industries had 
132 

133 
been stopped by NABARD. The Credit Deposit ratio was also very low in the case of 
Meghalaya. There was large scope for development of wasteland which could be utilised for 
setting up industries based on mushroom, floriculture, banana, sericulture etc. 
There was also need for setting up another university to conduct research on medicinal 
herbal plantations available in the State. 
In the State of Meghalaya there was large potential for· development in adventure 
sports, golf course, hotel and amusemeut parks, development of tourism, air, water and 
surface transport. Good quality coal was available here. There ·was potential for setting-up 
lime-stone, granite and agro-based industries .• But in the absence of financial package these 
were not being made use of on a large scale and consequently the State was lagging behind 
in industrial development. 
The Power scenario of the State was, however, stated to be of a satisfactory level as the 
State was generating a total hydel power of 185 M. W. against its requirement of about 75 
M. W. The excess of the power generated was sold to the neighbouring States. Still the State 
had potential for a 25 M. W. hydel power project. If some big industrial units were set up in 
the State, it could cope with the power requirement of the units and the State would 
consume the entire power generated. 
It was pleaded before the Committee that for the rapid industrialisation of the State an 
airport, some good hotels, adequate publicity for the region and navigati~nal aids were very 
necessary. 
The representative of the Ministry of Industry of the Central Government enlightened 
the Committee that the Central Government were certainly proposing to make some changes 
in the industrial policy specially for the North-Eastern region. 
The meeting then adjourned at 9.20 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 
/ 

THURSDAY, THE 14TH SEPTEMBER, 1995. 
The Sub-Committee-IV of the Committee on Industry met at 12.00 noon on the 
14th September, 1995, at Circuit House, ·Jowai, Meghalaya. 
PRESET 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria)-in the Cl1.4ir 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF MEGHALAYA GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri N.S. Samant, I.A.S., Deputy Commissioner, Jaintia Hills District 
2. Shri K.F. Rangod, Director of Industries, Meghalaya 
3. Shri George Lyngdoh, General Manager, D.I.C., Jaintia Hills District 
4. Shri S.K. Lato, Managing Director, Jaintia Cement, Latyrke J.H. District 
5. Shri Nixon Pde, Prop·. Pde Electronics, New Hills, Jowai 
6. Shri Thyndamoit Sumer, Prop: Xavada Sprices, Jowai Bank of India, Jowai 
7. Shri B.K. Das Gupta, Branch Manager, United Bank of India, Jowai 
8. Shri I.R. Lanong, Branch Managerl State Bank of India, Jowai 
9. Shri B. Biam, Prop. Mullum Saw Mill, Muswai, Nangbah, Jaintia Hill District 
10. Shri L.C. Khaund, Manager (Civil), C.C.I. 
11. Shri U.K. Baruah, L.O., H.P.C. Ltd. 
12. Shri N.D. Rajwowa, Sr. Manager (Env.) H.P.C. Ltd. 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
·· Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director, Ministry of Industry. 
The Committee was informed that in Jowai there was good production (.\ oranges, 
tejpatta, ginger and some other herbal medicinal plants. The oranges grown in Jowai were of 
very good quality and taste. A part of the produce of this item was being exported to 
Bangladesh. But for want of adequate infrastructure and finance full advantage of the 
potential of these products was not being taken. The Committee was also informed that the 
district as a whole was a hilly region with difficult terrain and, hence, the scope of 
development of other sources like rail or waterways was extremely limited. Roads form the 
vital means of communication in the entir.e district. Thus the . district lacks in adequate 
transportation facilities. The only industry in the district worth the name was a cement 
factory called Jaintia Cement Limited. This cement project had finally cost Rs. 6.5 crores 
instead of Rs. 4.5 crores due to late receipt of· financial assi.stance and due to want of 
adequate transport facilities the ancillary inputs brought from outside cost very high. 
Therefore, the finished product was also expensive. There was also no organised market in 
134 

135 
the district. The Committee was further informed that there was complete lack of industrial 
culture in Jowai as a whole .. The industries were not receiving full financial support from the 
Government of India. The Committee was further informed that generally people of the 
district were engaged in trade of coal, horticultural produce etc. They were also earning 
foreign exchange by exporting coal, orange, ginger, tejpatta etc. to Bangladesh through 
custom check post Dawki. People of the ·district were enterprising but ·for want of 
infrastructural facilities the industrial development was lacking. There was dearth of banking 
facilities in the district. 
Transport subsidy scheme of the Central Government was still unknown in the district. " 
Though the district contributes lakhs of rupees in the form of excise to the exchequer, but 
even that amount was not ploughed back to the district. The rate of excise duty should be 
decreased. 
One very important problem with which this remote district was grappling was that the 
agmark offices were situated in far-off places like Guwahati and Calcutta. This made very 
difficult for the small entrepreneurs to avail themselves of the facilities. 
About Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana, the Committee was very happy to note that all 
the cases earmarked for the district and recommended by the concerned authorities had 
been sanctioned loans with full disbursement. The banks accepted the fact that the recovery 
rate under the scheme was satisfactory. Some beneficiaries under the Y ojana al~o informed 
the Committee that there was potential for expanding the turmeric powder industry as there 
was a good crop of best quality turmeric in the district. The Committee was also apprised 
that saw industry had ~ good ·future ·in the district. 
The Committee was satisfied to know that there was very good co-ordination between 
the bankers and the Small Scale Industrial Units and the district administration. 
The district adminisp-ation strongly pleaded before the Committee for introduci­
capital subsidy to off-'Set the high cost of projects in order to promote industries in the 
district and for extending further the transport subsidy on raw materials as well as on 
fmished products to the region for promoting industrial development of the area. 
The meeting then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 
' \ 

SATURDAY, THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
In the morning the Committee was taken to Ging Tea Estate in Darjeeling. The 
General Manager of the tea gardens took the Committee around the tea plants and showed 
the working of the plant as to how the green tea leaves were given final shape of tea ready 
for marketing. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee met at 10.45 A.M. in Hotel Sinclairs, 
Darjeeling. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
' 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER DEPARTMENTS 
AND DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIES 
1. Shri P.R. Baviskar, lAS, D.M. 
2. Shri D. Chakravarti, I.A.S., Principal Secretary, D.G.H.C. 
3. Shri S.N. Bhutia, Secretary, Industries 
4. Shri N. Lama, G.M., DIC., DGHC, Darjeeling 
5. Shri Swapan Kumar Ghosh, S.E., W.B., S.E.B. 
6. Shri S.K. Roy Dakua, DET/DOT 
7. Shri, Harnarayan Ojha, SDOP (Telecom.) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
1. Shri M.C. Agarwal; President, Darjeeling Chamber of Commerce 
2. Shr~ Sawar Agarwal, Vice-President, Darjeeling Chamber of Commerce 
3. Shri K.R. Agarwala, Vice-President, Darjeeling Chamber of Commerce 
4. Shri P.B. Agarwala, Vice-President, Darjeeling Chambe! of Commerce 
5. Shri .B.M. Garg, PRO, Darjeeling Chamber of Commerce 
6. Shri M.C. Thivani, Ex-President, Darjeeling Chamber of Commerce 
7. Shri Alok Roy, Manager, Marybong Tea Garden, Darjeeling. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri Hasmukh Adhiya, Director 
2. Shri V.K. Yadav, Deputy Secretary 
The Committee was informed that Darjeeling was famous fo,r 3 Ts i.e. tea, timber and 
tourism. Out of these three, timber had already gone. Tea industry was in a critical 
condition and tourism had not been developed to its full extent. Development of Darjeeling 
was only the same which was done by the British before independence. The tea industry had 
remained and would remain the main avenue and prospect for concentrated investment. 
136 

137 
Although between 9 to 12 million kgs. of tea was produced per year, it account for hardly 
1.5 per cent of the total production and its share in exports was nearly 30% of the total 
produce of tea. To enable the tea industry in the hill areas to retain its primacy and cater to 
the niche market as well as to stay environment friendly, a major criterion for export of tea, 
it was necessary for the industry to continue to make investments. Investments were 
required on the plant and machinery to achieve higher process efficiency, energy efficiency 
und also in the plantation sector to improve labour productivity as the labour cost 
component was high and finally to steam the tide of deterioration in the conditions. This 
need must be recognised by all concerned. 
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council had identified few sectors such as · diversified 
commercial crops, educational services, tourism products and services, animal resource 
development produce etc. which were capable of quickly meeting development objectives as 
well as generate surpluses. It was necessary to consider these while framing any policies for 
industrial development in these areas by the Go'f'~rnment. This included measures for 
integrated fodder development plan, integrated energy management with improvements in 
the availability of L.P.G./natural gas and guidelines for entrepreneurs for providing 
educational services and training and orientation of the operating personnel. 
It was also contended before the Committee that the special gauge railway line which 
was laid in the 19th century and no improvement had been made in it since then. 
The toy train running on that line was in the red. The Committee had the opportunity 
of seeing the poor condition of roads leading to Darjeeling from various points. Though 
power produ~tion in the district was sufficient but there are problem of distribution. There 
was no air link with the district due to climatic conditions and hilly track. 
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council was established in 1988 for preparation of an integrated 
development plan for the district. But not much had been achieved in this regard. It was 
contended that jurisdiction of DGHC did not extend to the whole of the district. This results 
in overlapping of the jurisdiction of the district administration on the one hand and DGHC 
on the other. 
lt was also suggested before the Committee thpt the district required an industrial 
development plan different from other requirements.
1
The need of the hour was to encourage 
growth inducing investment. This would result in the upgradation of industry. 
The district has large potentional for handicrafts and cottage industry. Agro-herbal 
industry, electronic industry and other related industries which require clean environment. 
Another area which had remained unexplored for which district had a unique position 
was education. Similarly situated hill stations had a number of reputed school in the country 
but no s<.~hool of repute had come up in the district so far. 
It was alleged that the district had been given a step motherly treatment both by the 
Central and the State Governments, though it was vital from the defence point of view. The 
district had acute shortage of drinking water and L.P.G. For promotion of tourism no 
proper publicity had been given so far. People of the district were ignorant about the various 
concessions and facilities provided by the Government for starting new ventures. 
Enterpreneurs present in the meeting were ignorant about the transport subsidy scheme. 
Office of the D.l.C. had only. one Mam~gcr though there were seven vacancies. 
Though Darjeeling had a land problem us 70% of the land is locked up in inalienable 
resources yet some areas should be earmarked for industrial units. 
Implementation of the PMR Y was also very tardy and the blame was put on the banks. 

138 
The only hope for the development of Darjeeling was development of tea industry. For 
promotion of Darjeeling tea which is known for its uniqueness all over the world, there was 
need to give· wid~ publicity in interna·donal market. As cost of production of tea had gone 
up over the years, some integrated state of the art research institute was must to gain firm 
footing in the international markeL The development of New Jalpaiguri as a dry port, was 
also demanded. 
A strong demand was made before the Committee for a special treatment in the form of 
special financial incentive/package for industrial development of the hill district. 
The meeting then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

SATURDAY, THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. in Hotel Sinclairs, Darjeeling. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABRA 
3. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION AND TEA PLANTATION 
1. Shri P.R. Baviskar, LA.S. District Magistrate 
2. Shri Jit Yonzon, General Secretary, DCBM Union 
3. Shri D.S. Bomjan, CITU 
4. Shri H.B. Rai, ex-MLA, Kurseong 
5. Shri Ratan Mothay, Darjeeling Shramik Sang 
6. Shri Joyti Gurung, DCK, SS 
7. Shri N.B. Chhetri, Working President HPWU, Cinchona Jone 
8. Shri Samal Chhetri, General Secretary, HPWU, Cinchona Zonal Committee 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri Hasmukh Adhiya, Director 
2. Shri V.K. Yadav, Deputy Secretary 
Parliament of India was thanked through the Committee for including Nepali language 
in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India. 
The Committee was informed that the tea labour was thankful to the English people for 
establishing tea gardens and tea industries in the district which were profit making industries. 
However, after independence, the position had changed and about 15 tea gardens had closed 
down. The industry came into the hands of private parties who were making huge profits 
from the industry by exploiting the tea plantation workers. The Committee was informed 
that the labourers working in the tea gardens were paid a meagre wage of Rs. 24.50 per day. 
A wage of Rs. 50/- per day was demanded. The Management of the tea gardens did not 
provide any basic necessities like residential houses etc. People were not paid benefits of 
service after their retirement. 
The Committee was informed that in the tea gardens owned by private persons bonus 
was paid to the workers whereas no bonus was paid to workers of tea gardens owned by the 
Government. This was creating dissatisfaction and. heart burning among workers of tea 
gardens. Temporary workers had not been confirmed and thus the fate of the workers in tea 
gardens had become worst. 
lt was pleased before the Committee by the plantation workers that the Labour Ministry 
139 

140 
of the Central Government may be impressed upon to do something positive to increase the 
wages of tea garden labour and to ensure timely payment of wages to solve their problems. 
If need be the labour Jaws might be suitably amended/changed so that the workers of tea 
gardens might also feel satisfied. 
There was large scope for establishing/expanding industries in the field of seri-culture, 
herbal medicinal plants, mushroom,· soap making from chi a seeds, umbrella making, food 
processing, paper making tannery and broom industry. 
In the field of tourism there were no infrastructural facilities and this sector was 
required to be improved. The representatives demanded that a package of incentives and 
financial assistance should be provided in the region like any other State, otherwise the 
future of the tea gardens and their workers would be bleak. 
The Cinchona plantation was started in 1867 and so far with the increase in the 
plantation of Cinchona the labour force had also increased manifold. This industry had great 
potential for its development in the district and needs to be encouraged. 
A strong appeal was made to the Committee to do something positive for the 
betterment of the poor workers of tea gardens. 
The meeting then adjourned at 5.45 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

SATURDAY, THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met at 5.45 P.M. in Hotel Sinclairs, Darjeeling. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF ANDREW AND YULE COMPANY LIMITED 
1. Shri Sujit Chakravorty, C.M.D 
2. Shri Joydeb Chatterjee, Director (Planning) 
3. Shri Kanwarjit Singh, Chief Executive (Tea Division) 
4. Shri M.L. Bhattacharyya, General Manager 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri Hasmukh Adhiya, Director 
2-. Shri V. K. Yadav, Deputy Secretary 
The C.M.D. of Andrew and Yule Company Limited informed the Committee that they had 
four tea gurdens located in the interior. The Company was setting up some new projects in the 
field of mushroom and flori-culture with the advent of new technology. They were also starting 
export oriented projects with foreign collaboration doing business for a long time with &tbe 
Company. The Company was one of the oldest in India established 150 years ago. Earlier they 
had 57 companies with a total of 87,000 employees. With the nationalisation of coal industry by 
the Government of India the business of this group· was considerably curbed. All companies 
except 16 were disposed of by 1974. In the year 1979 the main company became a Government 
company with 51 °/.> shareholding except 14 tea garder:ts, five in West Bengal and 9 in Assam. All 
tea gardens were doing well and the tea was suitable for consumption. After the break-down of 
USSR, the Company had some difficult time but now it had improved its position. The 
assistance given by the IDBI was not of much help due to the slow pace. The Committee was 
also informed about their problems like its situation in the much interior from the main road, 
bad condition of roads, up-rooting of some tea bushes, long gestation period of tea plants, the 
formation of the hill council, scarcity of water, fluctuation in voltage, no further expansion of 
tea gardens etc. Darjecling tea had great future as such superior quality tea was not found any 
where in the world. It was anticipated that if the present conditions were permitted to prevail 
there was likelihood of these tea gardens being damaged/finished in the next 20 years. It was 
pleaded before the Sub-Committee that it was high time for the Government to review the 
'-., 
situation and make a pragmatic policy so that tea industry could be expanded and continued for 
years to come. The Central Government's investment was very much required in industries like 
tea, tourism, mini-hydel projects and remodeling of the system of subsidy. 
141 

142 
It was contended before the Sub-Committee that tea bushes were not considered as 
plants. Andrew Yule Limited would like to expand its tea gardening if some forest land was 
given to them as it would have the same ecological effect as the forests leave. 
Grants given by the. Tea Board for uproorting and re-plantation of tea bushes was 
utterly meagre. The Government should make more pregmatic and realistic policy in this 
regard. 
Agro-based fudustry, particularly floriculture required regular and fast transportation 
but some flights of the Indian Airlines fr6m Bagdogra had been cancelled/withdrawn 
without giving the routes to any private airlines. Consequently these products could not be 
transported quickly. Time factor was very vital for the survival and growth of such 
industries. 
The representatives of the Company strongly pleaded before the Sub-Committee for 
increasing some flights from Bagdogra airport and also to increase the frequency of some 
flights which are already in operation. They also pleaded for the speedy infrastructural 
development which in tum will improve the industrial fate of the region as a whole and the 
district in particular. 
The meeting then adjourned at 6.30 p.m. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

SATURDAY, THE 16TH SEPTEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met at 6.35 P.M. in Hotel Sinclairs, Darjeeling. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative -Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF SIKKIM 
1. Shri L. Bhutia, I.A.S., Secretary, Industries 
2. Shri G. Kiran, Joint Director, Industries 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri Hasmukh Adhiya, Director 
2. Shri V.K. Yadav, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Bhutia, Secretary, Industries expressed his profound sorrow for not being able to 
welcome the Sub-Committee at Gangtok as the road from Siliguri to Gangtok was not in 
good condition and the alternative road would have taken long time to reach Gangtok. For 
that very reason Shri Bhutia was requested to appear before the Sub-Committee at 
Darjeeling. 
He explained to tlie Committee that Sikkim had joined the Union of India not long ago. 
The State was facing some teething problems in the way of industrialisation of the State. 
The Committee was informed that in view of the peculiar geographical location and 
typographical features, the Himalayan State of Sikkim suffered from constraints of lack of 
infrastructural facilities, particularly in respect of transport communications and socio­
economic resources, limiting the scope for vigorous industrialisation in a big way, thereby 
resulting in the backwardness of the State. However, despite limitations, the welfare 
conscious Government of Sikkim had been able to make substantial progress in the 
industrial sector towards economic upliftment of the people in the State. 
The new policy of economic liberalisation, deregulation, decontrol and delicensing 
alongwith its emphasis on market economy might be correct remedy to stimulate the 
country's economy in general. But these very measures might prove to be death blow to the 
economic development and industrialisation of backward State like Sikkim which suffered 
from locational disadvantages, under-developed infrastructure, lack of natural resources, 
technical skills etc. To avoid such a situation and for ensuring development of such regions, 
it was imperative that the Central Government must take very active part in finding out 
effective ways and means to bring about economic development and foster industrialisation 
so that employment opportunities could be generated. 
143 

-
144 
The Committee was further informed that there was not a single Central Public Sector 
Undertaking in Sikkim. The State Government had been persuading the Central 
Government to set up some of its Public Undertakings in the State which somehow had not 
materialised. The pollution free atmosphere, excellent labour relations and disciplined work 
force prevalent in the State offered an excellent scope for establishment of electronic and hi­
tech industries. The Central Government should consider setting up some of its Public 
Sector Undertakings · in Sikkim and reserve licences for setting up certain hi-tech and 
electronic industries in the State to provide employment opportunities and to foster the 
economic development of the State simultaneously. For this purpose a separate industrial 
policy fCir hill areas like Sikkim and other North-Eastern States was required to be 
formulate<! by Government of India providing special package of incentive etc. 
The Central Government subsidy scheme had been vital in promoting industries in 
backward and hilly States like Sikkim. The discontinuation of the scheme bad very adverse 
effect on tile entire industrialisation process. In order to bring about industrial development 
in hilly and 'no industry districts' the Central Government invest,uent subsidy scheme should 
be restored immediately·. 
The reimbursement claims preferred by the State Government on account of Central 
transport subsidy were inordinately delayed and at times, the reimbursement was not 
effected even after a lapse of about two years. Such an inordinate delay in reimbursement 
had caused great hardships to the industrial units and the viability of the Units was adversely 
affected. Government of India should make reimbursements of Central transport subsidy 
within . 45 days from the date of preferring claims; 
The interest rate on the borrowings from financial institutions was high due to which the 
entrepreneurs were shying away and the prospects of setting up new industries were negated. 
In order to ensure that such a negative trend did not continu.e indefmitely, if was of 
immediate necessity to effect downward revision of the rates on the borrowings from 
financial institutions and in any case, the lending rates should not be more than 12% in 
backward and hilly areas. 
The Central Government should also entirely fund the industrial growth centres 
sanctioned for hilly and backward States like Sikkim where the investment in no case would 
exceed Rs. 10 crores as compared to growth centres in other States where the investment 
was between 40-50 crores. 
The presence of central organisations like ISSI, All India Handicrafts Board etc., was 
not satisfactory as their functioning was not very smooth as they always lacked proper man­
power etc. 
Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana scheme had also been imp~emented in Sikkim but due 
to lack of support from the commercial banks the targeted results had not been achieved. 
During the last financial year the target under the scheme was only 250. Against this target, 
ihe banks had sanctioned loans to 75 beneficiaries only thereby achieving 30 per cent of the 
target. 
The State had sufficient power to meet its demand but because of lack of proper bank 
facilities SSI units were not able to grow at the desired rate. 
The meeting then adjourned at 7.05 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

MONDAY, THE 16m OCTOBER, 1995 
I 
The Sub-Committee had an informal meeting at 2.45 p.m. with the Acting Chief 
Minister and Minister for Industries and Commerce of Tripura State in New Secretariat at 
Agartala. The Sub-Committee was informed that during the last about 48 years industrial 
development, agriculture and irrigation had been most backward in the State of Tripura. 
Only 40% of the land was fit for agriculture. The availability of minerals and gas 
whatsoever, could not be made use of. Small Scale Industrial units were lying closed in the 
State. There are about six lakhs tribal people. There are Bangladeshi refugees also for whom 
there is no job or work. There are ·some traditional weavers in the State. No foreign 
investment has been made in the State.· Conces&ions, financial assistance and investment is 
required to be made on priority basis to develop the industrial activities in the State. MeanF 
of communications are also needed to be ilpproved. 
n 
The Sub-Committee then met at 3.30 P.M. in New Secretariat at Agartala for discussions 
with the representatives of trade and industry. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
LOK SABRA 
3. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY 
1. Shri S.K. Panda, Cotiunissioner (Industries & Commerce) State Government of Tripura 
2. Shri Motilal Devnath, Hony. Secretary, Tripura Chamber of Commerce & Industry 
3. Shri M. Banik, Tripura Chamber of Coqunerce & Industry 
4. Shri R.N. Das, President, Federation of Association of Cottage & Small Industries 
(I"ACSI) 
5. Shri Sanjay Deb Roy, General Secretary, FACSI 
6. Shri M. Kar, FACSI 
7. Shri A.K. Pal, General Secretary, Tripura Industrial Entrepreneurs, Agartala 
8. Shri S.-R. Roy, President, Tripura Industrial Entrepreneurs, Agartala 
9. Shri A.B. Das, Acting Chairman, Tripura Industrial Entrepr~neurs, Agartala 
After introduction from both the sides the Convenor made two customary 
announcements regarding confidentiality of the proceedings and that the proceedings of the 
meeting be sent to its Secretariat within ten days. 
145 

146 
The representatives of F ACSI informed the Sub-Committee that North-Eastern region 
was a victim of the step motherly and colonial attitude by the Central Government. The 
continuous economic backwardness had affected social and political conditions of these 
States leading to a situation threatening the integrity and security of the country. Massive 
improvement of their economic condition can only help to change the situation. 
The economic found~tion of the State of Tripura is weak. Financial institutions are rigid 
,~ in giving assistance. There is no branch of RBI. A branch of RBI is very necessary in the 
State. The infrastructure facilities are poor. Railway line has· its token presence at one 
corner of the State. Moreover narrow gauge .rail track from Lumding to Kumarghat is too 
congested and burden with carrying essential commodities. Tnmshipment facilities for goods 
from broad gauge to narrow gauge line at Lumding are inadequate. There is no storage 
arrangement. Railway wagons are not available. The movement of raw-material by rail for 
industry is almost nil. National Highway 44 which is considered to be the life line for the 
State is not as per the specification laid d~wn for National Highway. Travelling by air which 
is the easiest means of communication for the people of this land locked State with the, rest 
of the country has become costilier with the hike in air fares over the last few years. The 
Committee was also informed that Hilsa fish is found in abundance in the State which can be 
sent out of the State. There should be an adequate infrastructure arrangement for 
international trade specially with adjoining 5angladesh and a corridor to go to Calcutta via 
Bangladesh (350 kms.) which, otherwise is 1600 kms. 
On a query by the Convenor the Committee was informed that the power sector had 
bright prospects in the near future but the system of transmission and distribution needed 
improvement. Mineral resources were totally absent in the State. Availability of essential 
raw-material and fuel are difficult. Markets was limited. Capital was scarce. Over and above 
in the absence of industrial culture few entrepreneurs dared to come forward for setting up 
industries in the State. 
The entire economy of the State was based on agricuiture. Cultivable land was limited. 
System of agriculture had not been modernised as a result of which a large number of 
agriculture labourers were either unemployed or underemployed. Industri8lisation provide 
alternative scope for employment to the large section of unemployed labour force. There 
was oo foreign post office in the State. Fax messages are not transmitted due to absence of 
facilities therefor. The State Government did not have adequate means to provide basic 
infrastructure required to build up industry in the State. The Central Government, 
therefore, had to come forward with a 'Crash Programme', determined attitude and finn 
•·· industrial policy frame keeping in view the inherent difficult situation of the North-Eastern 
region. The representatives also informed the Sub-Committee that they were paying all taxes 
like other States but were not getting the facilities like them. The suggestion by one of the 
~ Members of the Sub:-Committee that the· use of available gas and floriculture could .be made 
use of in the State was welcomed. 
The representatives strongly pleaded that :-
(i) Four industrial estates should be built up in all the four districts of the State with 
100% Central aid. 
(ii) Rail line should be extended upto A~artala and the narrow gauge line from Lumding 
to Kumarghat should be conver.ted into broad gauge. 
(iii) The National Highway 44 should be improved to the standard of a National 
Highway. 
(iv) Central assistance should be extended for generation of power and for improvement 
of transmission and distribution system. 

147 
(v) The Central investment subsidy which was discontinued in the name of 'Growth 
Centre Scheme' should be re-introduced for the North-Eastern States. 
{vi) Central transport subsidy should be extended for another ten years. 
(vii) The advertisements on All India Radio and Doordarshan for the products of the 
State should be subsidised. 
(viii) Gas should be supplied at subsidised rates considering the extreme backwardness of 
the State. 
(ix) Commercial financial institutions should be brought under a policy making it 
obligatory for them to invest a part of their capital in industrial sector and lower 
interest rates charged. 
(:c) Tripura should be exempted from payment of all taxes for a period of at least ten 
years. 
(xi) A full fledged branch office of Ministry of Agricult}lre for agro-based and food. 
processing industry should be set up in the State. 
(xii) Central Government should financially assist the Government of Tripura for reviving 
the Tripura Jute Mill which was the first venture of the State Government in the field 
of medium industry. 
(xiii) Central institutions like NSIC, NEIIDB, RTC etc. should open their offices at 
Agartala. 
(xiv) Private air-lines should be permitted to operate flights to and fro Agartala airport. 
(xv) The.SISI Directorate should function properly and a testing laboratory should also be 
set up in Agartala. 
The Members of the Sub-Committee asked certain questions which were replied to by 
the representatives. 
The meeting then adjourned at 4.50 P.M. ·with a mutual vote of thanks. 

MONDAY, THE 16m OCTOBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.45 P.M. in New Secretariat, Agartala for discussions with 
the management of the lead bank in connection with Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govind Ram Mjrj 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
SECRE7ARIAT 
1. Shri G .K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPr ~ENTATIVE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT 
Shri S.K. Panda, Commissioner (Industries & Commerce) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
1. Shri M. Sen, Dy. G.M., United Bank of India, H.O. 
2. Shri R. Mohanty, Regional Manager, UBI, Agartala 
3. Shri M.R.A. Laskar, G.M., SBI, North Eastern Circle, Guwahati 
4. Shri N.R. De, AGM, SBI, Regional Office, Agartala 
5. Shri A. Bhattacharya, Manager, Distt. Coord., SBI, Agartala 
6. Shri A. Bhowmik, Officer, P & S Bank 
7. Shri N. Dutta, M~nager, Bank of India 
8. Shri A.K. Bannerjee, Sr. Manager, Indian Bank 
9. Shri T.V. Ganesh, Manager, lOB 
10. Shri Ajay Jain, Development Officer, UCO Bank, Agartala 
11. Shri P.C. Mohanpuria, AGM, RBI, Guwahati 
12. Shri T.A. Seetharaman, Sr. Manager, Canara Bank, Agartala 
13. Shri B.A. Alwani, Officer-in-charge, NABARD, Agartala 
14. Shri Surendra Srivastava, Officer-in-charge, SIDBI, Agartala 
15. Shri V.S. Murty, Director, SISI, Agartala 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE, GOI 
Ms. Mona Sharma, Joint Director 
After introduction the Convenor, at the very outset, made two customary 
announcements regarding the confidentiality of the proceedings of the meeting and that a 
copy of the proceedings be sent to the Secretariat within ten days. The Convenor also 
explained in brief the scope and purpose of the visit of the. Sub-Committee and requested 
the Dy. General manager of the United Bank of India to give in brief, the picture about the 
working of the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana in the State of Tripura. 
The Deputy General Manager informed the Sub-Com_mittee that Tripura was small 
148 

149 
State in the North-Eastern part of the country. There was no big industry due to financial 
and infrastructure constraints. At present there were two lakh unemployed youth registered 
in the employment exchanges. The problem of the unemployment could be solved only by 
generating productive employment in the private sector and reducing dependence on 
Government for jobs. Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana essentially was an important and 
ambitious scheme to promote and create sustainable employment opportunities for the 
educated unemployed youth. During the year 1993-94, Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana was 
implemented in the State of Tripura in urban areas only. From 1994-95 onwards, the scheme 
was implemented to cover both the rural and urban areas of the State in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Central Government. This is basically a credit linked programme and is 
being implemented by commercial banks through branches in Tripura. Under the scheme 
Government provides a subsidy of Rs. 7500'- per beneficiary as against five per cent by the 
beneficiary. 
In the State of Tripura as on 30.6.95, 218 branches of commercial bank, RRBs, State 
Coop. Bank, Tripura Coop. Land Development Bank and Tripura Urban Coop. Bank were 
functioning. The UBI was the lead bank for the State. The Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana 
was being implemented by 391 branches of commercial banks spread all ove,r the State. 
Coming to the practical working under the Yojana the bank man~gemc;n! infprmed the 
Sub-Committee that the scheme was first implemented in 1993-94. ·Certain clarifications 
therefore, were required regarding income criteria etc. ofbeneficiaries. A target of fOO was 
set for 1993-94. Disbursements were however, could be made to 103 beneficiaries only due 
to want of clarifications on the aforesaid doubt. Most of the proposals I projects submitted 
by prospective beneficiaries were of stereotype and most of the cases could not pass the test 
of viability and were rejected by the banks' branches. The average size of disbursement 
during the year 1993-94 was around 0.67 lakhs. For the year 1994-95, the target was fixed at 
1000 cases. Out of that figure only 796 cases were sanctioned by branches of commercial 
banks and money could be disbursed only in 388 cases. 
The Committee was also informed that 451 cases were rejected/referred back/returned 
to the Task Force for the reasons that (i) the proposals were beyond the target fixed 
therefore, and returned to the DICs, for re-sponsoring, (ii) change/modification of the 
scheme required by the entrepreneurs, (iii) entrepreneurs were not interested in availing 
themselves of the ·loan under the scheme. 
For the year 1995-96 the target has been fixed at 1300 cases. But so far, out of that 
figure only 494 cases had been sponsored mainly during September, 1995. There were 
restriction in sponsoring new cases owing to elections to Tripura Autonomous District 
Council. It is hoped that involvement of the elected representatives of the Panchayati Raj 
institutions would expedite sponsoring of applications. 
The Committee was further informed that the lead bank has been working with the 
State Government very well. The tribal girls were being trained as entrepreneurs under the 
scheme. The Convenor enquired as to what sort to industries were viable in· the State. The 
Management replied that there was good potential for gas based, agro-based and timber 
based industries. It was also informed that the State had natural resources in the form of 
rubber, the production of which was fairly good as compared to Kerala. Rubber-based 
industry had also a good f~ture in the State for which intermediate processing industries 
were essential. On a further query by the Convenor as to what were the constraints coming 
in the way of industrialisation in the State, it was informed that transport/communication 
was a major hurdle. Calcutta by road from Agartala was 1600 Kms whereas through 
Bangladesh it was only 350 Kms. Once Government permitted trade with Bangladesh then, 

150 
of course, some big industries would come up in the field and industrial development of the 
State was bound to progress. The Committee was also informed that the C.D. ratio was six 
per cent for rural branches and that this ratio was falling everywhere. It would increase only 
when big industries were set up. 
It w.as strongly argued before the Sub-Committee that for successful working of the 
scheme it was essential that:-
(i) Quarterly phasiflg. of sponsoring of proposals should be adopoted to avoid bunching 
of proposals· at the fag end of the financial year. 
(ii) The concerned Government departments should expeditiously release the licences, 
SSI registration, electriCity connections etc. in favour of the beneficiaries. 
(iii) More training institutions should be identified to quicken the process .of completion 
of training programme required for expeditious disbursement. 
(iv) Adequate discretionary powers were granted to the Managers of certain commercial 
banks who did not have the power to grant advances. Therefore, they had to refer 
the proposals to their controlling officers for sanction, resulting in delays~ 
(v) The scope of involving of Tlipura.Gramin Bank in the implementation of PMRY 
especially in areas where there was .no commercial bank branch or the commercial 
bank branches were situated ·far away. 
(vi) The maximum age limit of 35 years should be relaxed to 40 years and the annual 
income limit be enhanced to Rs. 50,0001-: 
The Convenor observed that for further successful working of the scheme modalities of 
operations may be decided by discussions between the banks and tpe Government and any 
problems coming in the way of implementing PMRY be sorted out expeditiously. 
The meeting then adjourned at 5.35 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

MONDAY, THE 16TH OCTOBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee IV met at New Secretariat, Agartala, at 6.05 P.M. and held 
discussions with the District Magistrate and the State Government officials. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
LOK SABRA 
3. Shri Mulfappally Ramachandran 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA 
1. Shri V. Thulasidas, Chief Secretary 
2. Shri S.N. Oommen, Principal Secretary 
3. Shri S:K. Panda, Commissioner (Industries & Commerce) 
4. Shri B.K. Bal, Commissioner (Power) 
5. Shri D. Prakash, Commissioner {Planning) 
6. Shri N.K. Datta, Secretary {PWD) 
7. Shri K. Rajeswara Rao, Secretary to the Chief Minister 
8. Shri S. Kumar, District Magistrate, West Agartala 
9. Shri S.K. Rakesh, ADM, {North) 
10. Shri P.R. Kar, ADM and Collector, Dhalia 
11. Shri Lok Ranjan, Director (I&C) 
12. Shri S.K. Adhikari, Director (Statistics) 
13. Shri S.C. Dey, Consultant, TIDC 
14. Shri S.N. Bhowmik, Special Officer, TIDC 
15. Shri T. Bhattacharya, Sr. Dy. Magistrate (S) 
16. Shri S.K. Das, Director (Fisheries) 
17. Shri Sanjib Datta, Sr. Dy. Manager, GAIL 
18. Shri G.V.S. Sai Prasad, Dy. GM, GAIL 
19. Shri Kharak Singh, GM {P), ONGC 
20. Shri D.K. Khetan, Chief Engineer (P), ONGC 
21. Shri S.S. Mohammed Abdul Kader, Joint Com{tlissioner Rubber Board 
22. Shri D.K. Dasgupta, Manager {Admn.) NERAMAC Ltd. 
23. Shri P.C. Panda, Incharge Zonal Office, Agartala NERAMAC 
24. Shri S.R. Datta, Executive Officer, K. & V.I. Board, Agartala 
25. Shri B.C. Sharma, MD, TNGC 
26. Shri B.L. Debbarma, Director (Agriculture) 
27. Shri M.L. Das, MD, THHDC 
28. Shri D. Datta, MD, TAWCS 
,. -· .· 

152 
29. Shri S. Bhattacharya, Horticulturists. 
The Convenor made two customary announcements regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings and that the proceedings should be sent to the Secretariat within ten days. He 
also explained in brief the scope/purpose of the Sub-Committee. 
The Chief Secretary while giving a brief scenario of the State informed the Sub­
Committee that about 60% of Tripura's terrain was undulating. About 53% of the land was 
under forest cover. The State is served by a large number of streams and rivers which are 
not suitable for inland water transport. It has abundant reserves of sub-soil water and the 
several parts of the State artesian wells are frequent. Tripura's population is 27.6 lakhs. The 
rural population is about 85% and 74% of the people live below poverty line. 85% of the 
border of Tripura is international. About 50,000 tribal refugees from Bangladesh are 
sheltered in South Tripura district. The State has three Industrial Training Institutes. 
Roughly 13% of the cropped area is irrigated. Limited availability of irrigation has restricted 
cropping intensity of the major crops of rice, wheat, maize, oilseeds, pulses etc. Fruits like 
jackfruit, coconut, lichi, pineapple, mango etc. grow in the State. ·~ 
The Committee was also informed that the State was industrially backward mainly 
because of geographical isolation, lack of infrastructure, non-availability of raw material and 
associated problems. The State as a whole had been declared 'No Industry District' under 
Category 'A'. The State had been assigned special status for the purpose of rapid 
industrialisation. The industrial units set up in the State were in small scale and rural 
industries sector, except for Tripura Jute Mills Ltd., which was State PSU. The total Small 
Scale Industries registered upto 30.9.95 with the District Industries Centres were as:-
SIDO Units : Provisional 5737 and permanent 1524. 
Non-SIDO Units : Provisional 2564 and permanent 386. 
Out of 1910 units many had turned sick or closed down. The functional units were 950 
i.e. 49%. The investment involved in these units was about Rs. 1838.02 lakhs and their 
combined annual turnover was Rs. 1590.27 Jakhs. These employed about 11 ,000 workers. 
The sickness in the small industries sector was due to raw material non-availability 
problems and higher costs leading to non-competitiveness of local credit and delayed or 
inadequate finance from commercial institutions and lack of assured power supply. 
Some of the salient features of the Small Scale Industrial scenario in the State of 
Tripura were stated to be: 
(i) nearly all the units were established by the first generation entrepreneurs. 
(ii) their product range was also by and large conventional and technologically 
simple. 
(iii) the raw material for most of these was transported from qutside the State 
resulting in higher cost of production. 
(iv) the income level and purchasing power of major portion of the local population 
was low. Therdore, the local market could not sustain the industrial units. The 
dependence on State Government for marketing support and for departments as 
purchasers was therefore, considerable. 
(v) the units also faced the problems of bringing in qualified manpower and advanced 
technologies because of remoteness and transportation bottlenecks and associated 
costs. 
The Tripura Jute Mills Ltd. which was the first medium scale industrial unit in the State 

---------- ------ -----, 
153 
was set up in 1974 as a PSU with an authorised share capital of Rs. 10 crores. Its installed 
capacity was 40 M.T. of product per day. But this was now a sick unit. The North-Eastern 
Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation had set up a pineapple processing plant in 
1988 at Nalkata in North Tripura district with an investment of Rs. 3.5 crores. The 
pineapple processing capacity of the plant was 5760 M.T. per annum and the targeted 
working days were 120. However, the maximum capacity utilisation had been of the order of 
10% to 15% only. 
The Committee was further informed that the State had not gained from liberalisation. 
The rail link was necessary for economic and industrial development. National Highway 44 
connecting Tripura to Guwahati and Shillong was not in good condition. The transit passage 
through Bangladesh and trade with it could only bring economic and industrial development 
of the State. Natural resource in the form of rubber could be developed. The production of 
pineapple, mangoes, jackfruit etc. had a great potential for industrial development. Bamboo 
and wood industries too had a good potential. Growth Centre Scheme was required to be 
revised. The State did not have even a single five star hotel. 
On a query by the Convenor about meeting the power requirement the Committee was 
informed that at present 50% of the requirement of power was being met but at the peak 
hours the requirement was not met in full. Replying to a query by the members, it was 
informed that though one offer for power generation project in the private sector was 
received from M/s Gujarat Gas Company Ltd., but the purchase agreement could not be 
entered into. On an enquiry about the functioning of SSI units in the state, the Committee 
was informed that 36,000 SSI units were working in the State but their main problem was 
the non-availability of raw material, non-investment and the non-availability of subsidy 
scheme. 
There was a strong need for easy availability of r~w materials, development of means of 
communications, good connections of rail, air, flow of capital by banks, patronage of 
industries etc. Foreign investment for the development of North-Eastern region was a must. 
The meeting then adjourned at 7.10 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

WEDNESDAY THE 18TH OCTOBER, 1995 
The Committee assembled at 6.00 P.M. in State Guest House, Aizawl, for a discussion 
in a joint meeting with the representatives of trade and industry and the management of lead 
bank in connection with the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
4. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
.. 3. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
t~·· J 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE & INDUSTRY 
1. Shri. Laltlan Kima, President, Mizoram Industries Association 
2. Sbri M.C. Awia, General Secretary, Mizoram Industries Association 
3. Shri Bualhranga, President Mizoram Chamber of Commerce 
4. Shri Zarzoliana, Secretary, Mizoram Chamber of Commerce 
5. Shri K.L. Rochama, President, Federation of Mizoram Industries 
6. Shri Zohmangiaha, General Secretary, Federation of Mizoram Industries 
I 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BANKING INSTITUTIONS 
7. Shri A.K. Nath, AGM, SBI Regional Office, Aizawl 
8. Shri S.C. Pathak, Chief GM, SBI Local HO, Guwahati 
9. Shri N.C. Purkayastha, Chief Manager, SBI, Shillong 
10. Shri B.B. Shetty, Sr. Branch Manager, Vijaya Bank, Aizawl 
11. Shri P.K. Mandai, Sr. Manager, UCO Bank, Aizawl 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVT. OF MIZORAM 
1. Shri Hrangthanga Colney, Minister of Industries 
2. Shri M.C. Goswami, Director (Industries) 
3. Shri Taborn Bam, Commissioner & Secretary (Industries) 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE, CENTRAL GOVT. 
Ms. Mona Sharma, Joint Director 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, CENTRAL GOVT. 
Shri M. Kunhi Raman, Under Secretary 
154 

15$ 
After introduction the Convenor at the outset made two customary announcements­
one relating to confidentiality of the proceedings and the second requiring the organisation 
to send the proceedings within ten days. the Convenor then explained in brief ihe scope I 
object I purpose of the Sub-Committee. 
Explaining the working of the financial institutions with regard to the Prime Minister's 
Rozgar Yojana · the Chief General Manager SBI informed the Sub-Committee that the 
scheme was introduced in Mizoram during 1993-:-94. In the firs(year the progress was slow. 
Under the scheme the entrepreneurs were first trained and that is why its implementation 
was somewhat delayed. Now, the work had been started in the right earnest. In the year 
1993-94 as against the target of 40 cases only 30 cases were cleared, loan was sanctioned and 
disbursed to them. The remaining 10 cases were rejected not being found viable. No doubt 
in the year 1993-94 the progress was slow but during the year 1994-95 the scheme progressed 
well. In 1994-95 the target was 250 and 305 candidates were sponsored. Out of this 223 cases 
were cleared, money was sanctioned and disbursed to them. The remaining 82 cases were 
under consideration. 
During the year 1995-96 the work under the scheme had gained· further momentum. 
Training of selected candidates for Lunglei and Chhifmuipui. districts organized by the 
industries department of the State Government was completed in the last week of September 
and first week of October, 1995. Disbursement to the beneficiaries in the two districts could 
not be completed for non-completion of training. However, it was expected that by the end 
· of the month free disbursement in all eligible cases would be made. For 1995:-96 the target 
set was 250 cases. So far 145 cases had been sponsored and the selection process was still in 
progress. 
The training of candidates was delayed following very heavy land-slides in Lunglei 
district which completely paralysed normal life in the affected areas for months together. 
Now that the training had bee~. compl~ted and road communication restored, the process of 
disbursement was likely· to" be completed by the end of October, 1995. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that towards the closing months of the financial 
year there was heavy pressure of work in the. banks and hence the authorities concerned of 
the industries department were requesled to work regularly throughout the year to avoid 
pressure towards the closing months. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that in some cases it was found that the selected 
candidates were not serious in establishing their unit. A few got employed elsewhere and 
could not start the project and, therefore, only serious candidates need be selected. On the 
recovery front the Sub-Committee was informed that the some was poor. Though recovery 
of loan was equally important yet more important was the propef utilisation of the loaned 
amount. This would take some time. 
The Minister of Industries of the State Government informed the Committee that there 
was no agency to impart training to the trainers. The State should, atleast, have one such 
agency of its own. He also informed the Sub;.Committee that in many rural areas there was 
not even a single branch of the bank. However, the Chief General Manager, SBI suggested 
that in areas not being served by any branch of any bank the burden can be put on the 
branches of cooperative banks functioning there. The idea of mobile van bank was also 
suggested. ~ut none of the two were found possible. It was contended before the Sub­
Committee that keeping in view the backwardness and peculiar circumstances prevailing in 
the North-Eastern regio1,1, the· prescri~4 JllaximUin age of 35 ·years should be relaxed to 
40 years and the rate of interest on the loan should be Somewhat lower in comparison to 

156 
other regions I States. The Convenor and Members of the Sub-Committee emphasized the 
need to cover the entire area by the existing network_of banks! branches and if necessary, 
more branches could be .opened. 
It was strongly pleaded before the Sub-Committee to recommend that:-
(i) Attending the work of sponsoring candidates processing/recommending their cases 
for disbursement of loans and sanctioning and disbursing loans should be spread 
throughout the year instead of piling up the cases for clearance I disbursement at 
the fag end of the year; and 
(iz) Keeping in view the extent of industrial backwardness in .the North-Eastern region 
in general and Mizoram in particular, the rate of interest on loans be less and the 
maximum age limit be relaxed from 35 years to 40 years for candidates to be 
eligible to get the benefit of the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana. 
Thereafter the Sub-Committee heard the views of the representatives of trade and 
industry. The representatives informed the Committee ·that Mizoram was the most 
industrially backward State in the counl!)' and the entire State had been notified as No 
Industry District For all purposes of de~elopmental plan like areas specific infrastructure 
development and specific project proposals in Mizoram a proper techno-economic survey 
had to be conducted by a central team ftrst and a geographical map had to be prepared for 
meaningful healthy growth of indilstries in the State. Further, till date the infrastructure in 
Mizoram was nil. Keeping in view the geographical conditions of the . State with its scattered 
population the infrastructure cannot be developed in all the areas and therefore, an area 
specific development should be identified. The new scheme for growth centre appears to be 
the best means for ~ding up industrial infrastructure in Mizoram. They pleaded that for 
the purpose the plot already acquired should be approved by the Central Government for 
implementation and that another suitable l9C8tion for the growth centre may be identified 
having hinterlands where thousand of families may be given sufficient land for settlement to 
feed such centre with their products. 
It was also pleaded before the Sub-Committee that while making proposal for the 
centrally sponsored scheme of growth centre in hilly terrain of Mizoram with a thinly 
scattered population, certain relaxations suitable for the local conditions should be provided 
for better implementation of the project or certain relaxations to provide! scope for making 
proposals without loan component from financial institutions be given. 
The Committee was informed that the availability of capital was not satisfactory and 
hence the investment climate was not good. Capital was not available for the construction I 
repair of roads and bridges. Power was in short supply. Means of communications were 
lacking. An air field was to be established I expanded. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that the scheme of Central Investment Subsidy 
was discontinued in 1988 on introduction of the enhanced scheme of industrial growth 
centre. It was really strange that even after lapse of seven long years of introduction of 
scheme for growth centres the State Government of Mizoram had not got even one .such 
centre approved by the Central Government so far. Even if such a centre was approved in 
the near future, its implementation would take yet some more years. The result was that the 
entrepreneurs within the· 'No Industry District' areas of Mizoram had been facing. difficulties 
and the growth of industrial development had further been affected adversely. The problem 
of regional imbalance in the country had worsened due to lagging behind of States like 
Mizoram. It was pleaded before the Sub-Committee that the old scheme of central 
investment subsidy for backward areas should be revived for Mizoram as a special case till 

157 
be Industrial Growth Centre scheme was not implemented for the benefit of the industrial 
:ntrepreneurs in the State. The Committee was also informed that just before the dis­
:ontinuation of the scheme for Central Investment Subsidy during 1988-89, a claim 
mounting to Rs. 70 lakbs was sent by the Government of Mizoram for reimbursement but 
iO far nothing had been reimbursed to the State. It . was also pleaded before the Sub­
:Ommittee that the amount of Central Transport Subsidy be paid direct to the State 
>romptly. 
The Sub-Committee was requested that if need be the scheme might be modified to the 
~xtent possible in relation to its implementation to achieve fast industrial development of the 
~orth-Eastem region in general and the State of Mizoram in particular. 
The meeting then adjourned at 7.45 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 
•, 

WEDNESDAY, THE 18TH OCTOBER, 1996 
The Sub-Committee assembled at 7.50 P.M. in the State Guest House, Mizoram, fo 
discussions with the State Government officials. After introduction, the Convenor made tw• 
customary announcements relating to confidential of the proceedin,s and that a copy of th1 
proceedings be sent to the Secretariat within ten days. The Convenor explained in brief the 
scope and purpose of the Sub-Committee. 
Pi~ !SENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kaiita-Convenor 
:t Shri Govindram Miri 
LOIC SABIIA 
3. Shri MuUappally Ramachandran 
SECltETAIUAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Sbri Rohtas, Legialative Officer 
REPRESILNTA11VIS OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF MIZORAM 
1. Shri Tabom Ram, Commissioner & Secretary (Industries) 
2. Shri .M.C. Goswami, Director (Industries) 
3. Shri Denghanuna, Secretary (AHCV, Labour etc.) 
4. Shri Deenglcna, Secretary (PWD & Power) 
5. Shri P.R. Bumb, Secretary (Sericulture) · 
6. Shri C. Lal Chhuma, Commissioner & Secretary (Agriculture, Horticulture & 
Cooperation) 
7, Sbri F. Hamingthanga, J.S. (Finance) 
8. Shri Sushi Kumar, lAS, M.D. Mizoram Industrial Development 
9. S!ui R. Bhattacharjee, M.D. M.H. & ,H.D.C. 
The representatives of the State Government of Mizoram informed the Committee that 
the Mizoram was one of the youngest and industrially most backward States in the country. 
Twenty long years of insurgency till1986; lack of infrastructure, specially in respect of power 
and technical knowhow, poor communication links and dearth of capital investment had all · 
contributed to this backwardness. There was no capital goods industry, no large scale 
industrial unit at all. There was only one industry in medium scale unit which was engaged 
in food processing. This was owned by a public sector undertaking. There were 2700 
registered and about 1500 unregistered or provisioDally registered SSI unit which could more 
appropriately be termed as tiny units. 
The representatives further informed the Committee that Mimram was quite. rich in · 
natural forests. One of these resources was babmoo forests. An estimated 405 lath M. T. of 
bamboo were available. This wealth was a renewable source. There were good potenti81 for 
bamboo based industries like bamboo chipping plant, chopstick, toothpick, agarbatti stick, 
apart from larger plants for paper pulp and paper mills. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that due to limited potential for cereal 
158 

159 
oduction, Government of Mizoram had been putting more emphasis on horticultural 
ctor. Consequently, production of fruits had been increasing rapidly over the past few 
:ars and food processing offered good potential. The Mizoram Food and Allied Industries 
orporation, a Public Sector Unit, had been mainly engaged in food processing. There were 
few tiny units in the private sector also. In fact food processing had good potential even 
,r export. Passion fruit was grown only in Mizoram iJl the country. Processed juice from 
tssion fruit and also canned bamooo shoot could find a market outside the State and even 
)road. · 
Under the new land use policy of the Government, thous~nds of families had taken to 
ung (aburiates species) plantation in large scale. Mizoram was the only State that could 
~ow Tung till now. Very high cost paint and aviation oil were produced from Tung seeds. It 
as necessary to establish a processing unit urgently within the next two years or so in order 
• offer a market to the cultivators. In this field also the State needed expertise and 
Jidance from outside the State and the assistance of Central Government was required in 
tis regard. 
The handloom and handicraft sector had provided industrial employment to largest 
umber of people. There were approximately 6,200 handlooms, 2430 frame looms and 172 ..... 
andloom cooperative societies with 3925 members. About 12,000 people were directly 
mplo)Gtd in the handloom sector and more in subsidiary activities. The Mizoram Handloom 
nd Handicraft Development Corporation, a P.S.U., and another corporation in the 
:>Operative sector had been mainly providing marketing facilities. The State required 
rgently a reputed export agency to conduct export potential survey and guide the State in 
roduction of required quantity with desired quality. 
Large deposits of shell lime stones have been identified in the State. These mineral 
esources can been used for manufa~uring different sizes of slabs and tiles. Equally 
romising are the natural mineral water springs. But due to lack of resources and expertise, 
~e State has not been able to exploit these resources. 
In the absence of regular and adequate power supply specially in the villages, candle is 
n item of daily use for the people. Quite a number of entrepreneurs in this. tiny sector are 
ngaged in production of candles. However, all these units are under-utilised for want of 
equired quantum of parafin wax. Even the minimum local demand for candles cannot be 
net by them. At present, the State is allotted only 45 M.T. ~f .parafin wax per quarter 
,gainst the minimum requirement of 80 M.T. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
hould be requested to look into the matter and arrange adequate supply of parafin wax. 
lhe industrial growth centre for Mizoram was approved by the Government of India in 
1rinciple. A project report, with a total project cost of Rs. 25.55 ci'ores, was submitted to 
he Central Government during 1992 ·for approval. But the same was still pending. 
~xpeditious approval of the project report and release of funds was necessary for developing 
nfrastructure at the site already selected. The funding pattern of growth centres was also 
·equired to be streamlined and reviewed by the Central Government so that the State 
:Jovernment might. not feel it difficult to raise the required funds. 
The Convenor and the members asked a few clarifications/questions which were replied 
>y the State Government officials. 
The meeting then adjourned at 8.50 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

MONDAY, THE 6TH NOVEMBER, 1995 
I 
The Sub-Committee IV of Committee on Industry met at 6.30 P.M. in the Confereno 
HaJJ,- of Hotel Japfu Ashok, Kohima, Nagaland and held joint disc~sions with th• 
management of lead bank in connection with the Prime Minister's Rozgar Y~jana and wit! 
the officials of the State Government of Nagaland. -
PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita-Convenor 
2. Shri Shivajirao G. Patil 
3. Shri Govindram Miri 
LOK SABRA 
4. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Prakash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
1. Shri O.P. Sharvar, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Sachdev, Assistant Director 
REP~ENTATIVES OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT OF NAGALAND 
1. Shri N.G. Laloo, Development Commissioner 
2. Shri H.K. Khulu, Secretary (Industries) 
3. Shri Lal Huma, Commissioner & Secretary (W & H) 
4. Shri Alemtemshi, Special Secretary to Chief Minister 
5. Shri Toshi A_ier, Com~issioner and Secretary (PHED) 
6. Shri T.N. Mannen, A.P.C. and Secretary · 
7. Sftri Metongmeren Ao, Secretary (Home) 
8. Shri M. Zhasa, D.C. Kohima 
9 .. Shri L.R .. · Kjkou, Additional ~cretary (Hort.) 
10. ~hri P.N., Singh, Joint Director (Agriculture) 
11.':1 Shri A. Ka~g Ao, Director (In~stries) 
121 Shri F. J(onpemo Qmng, Oiredor (Tourism) 
13. Shri T. Kire, Joint Director (Inqustry) 
14. Shri K.T. Sukhalli, M.D. NIDC 
15. Shri P. Job, M.D. NHHDC 
16. Shri Lhouvitsu, President K.C.C. 
17. Shri S. Changsan, Director (IPR) 
18. Shri I. Meren Longchar, Additional Director (Industries) 
19. Shri A. Virshe Sema, Jt. Director (Industries) 
20. Shri Tojo lmlong, M.D. NIRMSC 
160 
II 

21. Shri G. Keppen Rengma, M.D. NSMC Company 
22. Shri G. Serna, M.D. MARCOFEB 
23. Shri Y.Y. Kikon, Jt. Director (Hort.) 
24. Shri N. Savino, Member NASSI and Editor 
25. Shri Lenu Jamir, President NASSI 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
Ms. Mona Sharma, Jt. Director 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BANK 
1. Shri S.C. Pathak, Chief General Manager, SBI 
2. Shri D.P. Hazarika, Dy. G.M. SBI 
3. Shri S. Venugopal, AGM, L.B., SBI, Guwahati 
4. Shri M.N. Ahmed, Regional Manager, CBI, Upper ~ssam 
5. Shri D.K. Basu, R.M. Bank of Baroda, Guwahati 
6. Shri S.N. Murarka, Actg. Chief Manager, Bank of Baroda, Dimapur 
7. Shri S. Subramanian, Sr. Manager, Indian Bank, Regional Office, Guwahati 
8. Shri G.R. Choudhary, Asstt. Manager, Indian Bank, Guwahati 
9. Shri R. Subba, Security Officer, CBI, Jorhat 
10. Shri Biswajit Gupta, Manager, Lead Bank, Kohima 
At the outset the Convenor of the Sub-Committee made two announcements relating to 
confidentiality of the proceedings and that a copy of the proceedings be sent to the 
Secretariat within ten days. He also explained in brief the scope and purpose of the visit of 
the Sub-Committee. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana was 
implemented in the State .of Nagaland in October, 1993, and all other formalities were 
completed by March, 1994, so it will be too early to comment on its implementation like 
sponsoring of cases, disbursement of loan instalment and recovery thereof. The 
representatives of the banks informed that there was a lot of political pressure and pressure 
of muscle power to sanction loans to all those cases which were sponso{ed by the task force. 
One alternative to avoid this situation was suggested that the task force should sponsor as 
many as have been allotted, though it may be different from the practice adopted in other 
parts of the country. The cases sponsored under the PMR Y are stereotype like bakery, 
grocery etc. A few youths were coming to undertake manufacturing activity. 
In this connection the attention of the Sub-Committee was drawn to the various 
problems faced by the banks in the implementation of the Yojana like delay in sponsoring 
applications by the task force, few applications sponsored from the far flung areas outside 
the area of operations, concentration of few activities without linkage, project reports not 
according to present market activities, hurried/perfunctory scrutiny by the screening 
Committee, project cost uniformity, non-availability of quality assets/insurance facilities 
except at Kohima and Dimapur, borrowers' insistence on cash disbursement etc. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that during the year 1993-94, 161 applications 
were sponsored, 103 were sanctioned and out of that an amount of Rs. 80.84 lakhs was 
disbursed to 101 cases. During 1994-95, 229 cases were sponsored, 216 cases were sanctioned 
and an amount of Rs. 147.06 lakhs was disbursed. The target fixed for the year 1995-96 was 
at 300 cases but - far no case had been sppnsored by the task force. To avoid rush of work 
regarding disbursement of loans at the fag end of the financial year, the representative of the 
Finance Ministry suggested that the whole work should be distributed evenly throughout the 
year. It was alsp suggested that the situation should be monitored from the ·very beginning of 
' 
161 

162 
the year. When the bankers informed the Sub-Committee that they are really willing to 
finance any commercially viable project, the State Government officials stated that 
commercially viable aspect was relative term as a project commercially viable in other parts 
of the country might not be viable in the State due to topographical reasons, lack of 
infrastructure, marketing facilities etc. On a query from the Convenor, the Sub-Committee 
was told that in the State of Nagoland, the CD ratio was' 34.06% as against the national ratio 
of 60%. The Sub-Committee ·observed that the CD ratio of the State was very low. 
II 
The Sut>-Committee thereafter started discussion with the State Government officials of 
Nagaland at 8.00 P.M. ,., 
At the fustance of the Convenor, the Secretary (Ind.) of Nagaland gave a brief account 
of the industrial scenario pr.evailing in the State. He informed the Sub-Committee that the 
policy of libera1isation had yet to have its effect in Nagaland. In the longer interest of the 
balanced industrial growth in the country, it was necessary that the steps should be· taken for 
the fast industrial development of Nagaland. The Sub-Committee was also informed that in 
line with the liberalised economic policy of the country, the State Government had recently 
announced its rather ambitious industrial policy. The successful implementation of the policy 
will only be possible with generous financial assistance from the Central Government and 
substantial investments from entrepreneurs and investors from outside the State as the 
investments from all India financial institutions, banks and investors from within the country 
were negligible. The Sub-Committee was further informed that there was no major industry 
except a··sugar ndll in Dimapur and a paper mill at Tuh, both of which had been lying sick 
for the last sewnl ~rs. The revival plans of these two were pending with the Central 
Government. Three proposals were pending in respect of ~ugar mill, first for cane 
development fund with Ministry of Food, the second for rationalisation of labour with the 
Labour Ministry and the third with the Ministry of Industry, Department of Industrial 
Development, for upgradation of capacity from 1000 TCD to 2500 TCD. These units had 
good potential if revived soon. The rate of return on investments in Nagaland cannot be 
compared with other advanced regions in the country. It was therefore, necessary to lower 
the leading rates by subsidising the rate of interest by at least 3%. In the interest of 
balanced e<;Q~omic growth of the country it was necessary to give some protection! to the 
North ~s .. ~·- Some of the industries in the ·reserved list of Government of India 
could be ~itted' to be set up. only il! ,the North East in· order to ensure that actual 
industrialisatiOn took place. A large population of the State was engaged in cottage and 
traditiorud industries like bamboo etc. The products 'Yere very popular and had potential for 
growth in the State. There were large number of saw mills, few wood based industries like 
plywood and some flour mills. Though the State had potential for agro-based industries, yet 
poor infrastructmal facilities leading to higber cost ·of production were making them 
unviable. The means of communications and transportation too were lacking in the State and 
conversion of railway track at Doyang for fast movement was necessary. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that the industrialisation of the State through 
small scale industries was the only answer for the economic development. The State 
Government in accordance with the new industrial policy invites investment from outside the 
country for the development of the State. Government_ of India has also been requested to · 
set up some of the viable central public sector undertakings in Nagaland to bring up the 
industrial atmosphere at par with other developed States in the country. Due to the. 
constraints of internal resources and . inadequate allocation of funds· from the Central 
Government, adequate infrastructural facilities COtlld not be created in the State for its 

163 
industrial development. Developing adequate infrastructure for attracting investment was 
one of the main objects of industrial policy of the State. Efforts were also being made to 
identify some agro-based and mineral based industries in the State through State Industrial 
Promotion Council. Some NRls had also been approached for foreign collaboration through 
the Government of India. But so far not much success had been achieved in tbis regard. The 
plan allocations to the State were meagre. As a result the State Government was unable to 
maintain the assets for development of industries. In the State plans priority was given to 
power, roads, agriculture and allied sectors. Industries had not been given priority so far. 
There was total lack of private participation in industrial activities. The hilly topography and 
absence of markets were hindering industrialisation. The high transportation . cost of raw 
material, plant and machinery and finished products had seriously affected the normal 
growth of industries. The expected generation of employment for the educated local youth 
was marginal. The all India financial institutions like IDBIISIDBI/NABARD had almost 
completely stQpped refinancing the State financial institutions. The IDBI office in Dimapur 
had not been functioning for the last few years. On the ground that RBI was giving financial 
support to the State of Nagaland. NABARD was also in the same situation. The 
representatives strongly pleaded before the Sub-Committee: 
1. to give a special status to Nagaland for financial package, 
2. to grant subsidy in making payment of the interest component, 
3. to permit the NRis to invest money in the State for industrial development, 
4. to approach the World Bank for financial assistance for repairing/developing and 
construction of good network of roads, 
5. to review the funding pattern of growth centre scheme, 
6. to promote/establish power projects in the State for fast industrialisation. Though 
the State had micro and mini power plants yet power plants of bigger size were 
required. One Hon'ble member suggested that some•good plans may be sent to the 
Central Government for approval and for extending financial assistance. 
7. for the early clearance and payment of Rs. 193 lakhs of transport subsidy 
reimbursement scheme which was pending with the Department of Industrial 
Development for the last two years whereas during this period many units had 
already gone sick or closed as they were relying heavily'on the subsidy scheme, and 
8. the revival of the capital outright grant would be beneficial for industrial 
development. 
The Sub-Committee was not satisfied with the pace of economic and industrial 
development of the State. 
Thereafte~ the meeting adjourned at 9.00 P.M. with a mutual vote of. thanks. 

WEDNESDAY, THE 8TH NOVEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. in the Conference Hall of Aranaya Tourist Lodge, 
Kohra, Kaziranga, (Assam) and held discussions with the State Government officials on the 
industrial scenario of the district. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) - Convenor 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Shivajirao G. Patil 
2.. Shri Govindram Miri 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
·REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri J.C. Pegu, I.A.S., D.C. Golaghat 
2. Shri N. Deori, Addl. Director (Industries) 
i 3. Shri M. U. Ahmed, G.M. DIC, Jorhat 
4. Shri A.K. Kotoki, Functional Manager, DIC; Nagaon 
5. Shri Amitabha Chetia, G.M. DIC, Sibsagar 
6. Shri Syed Zehirul Haque, Functional Manager, DIC, Gqlaghat 
7. Shri Santosh Ch. Das, Lead District Manager, Golaghat 
8. Dr. Syed Takiuddin Ahmed, Jt. Director (Vety.), Jorhat 
9. Shri Dibakar Goswami, Supdt. (Handloom & Textiles), Golaghat 
10. Shri K.C. Pandey, District Engineer (Telecom), )orhat 
11. Shri Anil Kumar Singh, IFS, D.F.O., Forest Deptt. 
'12. Shri Chittranjan Bhobora, D.F.O., Forest Deptt. 
13. Shri A.K. Baruah, A.C.S., PD, DRDA, Nagaon 
14. Shri P.N. Barman, S.D.I. (Telecom), Bokakhat 
15. Shri S.P. Kakoti Bora, A .. C.S., J:llroject Director, DRDA, Golaghat 
16. Shri D. Hazarika, A.C.S., S.D.O. {GAD), Bokakhat 
17 ... Shri J. Kakoty, District Information & PRO, Golaghat 
18. Shri D. Rahman, Election Officer, Bokakhat 
19. Shri N. Alam, Asstt, Project Officer (Tech.),. DRDA, Nagaon 
20. Shri F. Rahman, D.F.O., Golaghat (T) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
1. Shri O.P. Sharvar, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Sachdev, Assistant Director 
The Sub-Committee was welcomed. Thereafter the Convenor explained the purpose and 
object of the Sub-Committee. He also made two announcements - one. relating to the 
confidentiality and the other that the copy of the proceedings be sent to the Secretariat 
within ten days. 
164 

165 
About the working of the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana, the Sub-Committee was 
informed that during the year 1993-94 in Sibsagar district 45 cases were sponsored against 
the target of 39 and 21 cases were sanctioned and a sum of Rs. 14.96 lakhs was disbursed 
amongst all the 21 beneficiaries. In Golaghat district the target for 1993-94 was 26. A sum of 
Rs. 1~.05 lakhs was disbursed. Achievement was 26 cases. In Jorhat district the target for 
1993-94 was 36 and achievement was 100% ~ For the year 1994-95 the target for Sibsagar 
district was 265. 241 cases were sanctioned. An amount of Rs. 126.35 lakh was disbursed 
amongst 214 beneficiaries. In Golaghat the target for 1994-95 was 209. An amount of Rs. 
13.31 lakh was disbursed. The achievement was 209 cases. In Jorhat district the target, for 
1994-95 was 257 cases. An amount of Rs. 40.21 lakh was disbursed. The achievement was 
257 cases. For the year 1995-96, the target for Golaghat had been kept at 350 and so far the 
achievement was 129. Similarly, for Jorhat the achievement was 194 as against the target of 
280 cases. The progress under the PMRY had not been good. The main reasons for this 
were the absence of good and sufficient publicity of the Yojana, lack of infrastructure 
facilities, shortage of trainers, lack of banking facilities etc. However the D.I.C. had given 
stress for better implementation of PMR Y in respect of Agro-allied sector for rural areas 
e.g. dairy farming, fishery, poultry farm, piggery, duccary, banana plantation, tea, nursery, 
pine-apple garden, green house etc . 
. The climatic conditions of Golaghat and Jorhat districts were suitable for agriculture, 
live-stock and industry. The economic compulsions had forced more and more educated 
unemployed youth to take up employment through trade, business and industry. From the 
industrial development point of view the entrepreneurs of Jorhat and Golaghat districts 
required more encouragement and facilities to enter in the manufacturing business. 
However, the available infrastructure was inadequate. There was only one industrial area 
each in Golaghat and Jorhat. The transportation and roads were not suitable for vehicular 
traffic and also did not cover all the resourceful areas. The existence of nationalised bank 
branches were limited. The singleman bank branches were not in a position to render 
services to the entrepreneurs because they had a large area of 10 to 20 K.Ms to serve. 
Availability of finance was yet another problem for industrial ventures. Financial institutions 
gave less priority for providing financial assistance to the deserving entrepreneurs. TlJe 
entrepreneurs were also not in a position to fulfil banking formalities as per the R.B.I. 
norms as they belonged to very poor sections of the society. The availability of power was 
yet another problem. 
However, there was good scope for plastic industry, chemical industry, drugs and 
pharmaceuticals, spice manufacturing, sericulture, hqrticulture etc. On f1 query from an 
honourable Member of the Sub-Committee about potential of floriculture, the Sub­
Committee was informed that though there was little scope for floriculture yet the agro­
based industries and agro allied sectors wete found more suitable for both the districts. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that during the last three years the industrial 
scenario of the State undergone a lot of changes and now as a result thereof it is gaining 
ground welL The State Government had given exemption for five years for sales tax. and 
stamp duty. Even then there had been wide gap due to lack of transport and communication 
facilities. Still there was lack of capital formation and capital goods industry. The 
entrepreneurs had to bear high cost in establishing their units. Subsidy was required on term 
basis. Capital investment was required to be accelerated. The tiny sector should also be 
developed. One honourable member of the Sub-Committee asked whether they ever thought 
of establishing a sugar unit. The Sub-Committee was informed that there was already the 
problem of infrastructural facilities and therefore there was no question of establishing sugar 
industry. 

166 
The Sub-Committee took a very serious note of the way in which the applications were 
held up, not cleared and financial assistance was not given. The Committee was sorry to 
note as to why the banks were not cooperating in the matter of disbursement of financial 
assistance. 
on a specific query by an honourable member about recovery of loan· money, the Sub­
Committee was informed that recovery was only 15% which was a poor percentage. 
A very strong case was pleaded before the Sub-Committee for:-
(i) a special economic package for industrial development of Golaghat, Jorhat & 
Sjbsagar districts, 
(ii) development of roads, 
(iii) development of means of communications, 
(iv) availability and regular supply of power, and 
(v) a P.C.O. at Kaziranga. 
The meeting then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks . 
• 

SATURDAY, THE 11TH NOVEMBER, 1995 
The Sub-Committee met in the Conference Hall of Hotel Imphal Ashok, at 3.45 P.M. to 
hold discussions with the lead bank management in connection with the Prime Minister's 
Rozgar Yojana, the representatives of trade and industry and with the District Magistrate 
and State Government Officials. 
PRESENT 
LOK SABHA 
1. Shri Mohan Singh Deoria-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri· Shivajirao G. Patil 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Rohtas, Legislative Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF BANKING INSTITUTIONS 
1. Shri M. Bhowmik, Zonal Manager, U.B.I. 
2. Shri R. Gupta, Chief Manager, U.B.I. 
3. Shri P. Pattabhi Rao, Asstt. General Manager, S.B.I. Shillong . 
4. Shri S. Manohar, D.C.O., S.B.I. 
5. Shri 0. Raghumani, L.D.M., U.B.I. 
6. Shri K. Dhiren Singh L.D.M., U.B.I. 
7. Shri P.C. Samna, D.R.M., U.B.I. 
8. Shri Niranjan Ch. Das, Office P.N. Bank 
9. Shri P.K. Saikia, B.M. C.B.I. 
10. Shri P.B. Chakraborty, B.M., Bank .of Baroda 
11. Shri N.P. Das, B.M., Allahabad Bank 
12. Shri J.P. Hegde, Sr. Branch Manager, Vijaya Bank 
13. Shri V. Narayanan, Sr. Branch Manager, I.O.B., Imphal 
14. Shri H.G. •Kipgen, Branch Manager, P & S Bank, Imphal 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY 
1. Shri Vijay Jain, Executive, Chamber of Commerce 
2. Shri Sanjay Chhabra, Member, Chamber of Commerce 
3. Shri Pawan Dugar, Member, Chamber of Commerce 
4. Shri Chiron Ranjit Singh, Secretary General, lnd~Mynmar Exim Association. 
5. Shri Varinder Singh, Partner Sangai Exim Enterprises 
6. Shri T. Chonghiak, Executive Member, All Manipur Entrepreneur Association 
(A.M. E. A.) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE GOVERNMENT 
1. Shri K.K. Sethi, Chief Secretary, Govt. of Manipur 
2. Shri Jarnail Singh, Commissioner {Planning & Works) 
3. Ch. Biren Singh, Secretary (Industries) 
4. Shri A.K. Mangotra, Commissioner (R.D) 
167 

168 
' 5. Shri H.D.S. Sharma, Secretary (Hort. & Sc.) 
6. Shri P. Sharat Chandra, Secretary (Agri./M.I.) 
7. Shri J.S. Laishram, D.C. Senapati Distt. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
1. Shri O.P. Sharvar, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Sachdev, Assistant Director 
Meeting with Lead Bank MBIJagement in Connection with P.M.R. Y. (3.4S p.m. to 4.20 p.m.) 
The Members of the Sub-Committee were welcomed and the officers of the banks were 
introduced. Thereafter the Convenor introduced the Members and officers of the Sub­
Committee. The Convenor made two announcements- one relating to the confidentiality of 
the proceedings till the report was presented to the Parliament; and the other that a copy of 
the proceedings should be sent to the Secretariat within ten days. 
The Zonal Manager of United Bank of India, whicll was the lead bank, explained the. 
position about the performance of the banking institutions with regard to working and 
implementation of the Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana. He informed the Sub-Committee 
that during the year 1993-94, the yojana was implemented in the urban areas of the country 
while during the 1994-95 it was extended to the rural areas. The Yojana had a target of 
setting up seven lakh micro enterprises which was expected to generate employment for 1.4 
million persons by the end of the 8th five year plan. 
In Manipur the scheme covered only urban areas of five districts namely, lmphal, 
Thoubal, Bishenupur, Churachandpur and Chandel during the year 1993-94. But from the 
year 1994-95 it had been covering both the urban and rural areas of all the eight districts of 
the State. For the year 1993-94, 212 beneficiaries were sanctioned against the allotted target 
of 220 and money was disbursed ~o all. For the year 1994-95, 2040 beneficiaries were 
sanctioned against the allotted target of 2200 and money was disbursed to 1642 beneficiaries. 
For the year 1995-96 a target of 2000 had been allotted. Only 119 cases had so far been 
•t recommended and none had been paid so far. The State Government had requested the 
· . Central Government. to allot additional target for the year 1995-96 on the ground of large 
number of applications and good achievement of the scheme. 
On a query by the Convenor, the Sub-Committee was informed that under the Scheme 
the money was to be giwen direct to the firm or company supplying the machinery or spares 
or the infrastructural item~ but sometimes, under various pressures money was paid direct to 
the beneficiaries also. 
On another query by the Convenor, the Sub-Committee was informe<l that it was not 
proper and feasible for the banks to handover money for distribution and recovery. Shri 
Patil thanked the banks for fulfilling the targets and enquired what kind of industries were 
included for aid. The Sub-Committee was inf<>,rmed that f9r the p~p!Q~ of self employment, 
assistance was given to beneficiaries engaged in industries like IJ)iluery, poultry farming, 
dairying, power tillers etc. under the scheme. 
On another query by the Convenor the Sub-Committee was informed that generally a 
time of 20 to 25 days was taken between sanctioning and making disbursement to the 
beneficiary. The Sub-Committee w~ sorry to note that the recovery was very poor. For poor 
recovery of loans, the Zonal Manager informed the Sub-Committee that the beneficiaries 
were running good business and were creating assets. Dealing in piggery and grocery items 
had good chance in the hilly areas. Handloom was also a flourishing industry. The Zonal 
Manager also informed the Sub-Committee that infrastructural facilities were. wanting in the 
State. Good means of communication and transport were .-not there. The nearest railway 
• 

169 
station was Dimapur. Shri Patil suggested that they should demand a corridor through 
Bangladesh. The Sub-Committee was informed that the C~D. ratio was very high. Deposit 
was low because due to insurgency, people did not keep their money in banks etc. 
A strong plea was made for the special economic package for the State. 
II 
Meeting lfith representatives of trade and industry (4.25 p.m. to 5.00 p.m.) 
The repFeSentati.ves of trade and industry informed the Sub-Committee that due to lack 
of infrastructural facilities and insurgency, the industrial development of the State was 
suffering badly. The Sub-Committee was also informed that there was no good roads, no rail 
connection. Though there was an air connection yet that too was not regular. There was no 
regular power supply. Whatever industrial units were there they did not prosper due to the 
fear of 15 underground insurgent organisations which collected money forcibly as taxes. The 
State police was another problem which extracted money from the industrialists and their 
truck loads of goods were not allowed to proceed without greasing their palms. The 
industrialists could not export their goods due to non-viable import· of raw-material. There 
was a very good potential for export of ginger and resins. The heavy import duty of 45% 
dampens the enthusiasm of the entrepreneurs. Corruption was rampant in the State. 
The Indo-Myomar trade agreement, signed seven months ago was still limping. The 
barter system was still continuing at the Indo-Myomar border. In the State there were no 
incentives from the State Government for establishing industrial units. Whatever subsidy was 
given by the Central Government that too was not paid to them. 
The representatives strongly pleaded for :-
{i) Development of road and means of communications; 
·~~· (ii) Uninterrupted regular supply of power; 
(iii) Early implementation of Indo-Myomar trade agreement; 
(iv) Provision for subsidy to industrial units; 
(v) Reduction in import duty; and 
(vi) Special financial package to the State for its industrial development. 
III 
Meeting with D.M. and State Gon. Oflicials (5.00 p.m. to 5.45 p.m.) 
The Chief Secretary welcomed Sub-Committee and informed that the Government . of 
India had declared the whole of Manipur as industrially backward . area and all the eight 
districts of the State were categorised as 'No Industry Districts' ..• 
There was no centrally sponsored industrial estate in Manipur. The State Government . 
had set only one industrial estate at Takyelpat, Imphal covering an area of 10 acres with 40 
·constructed sheds. The State had no demarcated export zone at present. However, with the 
opening of the Indo-Myomar border trade, two trade centres, one at Moreh in Chandal 
district and another at Imphal in lmphal. district were proposed to be set up. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that the central investment; subsidy which was 
the main incentive had bee]l discontinued. The central transport subsidy which was 
withdrawn had again been continued, the orders for which had been received by the State 
Government only recently. The State Government gave incentives for allotment of land, 
joint sector investment, manpower development, powe_r subsidy, State investment, 
manpower development, power subsidy, State investment subsidy, State transport subsidy on 

170 
drawal of powerline etc. As regards powe~ it was informed that at present the peak hour 
demand of the State was a minimum of "70 M. W. Storage of power had been a major 
impediment in industrial development and the existing units also were badly affected. There 
was load shedding every third or fourth day in the State at present. . 
On the transport front the Sub-Committee was informed that the National Highway 39 
(Indo-Burma Road) was the main life-line of the State linking lmphal with Dimapur. 
National «ighway 53 (New Cachar Road) was the second road which connected lmpbal 
with Silchar in Assam. All the districts of the State were connected to each other by a 
number of State highways and also via lmphal. Railway network was practically negligible in 
the State. A metre gauge line had been extended recently upto Jiribam which was 225 K.M. 
from the State capital. 
Air transport also play a vital role in transportation of the State next of road transport. 
The State was connected with Silchar, Dimapur, Guwahati, Calcutta and Delhi by air 
transport service, but t~ !'as very costly due to the ever increasing fares by the airlines. 
Inadequate transport facilities, no proper rail link,\insurgency, uncertain conditions for 
safety of life and property, extraction of taxes by insurgent organizations had been adversely 
affecting the industrial development of the State. Though C.R.P.F. had been posted yet 
people did not feel safe. The iilsurgents had beea well equipped with arms and ammunition. 
Moreh was an important townfor trade butat Moreh there were no customs facilities. 
It was intended that goods should be brought from upland but the main problem was that 
there was no security on way. 
The Sub-Committee was further informed that there were no forests in Manipur. 
However, some teak was available which was smugled from Mynmar·. The State did not get 
any value addition by this. There was however, good scope for development of sericulture, 
handloom was traditional and fine quality of clotla was manufactured. There were 2,70,000 
looms and 3,00,000 handlooms. In the silk sector there were about 3oo:-400 looms. 
" On a query by an honourable Member of the Sub-Commitee was informed that one rail 
link had already been demanded by the State Government. 
The Sub~Committee. was further informed that for the industrial growth centre 33% 
assistance was received from the central government, 33% was given by the State 
Government and the balance was financed by financial institutions. Senapati district had 
already been indeatified for such a growth centre and the proposal had already been sent to 
l.C.I.C.I. 'lbe Chief Secretary informed the Sub-Committee that there was no investment by 
the Central Government in the State. 
Marketing was done by women only. The sale proceeds of handloom and sBk c·~, ~~i.t.!s 
came to Rs. 15 to 20 lakbs annually. The women also participated in industr.;;~ fairs at 
Bangalore etc., Und~r an agreement with JAICA of Japan, an assistance of Rs. 2 crore was 
expected. The help of NABARD was also anticipated for horticultre in the State. 
The agro climatic conditions ~f the State were suitabie for various fruits, vegetables; 
spices, rice, maize, wheat and pulses. 
The State Government had been training the educated youth in weaving, carpentary, 
blacksmithy, wool knitting, cane and bamboo works~ metal balls etc. from the year 1987 to 
1995, government had imported training to 2531 youth. In spite of government efforts to 
provide employment there were still 2,70,597. unemployed persons in the State. 
Th~ recent opening of border trade at Moreh bad given an impetus to local 
entrepreneurs and trade for exporting industrial products to Mynmar and ·import of 

171 
lustrial raw-materials, agricultural and forest products. Since the opening of the border 
de materials mainly resins, pulses, beans, ginger etc. of the value of Rs. 50,89,6121-had 
;:n imported and items like maida, cycles, cotton yatn of the value of Rs. 1,30,91,896'­
:1 so far been exported. Efforts were being made by the State Government ~ encoura,e 
: setting up of industries base~ on locally available raw materials to exploit the 
portunity, A better participation by banks and financial institutions would go a long way in 
Jediting the industrial development of the areas. Present level of participation by banks 
s far from satisfactory as would be evident from the advance credit deposit ratio in the 
1te which was unfavourable and continues to be so. In 199J.94 it was 20.46% and in 1994-
it was 16.88% indicating a net outflow of resources from the State. and declining local 
·estment. 
The Chief Secretary strongly pleaded for giving a special economic package for the State 
:lusively for its industrial development. 
The meeting then adjourned at 5.45 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

THURSDAY, THE 28TH DECEMBER, 1995 
Sub-Committee IV of Committee on Industry assembled in the State Guest Hou: 
Itanagar at 3.00 P.M. to held a joint meeting with the State Government officials, representath 
of Trade and Industry and the Lead Bank Management in connection with the Prime Ministe 
Rozgar Yojana. 
PRESENT 
RAJYA ~BHA 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita, M.P. & Convenor 
2. Shri Govindram Miri, M.P. 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria), M.P. 
4. Shri Manjay Lal, M.P. 
SECRETARIAT, . .,.. 
1. Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
2. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF GOVERNMENT-{)F ARUNACHAL PRADESH 
1. Shri Ashok Nath, Development Commissioner and officiating Chief Secretary 
2. Shri N. Diwakar, Secretary {Industries) 
3. Shri Makbul Pertin, Director {Industries) 
4. Shri R. Chandra Mohan, Commissioner (Finance) 
REPRESENTATIVES OF TRADE & INDUSTRY 
1. Shri Habul Payeng, President, Council of A.P. Industrial Association (CAPIA) 
2. Smt. Padi Jailang, Entrepreneur, ltafort Knittings, ltanagar 
3. Shri B.K. Ghosh Dastidar, Vice President, A.P. Chamber of Commerce 
4. Smt. Haqe Bida, Entrepreneur 
5. Shri Sanjay Tassar Batt, President, A.C.C. 
6. Shri Nani Kojin, General Secretary, CAPIA 
REPRESENTATIVES OF LEAD BANK MANAGEMENT 
1. Shri S.C. Pathak, Chief G.M., S.B.I., N.E. Circle, Guwahati 
2. Shri S. Venugopal, A.G.M., Lead Bank, S.B.l., Local H.O., Guwahati 
3. Shri S. Bhowmick, A.G.M., Regional Office, ltanagar '" 
4. Shri A.T. Debnath, Dy. Manager, S.B.I. Lead Bank, Itanagar ·· 
5. Shri D.N. Rao, Chief Manager, S.B.I., ltanagar 
Meeting with State Govemment Officials 
At the very outset the Convenor of the Sub-Committee made two custon 
anneuncements -one relating to the confidentiality of the proceedings of the meeting anc 
other that a copy of the proc_eedings be sent to the Secretariat within ten days. The Convc 
also explained in brief the scope of the Committee and its purpose of visit to the S1 
172 

173 
The Secretary Industries while giving a brief background of the Industrial scenario in 
the State informed the Committee that Arunachal Pradesh was the largest State in terms of 
the geographical area, among the North Eastern States with a population of 8.65 lakhs. It 
had so far lagged behind the other States of India in the pace of Industrial Development 
because of the severe lack of infrastructural facilities, communication bottlenecks and 
inherent constraints like difficult topography, geographical isolation, remoteness, etc. He 
urged that there was an urgent need to stimulate and encourage the growth of'industries 
which would go a long way in reducing the dependence on forest resources and create 
employment opportunities for ensuring all round rapid development. 
Giving the present industrial profile of the State he informed the Sub-Committee that 
there was no large and major industry in the State, though there were 17 medium Industries, 
3146 village and small scale industries, 155 craft/weaving centres, 28 sericulture centres, 5 
show rooms, 13 emporia, one growth centre and 13 Industrial Estates in the State. Though 
the State was endowed with abundant natural resources- like limestone, dolomite, graphite, 
coal, oil and gas, rice, maize, potato, tea, coffee, rubber, horticulture products like apples, 
oranges, pineapples, peas and forest resources but these were yet to be harnessed. This 
could not be possible so far due to problems like difficult terrain, Jack of transportation and 
infrastructural facilities. 
He also informed the Sub-Committee that the banks, due to commercial consideration, 
were very rigid in granting the required credit facilities to the entrepreneurs. No working 
capita1 was given by the banks in the State. The network of nationalised banks except State 
Bank of India was yet to extend the credit facilities in different distri"cts: The entrepreneurs 
were not in a position to invest big amounts. As the entrepreneurs of Arunachal Pradesh 
were the first generation entrepreneurs there was a need to have separate norms which may 
be softer than those made applicable in other developed States. 
He also informed the Sub-Committee that industries based on locally available resources 
and demand had better possibilities in the State of Arunachal Pradesh. There were (a) 
agricultural and horticultural based industries like mustard . oil mill, ginger drying and 
grinding etc. (b) Forest based industries like wooden furniture, wooden articles and toys, 
electrical accessories, tea chest battens, tea chest plywood, cane and bamboo products, etc. 
(c) demand based industries like printing press, barbed wire, blacksmithy, brick making, tyre 
retreading and volcanising, automobile servicing units, jobbing workshop, drycleaning unit, 
electronic industry, woollen knitted garments, readymade garments, etc. 
More than 70 per cent of the area of Arunachal Pradesh is under forests and almost the 
entire mineral wealth is found to be within the forest area. In the absence of suitable 
industries forests are exposed to over exploitation. Therefore, a pragmatic approach of forest 
protection vis-a-vis development of mineral resources of the State is of utmost importance. 
Arunachal Pradesh being predominantly forest area, needs some relaxation in the existing 
forest and Environment Protection Laws. The State Government views mining of economic 
mineral deposits on a small scale, as an activity complementary to forest protection. The 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh feels that the environmental clearance to the new -
industrial units sho!Jld be delegated to the State Government at least upto 20 sq. km. area 
and more fu.nds should be allotted under the mining sector as mineral exploration is a high 
risk and high cost venture. The present allocation of funds under the mineral sector is too 
meagre to undertake any mineral exploration work by the State Government on its own 
affecting adversely the development of vast mineral exploration and exploitation work. 
The Secretary. Industry of the State also informed the Sub-Committee about the various 

\ ; 
I 
174 
impediments in the way of developing the Industrial Sector. He suggested for the fast 
development of roads, transport network, means of communication and a special financial 
package for the State. 
When an Hon'ble Member asked about the outcome of the foreign visit of the Chief 
Minister (C.M.) of the State, the Chief Secretary informed the Sub-Committee that as a 
result of the visit of the C.M. now some of agreements/MOUs were likely to be arrived at/ 
signed with some foreign units for the industrial development of the State. He also informed 
the Sub-Committee that power in the State was only meant for domestic purposes. Though 
there w:.;s a high potential for generation of power but due to insufficient funds it was not 
being tJti!ised. The Chief Secretary also informed that an MOU had been signed with a 
compal:J' for exploration of gas and a gas-based power project in the eastern part of the 
State but there was no progress in the same as the issue of giving a counter guarantee was 
pen.-Jiog with the Department of Power~ He also informed that the scheme of single window 
clearance had not been announced. 
The Chief Secretary informed the Sub-Committee that the State Government offered all 
the possible assistance to the industrial units for the fast expansion/development of 
industries in the State. 
Meeli11g witll representatives of Trade & ltJdustry 
The President of the Council of Arunachal Pradesh Industries Association gave a 
detailed account of the various difficulties faced by the entrepreneurs and other Industrialists 
in the State. He stated that ther.e was an acute shortage of infrastructural facilities like road 
communication, railway track, shortage of power, means of communication, etc. He 
informed the Sub-Committee that the transport subsidy was available upto Siliguri which 
should be extended upto Patna. He also informed the Sub-Committee that the 25 percent 
Central Capital Investment subsidy which had been stopped should be restored. The banks 
were reluctant to finance the units for want of collatoral security. As there was no patta 
system, land can not be owned by anyone as far as documentary evidence was concerned 
and hence the difficulty in getting loan from the banks. He pleaded for the removal of 
restricttd area permit system atleast for Indians. He also pleaded for a concessional rate of 
interest. He wished that in Arunachal Pradesh the growth Centre Scheme should be 
successful though it was not so in other States. He informed the Sub-Committee that there 
was a very good coordination between the entrepreneurs and the government officials 
concerned. 
The Committee was informed that in the field of coal and oil the State was suffering 
badly. because it was not getting royalty as the concerned units are not extracting them while 
the Coal India Limited received Rs. 15 lakhs on the plea that they developed approach 
roads, etc. The entrepreneurs were happy and satisfied and assured the Sub-Committee that 
the target under PMRY would be over achieved. 
The Convenor of the Sub-Committee enquired about the complaints of Arunachal 
Pradesh's pavilion in the Trade fair in Delhi. The Sub-Committee was informed that as far 
as the State Pavilion was conceined it sold its own products whereas some other states sold 
goods not of their own States and, therefore, there were some complaints. 
The President of the Council of Arunachal Pradesh Industries Association pleaded 
for:-
(i) making transport subsidy operative for atleast 10 years to both the old and new 
industrial units; 

175 
(ii) creation of a revolving fund for speedy payment of transport subsidy claims 
amounting to crores of rupees in respect of the industrial units of the State 
pending for want of sufficient funds; 
(iii) renewal of 25 percent Central Capital Investment subsidy for the State~ 
(iv) the increase of credit flow in the State by banking institutions; 
(v) increasing the C.D. ratio in the State; 
(vi) increasing the National Equity Fund upto Rs. 30 lakhs term loan through CISBI; 
and for taking the financing of the projects directly by SIDBI; 
(vii) scrapping the 3 percent interest tax for the N.B. region; 
(viii) suggesting the R .B .I. to monitor credit flow effectively and regularly for the· 
healthy industrial development in the region; 
(ix) the review of the Growth Ce!'!~i"e Scheme which, in its present form was not 
feasible for the State and introduce the required changes to make it fruitful in the 
State; 
(x) increasing the annual income limit of Rs. 24000/- to Rs. 36000/- and removal of 15 
sq. k.m. area operational limit under the PMRY as in some areas there was no 
nationalised bank branch within an area of 100 sq. k.m.; 
(xi) making the available industrial products in the State mandatory to be procured by 
the State Government with 15 percent price preference and the bill be paid within 
30 days of presentation; 
(xii) lowering the power tariff and for scientific tapping of the available hydro-electricity 
potential; 
(xiii) the rehabilitation/revival of the sick industrial units; 
(xiv) scrapping the area restriction permit system; and 
(xv) inviting the investors both Indian and foreign, to invest in Industrial Units of the 
State. 
The Sub-Committee was satisfied with the discussion and recommends tiJat . the banking 
institutions should determine the ownership right as per the State's Land laws for grjlnting 
loans only to the residents of the State. It also recommends that the e~tra interest burden of 3 
percent should be stopped in the case of Arunachal Pradesh. 
,. 

176 
Meeting with Lead Bank Management 
The Chief General Manager, SBI gave a brief overview of the working of the branches 
of the lead bank in Arunachal Pradesh. He informed the Sub-Committee that under the 
PMRY the progress as on 18.12.95 was as under:-
Year Target Applications Applications & Distributed 
fixed sponsored Amount sanctioned Amount 
No. Rs. in lakhs No. Rs. in lakhs 
1993-94 200 160 124 103.29 115 86.79 
i994-95 250 311 183 130.80 132 78.67 
1995-96 300 220 96 77.69 3 1.31 
The Chief General Manager informed the Sub-Committee that there were a number of 
constraints being faced in the implementation of PMR Y scheme. For example delayed 
sponsoring, stray applications sponsored from far flung areas, crowding of similar actions, 
hurried/perfunctory scrutiny by the screening committees leading to subsequent rejections, 
delays in training, delay in issuance of trading licences, abandonment of scheme after 
availing term loan and poor recovery of loans. He also informed the Sub-Committee that 
due to limit on the service area those applicants residing in areas falling beyond the service 
limit of a branch could not be paid the amount. However, the management informed that no 
collateral security was demanded from the prospective beneficiaries. However, in many cases 
the loan amount could not be disbursed for want of proper title deed, etc. in respect of 
landed properties. 
The Convenor observed that the case for St:'me relaxation inight be reviewed and if 
some relaxation was made as a special case it shoutJ not be quoted as a precedent. The Sub­
Committee observes that when the task force recommends a case for payment the banks 
should not reject it otherwise. The amount should, in no case, be allowed to lapse. Tlte'-Svb­
Committee also observes that the restriction on the area limit or service area should be 
removed and bank branches should be opened in all the areas having no branch. A reasonable 
time limit should be fixed for deciding tbe case for payment and the actual payment •of the 
loan money. 
The Chief General Manager wanted that the Government should scrutinise the cases 
and sponsor them right from the beginning of the year so that banks might process then 
smoothly and payments be made. This would also avoid last moment pressure of work in the 
banks. The Sub-Committee was informed that on the whole the work was being done 
smoothly in cooperation with the State Government officials and entrepreneurs. 
The meeting was then adjourned at 7.00 P.M. with a mutual vote of thanks. 

STUDY REPORT (S) 
OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE- V 
I 

t t••·i II•··• 1 .f• 

Study Report of the 'tst Phase visit of Sub-Committee-V of Department-rehited 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry to Hyderabad, Visakhapatnam .and 
Vizianagram during lOth to 15th September, 1995 
The visit of Sub·Committee- V to State of Andhra Pradesh emanated from the decision 
of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry to constitute six Sub­
Committees of the Committee to study the aspects concerning industrialisation of backward 
areas and status of capital goods manufacturing units in the country. It was also decided by 
die Committee that these Sub-Committees would undertake field trips in different regions of 
the country. 
Sub-Committee- V comprised of the following members:-
1. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaih - Convenor 
(Telugu Desam) 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav (SP) 
3. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani (Nominated) 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri · K.H. Muniyappa, Cong.(I) 
5. Shri· Gurudas Kamat, Cong.(I) 
6. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad, Cong.(I) 
7. Shri M. Baga Reddy, Cong. (I) 
·I' 
8. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye, Cong.(I) 
9. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria, BJP 
10. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya, BJP 
The purpose· of the visit was to appraise the steps taken by the State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh towards removing the industrial backwardness of the State, vis-a-vis their 
coordination with central agencies in the matter. The Sub-Committee felt that it was equally 
important to seek the views of trade and industry representatives based in the State on the 
problems/constraints being encountered by them in running/establishing industries 
particularly in the light of new economic policy and its impact on the pace of 
industrialisatiOfl in the State of Andhra Pradesh. Another purpose was to interact with the 
workers as ·well as managements of the central industrial units in the State with a view to 
take stock of their status in the light of overall industrial scenario of the State. 
The Sub-Committee camped at Hyderabad on 11th and 12th September, ~995. The Sub­
Committee had a series of meetings with representatives of the State Governmegt of Andhra 
Pradesh, representatives of Federation of Andhra Pradesh, Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry and the workers and management of BHEL plant. The Sub-Committee deliberated 
its next day's business in three separate meetings with managements of National Mineral 
Development Corporation, Sponge Iron India Ltd. and Praga Tools Ltd. 
The Sub-Committee after completing its business at Hyderabad camped at 
Visakhapatnam on 13th and 14th September, 1995. At Visakhapatnam the Committee held 
discussions with Joint Collector of Visakhapatnam District, the representatives of trade and 
industry and also visited the plant of Bharat Heavy Plates & Vessels and met the ;workers 
and management of the unit to ascertai,!l the company profile. 
On 14th September, 1995, the·Sub-Committee took an opportunity to meet the workers 
and management of Visakhapatnam Steel Plant to analyse the progress of work in that 
179 

180 
upcoming steel plant and the problems related thereto. The Sub-Committee also met 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust authorities and the management of Hindustan Shipyard in 
connection with their contribution towards industrial development of the State and also on 
the basis of their separate representations submitted to it. Later the Sub-Committee visited 
the smelter plant of Hindustan Zinc Limited and discussed the activities of the unit with 
workers and manageme1.1t of Hindustan Zinc Limited. 
The Sub-Committee after completing its business at Visakhapatnam proceeded to 
Vizianagram on the 15th September to see the progress of Growth Centre being set up at 
Bobbili and discussed with the District Collector, Vizianagram the possible steps to arrange 
the requisite infrastructural facilities for the Growth Centre. The Sub-Committee also met 
the trade and industry representatives regarding prospects of industries in and around 
Vizianagram. 
Based on the evidence and the papers/memoranda submitted before it, the Sub­
Committee has come to the conclusion that representatives of the State Government, trade 
and industry representatives and the workers/management of industrial units at Hyderabad, 
Visakhapatnam and Vizianagram have similar views on certain issues like JX!Wer shortage, 
need for setting up of more ports and provisions of requisite infrastructural facilities iii the 
State. Still the Sub-Committee feels, that there are certain other related issues which have 
direct bearing on the overall industrial scenario of the State in general and particular impact 
on the performance of industrial units functioning in the State. The Sub-Committee would, 
therefore, before indicating· its recommendation like to give a brief account of all the issues 
connected with industrialisation of backward areas that came up for discussion, issue-wise, 
with different agencies in the State. 
Power shortage: The Principal Secretary (Industries and Commerce), State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh had informed the Sub-Committee that though the State was tlie third 
largest power producer State in the country but power generation had to be increased nearly 
by 100%, from 6000 m.w. of installed capacity. The Comnuttee was given to understand that 
State Government had allowed setting below 30 m. w. power projects which needs no 
clearance by the Central Government . . 
The Federation of Steel Small Industries had also highlighted the issue of lack of power 
supply. According to the Federation the power supply was needed to be iinproved in the 
State in particular. The ,small scale entrepreneurs in particular were facing lot of problems in 
running their units in peak hours. The power cut was applied for three to four hours daily 
which was affecting the infrastructure of SSI. 
The management of Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels at Visakhapatmim was equally 
concerned about power shortage and emphasised the need for captive power plant for better 
performance. 
Power shortage. was one of the main constraint in development of industries at district 
level. The district 'authorities expressed its deep concern ovef the power shortage at 
Vizianagram, where a Growth Centre was proposed to be set up under the Central Scheme. 
A captive power plant of 100 m. w. capacity had been proposed for proper development of 
the district. According to the trade and industry representatives at Vizianagram atleast two 
power plants were required at Bobbili and Vizianagram respectively to cater the industrial 
needs of the district. 
In view of the submissions made before it the Sub-Committee opines that power was 
most crucial factor for the industrial developmen(of any area/State. While it was gathered 
that the State Government of Andhra Pradesh was making all possible efforts within its 

181 
resources for power availability, it was the Central Government which should come to the 
help of the State Government in augmenting power generation. The Sub-Committee, 
therefore, recommends that clearance of power projects proposed by the State Government 
should be expedited on priority basis by the Central Government. The private parties may be 
allowed to enter in power sector as the State Government had no bitch on that score. The 
State Government should also ensure that regular supply of power to industrial units 
particularly to small scale industries was maintained. 
Port facilities: Andhra Pradesh has an added advantage of having a considerably long 
coastal belt and industrial development of the State would thus largely depend on the port 
facilities. Nearly all witnesses with whom the Sub-Committee interacted during its visit had 
unanimous view on the need to develop more ports in the State. 
According to the State Government representatives at Hyderabad, a major port was 
required between Visakhapatnam and Madras to cater the need of the industrial units of the 
region. State Government was also in favour of developing Gangavaram port and the 
proposal had already been sent to the Central Government for clearance. 
The workers as well as the management of Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels and 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant broadly highlighted the problems of port facilities in the State. 
According to them the facilities at Visakhapatnam Port Trust seemed to have reached a 
point of saturation and unless the new port was developed at Gangavaram, their problems 
were bound to increase. BHPV in particular had severe constraints in getting some place 
near Visakhapatnam Port Trust for fabrication purposes. The workers of Visakhapatnam 
Steel Plant also highlighted the issue of high demurrage charges paid by the plant due to 
delay at port. 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust on the other hand had its limitations. However, on the issue 
of Gangavaram Port, the Port authorities informed the Sub-Committee that both the States 
as well as the Central Government had to take a decision quickly. 
The Sub-Committee observes that development of more ports could definitely increase the 
pace of industrialisation of State. The Sub-Committee recommends that the Surface Transport 
Ministry should take urgent initiatives in developing Gangavaram port and declare it a·major 
port. 
Incentives in investment: Development of infrastructure needs a coordinated approach 
and a positive policy for attracting investors for development of. infrastructure. It was well 
accepted that investor would invest his capital only if incentives were available. In the 
present era of liberalisation, where Central Government had formulated certain incentives 
for investors, the StateGovernments were going ahead by offering extra incentives wherever 
possible to attract maximum possible investment in their respective States. These industrial 
incentives had normally three determining factors i.e. (i) incentives (ii) procedural issues (iii) 
infrastructure. 
According to the State Government authorities at Hyderabad, agro and food processing­
industry had good prospects in the State. The State had equally good base for drugs and 
pharmaceuticals. There was single window clearance for investors. The investors were 
provided all information with regard to their proposals at one place. There was good 
coordination between the State and Central Governments_in regard to incentives to be given 
to investors in infrastructural field but sharing of data required more coordination. The 
procedure for filing proposals was SO· simple that the investor had simply to fill up a single 
form (Industrial Entrepreneur Memoranda) for his proposals and need not go for different 
forms for different proposals. The paper work had been reduced to the minimum possible 

182 
extent. Five years tax Holiday scheme from the date of completion had also been extended 
to investors for infrastructural projects. 
The representative bodies of trade and industry in the State had however some 
reservations abput procedural issues in the State. The representatives at Vizianagram were a 
bit dissatisfied that all approval papers were processed at Hyderabad instead of at district 
level where the officers were available. The Sub-Committee appreciated the assurance given 
by the District Collector to make himself available to discuss the problems of industrialist. 
He further assured the possible delegation of powers and setting the time frame within which 
procedural issues would be resolved. 
The Sub-Committee had already highlighted this issue in a meeting with the Chief 
Minister of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad and he had promised to look into the matter on 
priority .. The Sub-Committee hopes that the procedure will be streamlined. 
The Sub-Committee would nonetheless urge the Central Government to formulate certain 
guidelines on procedural matters in such a manner so that entrepreneurs get their problems 
solved .at District Industries Centre level itself. This would prove to be the biggest incentive 
and the entrepreneurs would also not be forced to run from pillar to post for getting their 
proposals approved. The Sub-Committee would further suggest for a centralised data system 
for information on investment for the convenience of investc::-s. 
Other factors for infrastructure: The Sub-Committee had been given to understand that 
other means of transportation such as railways, air traffic; equally contribute in development 
of infrastructure. For instance, the representatives of Federation of Andhra Pradesh 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry highlighted the problems of cargo facilities for products 
meant for export. According to them, Air India should shoulder the responsibility of 
carrying export goods as ships were not easily available and also the demurrage charg~s take 
a major chunk of their capital. Hyderabad airport should be declared an international airport 
for export purposes. 
The Sub-Committee feels that Government may sympathetically consider this positive 
suggestion. 
There were certain issues linked with the railways which came to the notice of the Sub­
Committee. For instance, the workers of the Visakhapatnam Steel Plant deposed before the 
Sub-Committee that only 65 wagons per day were available for transportation against total 
requirement of 135 wagons. The Sub-Committee feels that the shortages of wagons should not 
come in the way of production capacity of the plant and urges the Government to solve the 
problem of wagons on urgent basiS. The Sub-Committee would also like the Railway Ministry 
to rationalise the special tariff levied for steel products in Visakhapatnam for overall 
development of steel sector. 
The district authorities at Vizianagram pointed out another problem connected with the 
railways. According to them the movement of coal to the St.ate was very tardy. In their 
view, the railway link facilities could be improved by constructing a railway bridge between 
Gajhapatinagaram and Dattira Jeru. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would take 
care of this suggestion. 
Water Supply: Water was one of the significant components of infrastructural facilities. 
State Governments authorities deposed before the Sub-Committee for diversion of the 
Godavari water for industrial purposes at Visakhapatnam. Estimates were being prepared 
for drawing of three MGD of water from Vengalraya Sagar reservoir to cater the needs of 
major industries expected in growth centre at Bobbili. 
Raw Materials: The State Government authorities informed the Sub-Committee that the 

1. 
183 
State had plenty of raw material resources. The main raw materials were coal, iron ore, oil 
and natural gas, bauxite, manganese ore, copper ore~ dolomite, limestones, lead and zinc 
ore. There was plently of scope for diamond mining in the state for which permission of 
proper aerial survey was required. The. present provision regarding aerial survey upto 25 sq 
km. only had restricted mining of raw material. The Sub-Committee feels that such 
restriction could adversely affect the prospects of mining in the. country in general and the 
State of Andhra Pradesh in particular. The Sub-Committee would urge upon the Government 
to lift such restriction and permit the mining authorities to conduct the survey. The Sub­
Committee would further suggest to make best use of satellite survey facilities in locating the 
prospective areas of mining in the State. 
Before moving on to the presentations of various industrial units of the State the Sub· 
Committee would like to give a brief account in the following paras, of the views it gathered 
from the State Government authorities and representatives of trade and industry on other 
relevant issues having a bearing on the industrialisati<?n of the ~tate. 
Presentation by State Government Officials: The State Government officials appreciated 
the need to encourage exports in the wake of globalisation but equally emphasised that the 
corresponding benefits be extended to the State Government from the export earnings. 
On the issue of taxation, the State Government emphasised the need of inter-state 
coordination. They wanted similar coordination in regard to movement of goods. 
The State Government officials informed that there was no modern textile industry in 
the State and the matter be examined in depth. Regarding sugar industry it was informed 
that licence to 15 private parties had been given and it was hoped this industry will flourish 
with participation from private entrepreneur. 
Presentation of Trade and Industry representatives: On the question of taxation, the 
trade representatives wanted uniform policy througout the country. They further deposed 
that while several labour laws had been enacted for workers no protection had been given to 
industry. 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the views of the State Government that corresponding 
benefit from exports should be given to State Government. This will simultaneously encourage 
the entrepreneur of the State to maintain quality control of their products. 
The Sub-Committee feels that high sales tax on some products in Andhra Pradesh had 
adversely affected the pace of industrialisation in the State. The Sub-Committee met the Chief 
Minister of the State in the matter and he assured to look into the matter sympathetically. 
The Sub-Committee would nonetheless recommend that uniform taxation should be effected 
throughout the country. The Sub-Committee feels that problems of industrial units like BHEL 
could be solved by rationalising sales tax structure. 
The Sub-Committee observes that small scale entrepreneurs are facing problems in 
getting credit from banks. The Sub-Committee recommends that possibilities should be 
explored for opening new banks which would exclusively cater to the needs of small scale 
industry. There is also a definite need of fixing time frame to process applications. 
The Sub-Committee agrees with trade people that Vizianagaram should be declared a 
backward area and all benefits given. to it in that capacity. 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited 
The Committee visited the Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd's heavy power equipment plant 
at Hyderabad. Members of the Sub-Committee were taken round and shown various 
workshops/plants by its officials. 

184 
The Sub-Committee held discussions with the workers who drew the attention of the 
Sub-Committee towards the problems/constraints being felt by the BHEL in the wake of 
new policy of economic liberalisation. They emphasised the need for allowing BHEL to 
participate in open bidding and not to put it to disadvantage vis-a-vis other bidders. They 
also pointed out that BHEL had capacity to deliver goods but it was not getting orders due 
to financial crisis. They emphasized that the Government should stand as a guarantor jor 
BHEL. The representatives of the workers also brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee 
that technicians/executives of BHEL were quitting BHEL and joining multinational joint 
ventures like Siemans, ABB, General Electric etc. ' 
During discussion with the management, the Committee was informed that liberalisation 
had not affected BHEL adversely. Orders from power sector, however had come down due 
to other reasons which were likely to improve in future. Certain country-specific, industry· 
specific and company-specific constraints being felt in the wake of liberalisation were also 
pointed out. 
The management pointed out . that BHEL had to face problem when they had to 
compete with General Electric, ABB, Siemans etc. The problem as pointed out by the 
management was in the area of taxation. They informed the Sub-Committee that BHEL had 
to bear with the policy of double taxation. On being asked by the Sub-Committee to 
elaborate on the point, it was clarified that when BHEL imported any particular material it 
had to pay import duty. Thereafter, on the fislished products sales tax also had to be paid. 
This problem they informed the Committee, was not being faced by companies like General 
Electric, ABB and Siemans. These companies when they import any machinery for their 
plant, they did not have to pay any duty. They therefore, urged the Sub-Committee that 
counterveiling duty (duty on import of machinery) required to be abolished. They also 
informed that the World Bank bidding process should be adopted and BHEL should be 
permitted. to participate in open competitive bidding. They also emphasised the need to 
introduce 'Credit Insurance Scheme' and that the Government 'should also stand as a 
guarantor. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the problems of this premier undertaking should 
be solved on priority basis particularly with regard to adjustment in duty structure and the 
question of allowing company to participate in bidding including financial bidding. 
Rationalisation of sales tax may also help the company a lot. 
National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) 
After hearing the performance achievements of the NMDC, the Sub-Committee 
enquired from the management whether the performance achievement was mainly due to 
export of raw materials and whether instead of exporting iron ore, NMDC could perform 
well by exporting steel? The Sub-Committee .further enquired about the activity of NMDC in 
the field of diamond mining and also the possibility of limestone mining in Andhra Pradesh 
to give a boost to cement industry. The Sub-Committee also enquired about the effect of 
liberalisation and globalisation on the Corporation? 
The Sub-Committee was informed by the management of NMDC that wherever possible 
finished product instead of raw material should be exported. However, they pointed out that 
the export of raw material to Japan was being done on the basis of MOU after getting 
clearance from the Government of India. They also informed that for few more years they 
had to export raw material. They further informed that their total production was 9.5 million 
tonnes and they had a long term contract with Vizag Steel Plant and Essar Steel in terms of 
supply of raw material. Since they had to export raw material they were keeping in stock 
with them iron ore for the purpose. Therefore, they w.ere unable to meet the requirement 

---------- ----- ------ -- ------
185 
(1.2 million tonnes) of the Vizag Steel Plant. At present they were supplying 0.78 million 
tonnes of Vizag Steel Plant. 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the performance of the Corporation in the field of iron 
ore mining and recommends that more emphasis should be given to meet the requirements of 
indigenous steel plants as regards the supply of iron-ore is concerned. 
As regards the diamond mining the Corporation informed that the mining done by them 
at present is of international standard and the success rate was also on par with the foreign 
companies engaged in the process. They informed the Sub-Committee that in order to 
increase the sphere of activity in diamond mining, 'Auto Magnetic Survey' needed to be 
conducted. The cost of the survey would be around Rs. 515 crores and the areas involved' 
will be about 25,000 sq. kms. At present Government permits to conduct survey in 25 sq. 
kms. and there was proposal to increase it to 40 sq. kms., which was again not sufficient for 
the purpose of conducting 'Auto . Magnetic 'Survey'. In this connection they sought the 
assistance of the Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee hopes that the Government would take 
positive steps in the matter. 
As regards mining of limestone was concerned the Sub-Committee was informed that 
the Corporation was supplying limestones to cement industry in Rajasthan and Madhya 
Pradesh. They also informed that Vizag Steel Plant had captive mines but they were finding 
them· uneconomical. 
After some deliberation the Sub-Committee gathered from the NMDC that they were 
pleading with the State Government of Karnataka and the Government of India to hand 
over the captive mines in Karnataka namely the 'Kumaraswamy Mines' to them. They were 
pleading for it because the Donamalai Mines in Kamataka where at present they were doing 
mining was likely to be exhausted in the next 7-8 years and the task force engaged there 
would have no work in hand. 
The Sub-Committee feels that apparently the pleading of NMDC for getting captive mines 
in Kamataka sounds logical and the Government should consider their case on merit. The 
Sub-Committee further observes that development of Bailadilla mines should help supply to 
VSP. 
Sponge Iron India Umited (SilL). 
Tlie ·management of the sm.. gave detailed account about the working of the Company. 
They informed the Sub-Committee that the prime objective of SilL was to establish the 
techno-economic feasibility of manufacturing sponge-iron suitable as substitute for steel 
making though electric arc furnace route and thereby develop an alternative to the 
conventional process of manufacturing of steel i.e. via the blast furnace route which required 
high grade metallurgical coal (coking coal), reserves of which in the country were fast 
depleting. In order to achieve this objective the Company completed the erection of the first 
kiln in the year 1980 and commissioned the same on 31st December, 1980 and was able to 
produce quality sponge iron suitable for steel making by electric arc furnaces. Encouraged 
by the successful result of the first Demonstration Sponge Iron Plant, Government of India 
approvd doubling its capacity by setting up a second. kiln. The second kiln incorporating the 
impiQ._vements and design modifications which was build with in-house expertis~ and 
indigenous equipment, went into commercial production in October, 1985. Since then both 
the kilns had been producing quality .sponge iron suitable for manufacture of steel by electric 
arc furnaces. 
The management further informed that after achieving its prime objective the Company 
entered into the field of offering engineering oonsultancy services. The Company entered 

186 
into five such consultancy contracts and successfully implemented five projects. The 
Company also discharged designs and prepared all the requisite engineering drawings for 
kiln of 60,000 tpa and above capacity. The Sub-Committee was informed that on the 
international front the Company had carried out several assignments for Vietnam, Hungary, 
Pakistan; Zambia etc. which included testing of raw materials for establishing their suitability 
for production of sponge iron, providing specialised technical services such as engineering 
expert assistance for creation, supervision and commissioning and training of foreign clients. 
Currently the Company was executing a prestigious overseas contract for a Peruvian Steel 
Company. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed by the management of SilL that the Company, 
keeping in line with its general philosophy of taking up innovative developmental 
programmes, had selected the following two new projects for implementation: 
(a) A ~aptive power plant based on waste heat recovery system. They had set up for 
the first time in the country a captive power plant (CPP) of 4mw capacity based on 
waste heat recovery system. 
(b) Submerged Arc Furnace (SAF) for manufacture of high grade pig iron. 
The Sub-Committee enquired from the management about the problems being faced by 
the Company. The management highlighted the following problems:-
(i) The Company was unable to achieve full capacity utilisation due to poor quality of 
coal. Over the years the quality of coal from M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. 
(SCCL) had deteriorated (with ash content some times exceeding 40%)~ · 
(ii) Till 1992-93, the Company was marketing almost 50% of its production .as captive 
consumption to A.P. Steel Ltd. However, due to certain operational problems of 
A.P. S.L. resulting in its closure, SilL had no other alternative but to sell its product 
to other customers located at far away places incurring additional costs in 
transportation. 
(iii) On account of severe power cuts in the State of A.P. in the last 3-4 years, many of 
the secondary steel making units, which were consumers of SIIL·Sponge Iron, had 
either to cut down their operation partially or close down totally. As a result they 
had to markc:tt the product to consumers located at far off places in the States of 
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, once again involving high element of freight. 
(iv) Reduction in import duty in melting scrap, a substitute for sponge iron from 35% to 
5% has also resulted in lower demand for indigenous sponge iron. 
(v) It is the only unit in public sector competing with major manufacturers in the marht 
in private sector with much larger installed capacity. 
(vi) Substantial increase in the cost of coal which was one of the major inputs in the 
manufacture of sponge iron had affected the company adversely. 
(vii) The major source of revenue for the Company had been earnings from Consultancy 
services which· the Company was rendering in the field of coal based sponge iron 
, technology. However, du~ to saturation in the industry, the consultancy income over 
· the last two-three years had reduced considerably. 
(viii) Increase in the interest on Government loans and depreciation during 1993-94 mainly 
on account of commissioning of captive power plant in March, 1993, had also 
affected the Company on the financial front. 
The Sub-Committee was informed by the management that they had taken steps to 
/ 

187 
contain the operational loss. This included raising the production from 48,500 tonnes in 
1993-94 to 50,375 tonnes in 1994-95. To overcome the problem of usage of high ash coal, the 
Company had effected certain modifications/improvements to the process parameters, which 
had enabled the kilns to be operated even with ash upto 32%. Improvement in the captive 
power generation had also contributed for better working results. There was improvement in 
income from consultancy consequent upon securing an overseas contract from a Peruvian 
steel company. 
They also informed the Sub-Committee that with signs of upward trends in the steel 
market the Company might make profit in the year 1995-96. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Company should be given financial assistance 
to increase its installed capacity. The supply of good quality coal with less ash content from 
M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. may be ensured. Subsidy should be given to the 
Company to purchase coal. Fo~ R & D activity the Central Government should also extend 
financial assistance to the Company. There was also need to review and rationalise the import 
duty on melting scrap so that indigenous production of sponge iron got proper boost. 
Praga Tools Limited (PTL) 
The Sub-Committee was informed that the Praga Tools Limited (PTL), Secunderabad, 
originally incorporated as a public limited company in May, 1943, for manufacture of high 
speed cutting tools and precision measuring instruments, became a Central Public Sector 
Undertaking from 31st March, 1959. The Company was initially under the administrative 
control of the Ministry of Commerce and. then the Ministry of Industry and was transferred 
to the Ministry of Defence, w.e.f. December, 1963, to facilitate more effective utilisation of 
the available capacity for production of defence items. The Company was brought back to 
the Ministry of 'Industry w. e.f April, 1986. PTL became a subsidiary· of HMT Limited, 
w.e.f February, 1988, when 51% of the paid-up share capital of the Company was 
transferred in the name of HMT Limited. 
Presently, the Company was manufacturing various standard machine tools viz. cutter 
and tool grinder, CNC cutter & tool grinder, surface grinder, milling machine, CNC milling 
machine, thread rolling machine, Jig boring machine and CNC Jig boring machine in various 
models besides machine tool accessories and Defence items. · 
During the year 1993-94, the Company achieved a production of Rs. 35.62 crores 
against a production of Rs. 34.89 crores in 1992-93. The anticipated production for 1994-95 
was Rs. 25.16 crores. 
The management informed the Sub-Committee about the problems faced by the 
Company. They informed that in order to meet their financial liability waiver of loans was 
required. After takeover by HMT, they were not getting the requisite orders for their 
products. The bulk orders which they used to get from the erstwhile Soviet Union had 
reduced. The management wanted that HMT should extend helping hand for the survival of 
the Company. 
The Sub-Committee was satisfied with the performance of the Praga Tools Limited and 
felt that the. Company was capable enough to compete with others in the wake of 
liberalisation. The proposal submitted by the Company to enter into technical collaboration 
with Mitsubishi, whith was awaiting clearance from the Central Government should, 
therefore, be expedited. If possible, the Company should be transferred back to the Ministry 
of Defence to facilitate more eff~ctive utiliSation of the. available capacity for production of 
Defence items. 

188 
Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels Limited (BHVP) 
The Committee was informed that the Bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels Limited 
(BHVP) was set up in the year 1966 primarily to manufacture and supply custom built 
capital equipment required for process industries in the core sector such as fertilizers, oil 
refineries, petrochemicals, etc. 
The Company had three product divisions, which had been formed on the basis of the 
concept of product divisionalisation. These were process plant division, cryogenics division 
and the boilers division. The process plant division which was set up primarily to cater to the 
capital equipment needs of fertilizer, ref:~1eries and petrochemicals, had extended its 
operations to serve a number of other industries. This division had also taken up fabrication 
of many sophisticated equipment some of which were manufactured for the first time in the 
country. The cryogenics division, which was taken up as a diversification scheme, had 
emerged as one of the major production divisions of the Company. This division could 
secure orders for a majority of small and medium size plants during last eight years. All the 
above divisions were in a position to execute the jobs on a turnkey basis and the Company 
was gradually shifting its emphasis from mere manufacturing and supply of equipment to 
system saJ.es. 
In a meeting with the representatives of the workers union, problems relating to bonus, 
pension etc. were raised. They expressed general satisfaction with the existing management. 
The Committee then held discussiorr with MD and other senior executives of the 
BHVP. Impact of liberalisation, they said, had made them more competitive both in India 
and abroad. The management pointed out certain disadvantages such as the Government 
insisting to import things on FOB basis through Indian flagships only which were generally 
not available on time and not on C&F basis and foreign companies getting loans on low rate 
as compared to the companies in India, high L.C. charges, foreign bidders forming 
consortium which was not done in India. Need for improving power situation, 
communication, and transportation facility etc. was also brought to the notice of the Sub­
Committee. Demands were made f':lr encouraging captive power plants, exemption from the 
payment of terminal excise duty (which was not reimbursed), reduction in Bank guarantee 
charges and streamlininglharmc.;;ising work contract tax being levied by various States. 
The Sub-Committee feels that BHVP being a profit making organisation Should-·be 
delinked from Bharat Yantra Nigam Limited (BYNL), the holding Company. The Sub­
Committee recommends that forming of holding companies like BYNL should be avoided as it 
is likely to harm the interest of profit making units in the public sector. The Sub-Committee 
further recommends that requisite budgetary resources for investment be extended to BHVP. 
The Sub-Committee feels that the Company should be relieved from the burden of Works 
Contract Tax levied. by various State Governments. 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP) 
The Committee had a meeting with the representative of Steel Plant Employees Union, 
CITU District Committee and AITUC. Apart from general problems of power and water 
scarcity, the representatives of the workers union emphasised the need for providing more 
educational and medical facilities to the employees of the steel plant and creation of more 
employment opportunities particularly for the displaced persons. The workers did not have 
anything to complain against the management apart from their demand to implement a 
pension scheme and arranging bonus for them. Some of the main demands/suggestions put 
forth by them were:- (i) conversion of loans that VSP had borrowed from outside agencies 
at huge rates of interest, into equity, (ii) expansion of steel plant particularly, steel melting 

189 
shop, (iii) construction of Gangavaram Port and (iv) development of ancillary units to VSP. · · 
etc. As regards the pension scheme, the Sub-Committee expiained to workers that it had to be 
taken up with the Government of India, as it was a policy matter. Since the Plant was· not 
showing net profit, the question of paying bonus to the employees mi.g~t not be possible. For 
rest of the demands of the workers, the Sub-Committee advised them that it might be taken 
up in the appropriate forum in a proper manner. 
The Sub-Committee, thereafter, met the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of VSP along 
with other senior executives. The CMD, while giving brief account of history and performance 
of the VSP and also apprised the Committee about the problems, being faced by the plant on 
different counts. He informed the Sub-Committee that despite several disadvantages and 
financial problems, the VSP was one of the major producer of steel and exporter of steel in 
India. It has been able to develop its own market in India and abroad. The main problems 
enumerated by CMD were heavy burden of capital charges and large interest liability rates, 
transportation problems due to shortage of railway wagons and lack of adequate port facilities, 
non-availability of good quality of coal in India. He wanted that VSP should be given an 
additional facility at the Visakhapatnam Port Trust and should be permitted to have its own 
captive jetty in the upcoming Gangavaram Port so that it could save huge amount of money 
which is being paid currently as demurrage charges. 
The management also informed the Sub-Committee that it had submitted a proposal to 
the Government of India for financial assistance to increase capacity utilisation of the Blast 
furnace from 3 million tonnes to 4 million tonnes. 
The Sub-Committee observes that the VSP needs to be suitably nourished for it being an 
upcoming steel plant, as in spite of several constraints the plant was making cash profit. The 
Sub-Committee appreciates the problem faced by the plant on account of non-availability of 
requisite good quality iron-ore and recommends that it should be solved by the agencies 
supplying it. The Sub-Committee feels that more wagons should be made available to the VSP 
to transport raw material from the VPT to the plant. The Government should give freight 
subsidy to the steel plant. VSP should also be permitted to set up its own aptive jetty in the 
upcoming Gangavaram Port and the clearance for the purpose should be given as early as 
possible. 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust (VPT) 
The Sub-Committee also met the officials of Visakhapatnam Port Trust .and discussed 
some of the problems which were being faced by various industries with regard to port 
facilities in and around Visakhapatnam particularly the Visakhapatnam Steel Plant and 
BHVP. As regards the BHVP's demand for providing some space near the Port for 
assembling their products, the port authorities informed the Sub-Co.mmittee that they had 
already provided them the required space and that they-were already making use of it. As 
regards VSP, the Sub-Committee was informed that the Plant was nearly 10 kms. away from 
the Port and the cargo had to be sent from there to the Plant by railway wagons which were 
generally not available in adequate number. The delay, therefore, was not because of Port 
Trust but because · of other problems. Proposals of using floating cranes by VSP, the 
Committee was informed, _was under consideration. The authority hoped that with the coming 
up of the Gangavaram Port the situation would improve to l! great extent. They urged to the 
Sub-Committee that the proposal for development of Gangavaram Port should be cleared as 
soon as possible and that it should be declared as a major port. Regarding prov~ding separate 
jetty for the VSP also, the port authorities did not have any serious reservation. 

190 
The Sub-Committee feels that the Port Trust which is managing the job of cargo handling 
in spite of several operational constraints may be entrusted with the job of developing the 
Gangavaram Port. 
Hindustan Shipyard Limited (H5t.) 
The Sub-Committee also met the management of the Hindustan Shipyard Limited and 
discussed with them the problems being felt in running/expanding the shipyard. One of the 
major problems being felt by the HSL was regarding sales tax levied by the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra Pradesh Government had levied sales tax on HSL for all the 
production activities which included mainly ship building, ship repair and off-shore platform 
construction. The shipyard authorities argued that it was not in a position to pay sales tax on 
ship building activities. The Government of India had recommended to the State 
Gm·~ ~nment of Andhra Pradesh to waive the sales tax but no remedy had far been given to 
the HSL in this regard. The capital restructuring proposal of the Shipyard for one time 
ct:;:;i~ ;,~nee was pending with the Miilistry of Finance for its approval. However, a formal 
decision had not yet been taken. The Sub-Committee was further informed that off-shore 
platform construction unit had been rendered idle because ONGC was not placing any order 
to the Shipyard and instead they were going to multi-national companies, although the 
shipyard had completed all their orders to their specification and on time. 
The Shipyard authorities further informed that in the last three years the HSL which 
was being closed by the Government, had taken the complete turn around and had started 
making some profit, though it was still suffering net-loss. They had orders worth 
approximately Rs. 800 crores at hand and were hopeful to fulfil all their obligations. It was 
hoped that in the coming seven to eight years it should start making net-profit. The shipyard 
representatives also demanded converting loans, aids etc. into equity. 
The Sub-Committee observes that the problems of Hindustan Shipyard such as waiving 
sales tax by the State Government could be examined sympathetically. The Sub-Committee 
would urge the Central Government to treat Hindustan Shipyard as export oriented unit in 
ship building activities in order to enable it to get sales tax relief. Capital restructuring 
prof)Osal of the Shipyard should also be taken care of without further delay. This would hel1> 
the shipyard to meet the challenges from multinational companies in the ship building 
activities . .It might also be desirable to consider conversion of loans given to Shipyard into 
equity. 
Hi11dustall Zi11c Limited (HZL) 
During its visit to HZL the Sub-Committee found that huge amount of waste material 
was being dumped near the factory without any plan for either recycling it or taking it away 
for dumping somewhere else. 
The workers of the HZL deposed before the Sub-Committee that they were satisfied 
over the functioning and facilities being provided by the management of the HZL. They 
however, complained of some minor health problems that they generally faced which was 
not very serious and the management was doing regular medical check-up of the workers. 
They were against the Government's policy of investment and demanded expansion and 
modernisation of their plant. They also brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee that due 
to amendment in the Bonus Act nearly 95% of its employees had become ineligible for 
bonus. 
The Sub-Committee, during discussion with the management enquired about the ;1u1in 

191 
hindrances being faced by them in running the plant particularly, in view of the policy of 
economic liberalisation. 
The HZL authorities informed that they w~·re meeting nearly 65% of the· zinc demand 
and 35% lead demand in the country. After liberalisation. their captive mines had become 
uneconomical and zinc industry which was producing less margin product cannot sustain it 
for a long time. It, therefore, was contemplating to process some precious metals in-order to 
strengthen its financial position. A demand of putting up 120MW power plant for Vizag was 
also raised. The Sub-Committee was also apprised of the measures taken to prevent 
environmental pollution, welfare and community services like housing, subsidized transport. 
education, medical aid, electricity etc., on concessional rates. The Sub-Committee expresses 
its happiness over the calm and peaceful environment in the HZL and various measures being 
taken to expand and modernise various plants of HZL and in maintaining ecological balance 
and doing social and community services. 
Study Report of lind Phase Visit of Sub-Committee-V of Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry to Bangalore, Cochin and Trivandrum 
during 9th to 15th October, 1995 
Sub-Committee- V in its second phase of tour programmes visited the States of 
Karnataka and Kerala to study various aspects of industrial backwardness and performance 
of industrial unit in those two States. The Sub-Committee selected Bangalore in Karnataka 
and Cochin and Trivandrum in Kerala for its study. 
1.1 In addition to original strength of ten Members, two more Members namely Shri 
Purna Chandra Malik and Shrimati Suseela Gopalan, M.Ps. belonging to Sub-Committee-HI 
and Sub-Committee- VI, respectively, assaciated themselves with this Sub-Committee. While 
Shri Malik accompanied the Sub-Committee throughout its visit, Shrimati Gopalan joined 
Sub-Committee at Cochin and Trivandrum. 
1.2 The Sub-Committee camped a't Bangalore on 9th October where it interacted with 
the managements of Bharat Electronics Ltd., Kudremukh Iron & Ore Company Ltd., 
Visvesraya Iron & Steel Ltd. (VlSL), Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd., Bharat Earth Movers 
Ltd. and Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. and wherever possible the workers as well. The Sub­
Committee also interacted with the State Government authorities and the trade and industry 
representatives at Bangalore. The Sub-Committee also took opportunities to meet the 
Industry Minister and the Chief Minister of Karnataka. 
1.3 After completing its business at Bangalore on 12th October, 1995, the Sub­
Committee left next day for Cochin. At Cochin the Sub-Committee held discussions with 
district authorities of Ernakulam followed by meetings with Coir Board and workers as well 
as the management of Hindustan Newsprint Limited. 
1.4 On 14th October, 1995, the Sub-Committee left for Trivandrum where it held 
discussion with the State Government officials of Kerala relating to industrialisation in the 
State. The Sub-Committee thereafter met the management of lead bank and participating 
banks in conneetion with Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana. The Sub-Committee also took an 
opportunity to meet Chief Minister of Kerala on 15th October, 1995. 
1.5 The Sub-Committee would like to make some preliminary observations about its 
experiences/difficulties faced in this phase of visit to Karnataka and Kerala. It was for the 

192 
first time that such a study was undertaken to gather certain first hand information from the 
Government. The ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines were requested some time back in 
July, 1995, to supply certain vital information, region-wise well in.advance of visits of Sub­
Committees. Unfortunately, the Government indicated its inability to furnish the requisite 
information and instead sought extension of time of five months. That being the situation 
Sub-Committee-V forwarded some questionnaire well in advance to the States of Karnataka 
and Kerala and the industrial units located there with a view to guide them on the purpose 
of the visit. The intention was to address supplementaries on the basis of their answers to 
such questionnaires. This was equally advantageous for the Sub-Committee as well as the 
witnesses to arrange discussions of the meetings. The Sub-Committee appreciated the 
attitude of those witnesses who came forward with their replies. However, in certain cases 
such as Kudremukh Iron and Ore Company Ltd. and VISL under the Ministry of Steel the 
replies were not ready, resulting in some confusion for the Sub-Committee and the witnesses 
about the concept of the study during discussion. The answers were got ready after a 
reminder given by the Sub-Committee during the meeting. The.Sub-Committee would thus 
like to proceed on the basis of the belated replies. 
1.6 The Sub-Committee would also like to mention about some dislocation of 
arrangements including meeting arrangements with the lead bank at Trivandrum. The Sub­
Committee Secretariat could not get even seating accommodation in the meeting haD. The 
Sub-Committee regrets that due to such dislocations it missed certain vital issues which· 
otherwise could have been covered in the presence of the Secretariat. The Sub-Committee 
feels that perhaps better coordination through Ministry could have saved the situation. 
1. 7 The details of discussions held during the tour are given 'in the following paras as 
per the programme of Sub-Committee. 
Bhant Electronics Limited (BEL) 
2.1 The Sub-Committee started its business with a visit to the plant of Bharat 
Electronics Ltd. located at Bangalore, The Sub-Committee took a round of various divisions 
of the plant such as High Frequency Equipment, Digital Micro Wave System, Digital 
Communication Equipment and Broadcasting & Television Division. The Sub-Committee 
during its visit gathered that Bharat Electronics Ltd., set up in 1954, being country's premier 
electronics manufacturing organisation, was engaged in design, development and 
manufacture of sophisticated ·state of the art electronics equipments, sound and vision 
broadcasting equipment, optical and opto-electronic equipment and electronic components, 
for the use of the defence services, para-military organb3tions and other governmental users 
like All India Radio, Doordarshan, Department of Telecommunications, police and 
meteorological department. 
2.2 While interacting with workers of BEL, the Sub-Committee noted that the capacity 
utilisation of the company was coming down. This was primarily due to hJ.;:k of orders. While 
the orders from defence had considerably come down, the orders from Department of 
Telecommunications were going somewhere else. According to the workers the broadcasting 
policy was also adversely affecting the order book position and as a result sound and v1sion 
broadcasting equipment orders were not forthcoming. The workers 'informed that though the 
Company had an order book position of nearly 2000 crores from defence, it had not been 
able to utilise the installed capacity fully. As on date the Company had executable orders for 
only Rs. 500 crores in the Bangalore complex even though the target for 1995-96 was 
Rs. 733 crores. As a result most workers were sitting idle for many hours. Only towards the 
end of the financial year does the work load picked. 

193 
2.3 As regards diversification, the workers deposed that the Company had a very strong 
R&D base with adequate infrastructure. Nearly 8% of total investme!J.t was in R&D sector 
but no outcome was forthcoming. The Company had not been able to go in for commercially 
viable diversification and modernisation. The workers submitted that the Company needed 
investment in a big way if it was to make a break through. The Semi Conductor -Gomplex 
will require huge investments upto Rs. 1000 crores. The workers further wanted the 
Government to give full autonomy to the Company to take timely decisions to meet modem 
market conditions through modernisation. Ibey further suggested that the Company should 
be allowed to enter into manufacturing of colour TV picture tubes. 
2.4 The workers also highlighted the problem of brain drain. According to them BEL 
had become a training camp from where people leave for good jobs somewhere else. 
2.5 The management of BEL had expressed similar views about capacity utilisation and 
took order position of the Company. According to the Managing Director, BEL, defence 
electronics was a small segment of its production. The Company was facing competition 
from private sector both in the civilian and defence sectors. Such competition was expected 
to be very severe in the coming years due to the dwindling defence market (in the world) 
and due to entry of multinationals. 
2.6 On a specific query about circumstances those led to disinvestment of BEL and the 
use of amount collected from such disinvestment, the management clarified before the Sub­
Committee that the Company was not aware of the circumstances but no amount collected 
by the Government had been utilised in diversification of the Company. 
2. 7 The Sub-Committee was given to understand that the Company had evolved 
following plans to meet the challenges it was facing following liberalisation:-
(i) Major thrust for marketing an~ customer satisfaction; 
(ii) Diversification of its product mix in consonance with its core competence with clear 
focus on specific products/technology; 
(iii) Joint ventures with foreign companies . in terms of technology and attaining 
specialisation; and 
(iv) Greater attention to high tech and high value added products. 
2.8 The management emphasised massive support from Government of India in 
component industry in view of following limitations:-
(i) For micro electronics, there had not been any change in the customs duty structure 
on the capital equipment; 
(ii) Products of component industry become obsolete much faster due to lack of 
investment; 
(iii) Component industry heavily depended upon imported raw material and 
components. With high interest rates on working capital/investment on capital 
~oods, the manufactu~ng costs tend to be very high; and . 
(iv) Duty on finished goods bad been reduced to 25% from 80% and on raw material 
and components to 15% from 55%. This had resulted into a reduction of 20% in 
Company's value addition on components manufacture rendering the manufacturing 
operations non-profitable. 
2.9 The Sub-Committee feels that B~L has got requisite talent and resources to be 
exploited to meet the international cluillenges. Being the only premier public undertaking in 

194 
the field of electronics the Government should ensure orders for the Company in the national 
interest. This would definitely motivate the workforce to attain the capacity utilisation. The 
Sub-Committee recommends that experts, the management, officer from Ministries of 
Defence, Communication and Information & Broadcasting and workers should sit together 
and fmd out some radical solution to bring back this premier Company on the track on 
priority basis. 
2.10 The Sub-Committee ~uggests that the Company should be encouraged to execute its 
specific action plans to enable it to meet the challenges it was facing from private and 
multinational ' sectors. 
2.11 The Sub-Committee urges the Ministry of Finance to sympathetically consider 
reduction of customs duty on raw material and components from S% to zero. The Sub­
Committee recommends that requisite fmancial support with low interest rates be extended to 
BEL for investment in capital equipment and for technological upgradation. 
2.12 The Sub-Committee appreciates the status of BEL as a capital goods industry. It, 
therefore, underlines the impenltive need to waive customs duty on capital goods required 
particularly in micro electronic industry. 
Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd. (KIOCL) 
3.1 The Sub-Committee held meeting with the management of KIOCL on the 9th 
October, 1995. At the outset the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Company gave a 
brief account of the Company. The Sub-Committee was informed that KIOCL, a wholly 
owned Government of India Enterprise, was established in 1976 to develop mine and plant 
facilities to produce 7.5 million tonnes of concentrate a year. The mine and plant facilities 
were commissioned in 1980 in time within the estimated cost. Iran which was the main buyer 
of iron-ore, because of changed political situation in Iran failed to lift the concentrate. The 
Company was left without a market for its product in the depressed international market. 
An intensive study of the global steel industry was taken up to find other markets for the 
product. It soon became clear that the global industry standards demanded more iron 
content in the concentrate as well as lower silica and alumina. The original process had to be 
modified to meet this demand from a customer-designed, dedicated single-product facility, 
Kudremukh had to convert itself to •a multi-product Company. Alternative strategies to 
utilise the facilities and make the Company viable was considered. The strategies included 
setting up of a downstream plant for value-added product in the form of iron-ore pellets. 
With an agreement with the Romanian Government, a three million tonne annual capacity 
pellet plant was commissioned in Mangalore in 1987. An unprecedented marketing drive 
established new customers in the Western· Europe and Japan. 
3.2 The Sub-Committee was further informed that KIOCL at present was India's major 
exporter of iron-ore concentrate and iron-oxide pellets. Its products were exported nearly to 
a dozen countries around the world, from Australia to Hungary, besides two domestic units 
viz., Essar and Grasim Industries. The Sub-Committee was also informed by the 
management that Kudremukh represented a series of firsts in the Indian mining industry:-
(1) It was the first magnetite iron-ore mine in India. 
(2) It was the first in the country to deploy the largest mining equipment. 
(3) It was the first commercial exploitation of low grade ore in the country. 
(4) It was the first fully integrated operation from mine to port. 

195 
(5) It was the first iron ore long-distance slummy pumping operation in the country. 
(6) It was India's largest iron ore mining and pelletisation project and it was the 
largest 100% export-oriented unit. 
(7) It was India's first iron ore mine to introduce floatation process for improving 
concentra'te quality. 
3.3 The Sub-Committee was apprised by the management that the Company was 
currently operating close to its capacity utilisation and had drawn up its long-term 
perspectives. To overcome problems of erratic power supply and operations downtime, the 
Company was setting up its own captive power generation plant of about 50MW capacity at 
Mangalore. The capacity of the mine and concentrator was being increased to eight million 
tonne a year besides improving the quality of products, ensuring better rate of recovery. 
3.4 Thereafter, the Convenor of the Sub-Committee enquired from the management 
about the replies of the questionnaire sent by the Secretariat to them to facilitate the 
discussions. The management initially expressed its ignorance about the questionnaire but 
subsequently admitted the lapse committed in not supplying the replies to the questionnaire. 
The Sub-Committee expressed its displeasure for non-supply of replies to the questionnaire 
and observed that in the absence of the same no fruitful discussion would take place. Only 
discussions of general nature were possible. The Sub-Committee was assured by the 
management that the replies would be supplied to the Sub-Committee during its stay at 
Bangalore. Subsequently, the management supplied to the Sub-Committee replies to the 
questionnaire. In its reply the management had stated that KIOCL being a 100% export­
oriented unit, had since its inception been a seller in the international market and had 
always been exposed to global completion. As such the present liberalisation policy had not 
affe,eted the Company's operations as it had already been performing to international levels 
both on specifications and deliveries. As far as the mining laws and regulations were 
concerned, it was stated that mining lease was initially granted only for a period of 20 years 
after which it was subject to renewal again. Since the life of the mine in many cases would 
extend beyond 20 years, they had requested that mining lease be granted for the entire life 
of the mine without any time limit. It had also been stated that for two stage clearance 
before mining operations commenced, namely, grant of prospecting licence and subsequent 
grant of mining licence, it was necessary to obtain clearances .from a number of agencies 
such as Pollution Control Board, Forest Department etc., both at State and Central levels. 
In order to facilitate early clearance of applications for prospecti~g and mining licences, they 
had requested that a Single Window Agency should be set up which would be the nodal 
agency for granting of all necessary clearances. This agency should have clear directive to 
process all applications within a specified time limit. In order to safeguard environment 
protection and preservation of ecology there could be a condition attached to the mining 
licence that a certain minimum amount of profit earned should be invested on environment 
protection measures. Furthermore, it could also be made a condition for grant of mining 
licence that specified percentage of profits earned by the Company should be earmarked for 
social welfare activity in the neighbourhood of the mine. 
3.5 In their reply they had further stated that the Company had entered to the following 
joint ventures:-
( a) Alongwith ME CON and MSTC, 2 other PSUs under Ministry of Steel, KIOCL 
had promoted a joint venture company, named as 'Kudremukh Iron and Steel 
Company' to implement the Pig Iron and Duclite Iron Spin Pipes ~roject. To be 
located at Mangalore, the capital cost of the project would be about Rs. 240 crores 
and would also have direct employment generating potential to the extent of 350. 

196 
(b) MOU signed on 519195 for promotion of a joint venture alongwith SAIL and 
RINL. The company when formed would carry shipping activities by buying and 
mining of fleet of vessels. , 
(c) Alongwith NMDC and 1MECON, two other PSUs u.nder Ministry of Steel, the 
company has a proposal to set up a joint venture company to render consultancy 
services in the field of iron-ore and other minerals mii~ing activities. Consideration 
of the proposal by the Government of India was at an advanced stage and 
clearance was expected in due course. 
(d) There was a proposal to take up prospecting and subsequently mining for gold, if 
fund feasible, in Ghana in joint venture with BEML and another Ghanian 
entrepreneur. Prospecting licence for the purpose had been obtained from the 
Government of Ghana, covering 65 sq. Kms and actual prospecting work was 
expected to commence slowly. 
3.6 As regards the tax structure, it was stated that KIOCL being a 100% Export 
Oriented Unit, qualifies for exemption from income-tax on all projects earned from exports. 
Moreover, imports as well as indigenous purchases of machinery and materials required for 
production purposes were also exempted from payment of customs duty and e~cise duty 
respectively. 
3. 7 The Sub-Committee appreciates the endeavours made, by the Company in crisis 
management during its formative period as well after commissioning when its major buyer 
(Iran) backed out. The Sub-Committee also appreciates the achievement and performance 
made by the Company since its inception. The Company from the management point of view 
was performing well and was striving to keep up with the upward trend. 
State Government of Karnataka 
4.1 The Sub-Committee before meeting the State Government representatives visited 
the birth place of renowned scientist late Shri Visvesvaraya at Mudanhalli to offer tributes to 
him for his contribution in the field of science and technology. 
4.2 The Sub-Committee observes that the role of Late Shri Visvesvaraya in the 
development of industdes in the country in general and in his home state in particular 
becomes quite relevant in the present . context. The Sub-Committee recommends that a 
training centre should be set up at Mudanhalli in the memory of the scientist. A museum 
should also be developed in recognition of his contribution. Any proposal from the State 
Government in this regard should therefore be favourably considered by the Central 
Government. 
4.3 The Sub-Committee thereafter proceeded to Nandi Hills to meet State Government 
representatives. The State authorities informed the Sub-Committee that the State currently 
had 759 large and medium industries with an investment of Rs. 6692.70 crores and 
employing 2.97 lakh workers. The State also had 1,63,524 small scale industries with an 
investment of over Rs. 1936.17 crores employing 10.76 lakh workers. Thtt State had 60 
industrial areas with 17430 acres of developed industrial plots and 104 industrial estates with 
more than 4100 sheds. According to the State Government, units with an investment of Rs. 
60 lakhs and below in plant and machinery were defined as small scale industries. The limit 
of investment is Rs. 75 lakhs in respect of those SSis undertaking to export at least 30% of 
their annual production. 
4.4 Industrial units wherein investment in plant and machinery was Rs. 5.00 lakhs or 
below were defined as tiny sector units and those with investment of Rs. 60 lakhs or more 
on plant machinery were treated as medium and large industries. 

197 
4.5 As regards the subsidy and concessions extended to the industries the State 
authorities informed that State investment subsidy at 25% to 30% was offered to tiny/SSI 
units. Additional investment subsidy at 5% to special category entrepreneurs viz SCIST, 
minorities, women, physically handicapped and ex-servicemen was ·also available. Sales tax 
concessions in the form of exemption/deferred for period ranging from four to eight years 
was offered for tiny/smalVmedium and large scale industries, with option exercisable by the 
entrepreneurs. Incentives available for 100% Export Oriented Units as thrust sector were 
also available for other EOUs exporting a minimum of 50% of their turnover. Finance 
facilities were extended . to Mega projects proposed to be set' up in the State. 
4.6 On procedural matters, the Sub-Committee was informed that 'Single Window 
Agency' (SW A) was efficiently discharging its duty and the mechani~ had been 
strengthened with Karnataka Udyog Mitra (KUM) was acting as the secretariat for SW A. 
Further, the district level SW As headed by Deputy Commissioners were empowered to 
sanction incentives and concessions as also infrastructural facilities for tiny and small scale 
industries. 
4. 7 With a view to strengthen the infrastructure, the State Government in association 
with Tata Group and Singapore investors had taken up a project for setting up of a High 
Tech. Information Technology Park near Bangalore to meet the infrastructural requirements 
of high tech. industries especially in the area of electronics, computers and information 
technology. The company had taken over 65 acres of land acquired for the project from 
KIADB. Civil works were in progress. These investors had also been selected for setting up 
of a new airport at Bangalore which had been recently approved by the Government of 
India. 
4.8 On a specifiC query about power situation, the State authorities informed that to 
provide for peak hour requirements large and medium scale industries had been subject to 
restrictions during certain times of the day. The State Government help the industries to 
install captive power plants for which sales tax paid on the full purchase for running the 
plant was refunded alongwith w~iver of electricity tax. While private sector was being 
pursuaded to invest in pawer generation, action was also being taken to strengthen the 
transmission and distribution net work. · 
4.9 As regards small scale industries, thG Sub-Committee was informed that 2849 SSI 
units had been registered during 1995-96 (upto 31.7.95) with investment of Rs. 89.18 crores 
employing nearly 19,246 workers. The registration was not compulsory. However, to get 
various incentives and concession given by the State and the Central Governments for which 
the registration was a pre-requisite, all the industries obtained registration certificates. 
4.10 Based on the evidence and the papers/documents submitted before the Sub­
Committee, it appreciates the efforts made by the State Government in promoting 
industrialisation. The Sub-Committee was quite convinced with the plans/schemes with the 
State Government for removing industrial backwardness of the region by way of incentives 
available for entrepreneurs while seting up projects in the State. The positive approach of the 
State Government towards development of industries particularly the small scale industries 
was reflected · in the suggestions it submitted before the Sub-Committee particularly the 
suggestions for opening banks exclusively for catering needs for s~all scale entrepreneurs 
and the need for separate secretariat for small scale industries are worth considering. 
4.11 The Sub· Committee was in total agreement with the State Government that there 
wF.'S ;;, need to have a package of concessions to rehabilitate sick small scale industries. The 
Sub-Committee recommends that the . Government of India should urgently undertake a 

198 
survey of all sick industries in the country and evolve a package to provide assistance 
particularly for reviving viable sick industries. 
4.12 The Sub-Committee was given to understand that small scale industries were 
suffering due to delay in the release of payment by large and medium scale industries for 
purchases made from them in spite of a legislation passed by Parliament which provided for 
prompt payment. The Sub-Committee was constrained to express its anguish over the 
ignorance of legislation and impress upon the Government to monitor the implementation of 
legislation, so passed, in letter and spirit in the interest of small scale industries. 
4.13 The Sub-Committee feels that interest payable by the small scale and village 
industries on tne finances obtained from banks and financial institutions was on the higher 
side. The khadi and village industries do not get the benefit of the finance provided to K VIB 
of the States by consortium of banks, though there was subsidy available from . the 
Government of India and State Governments under the scheme. 
4.14 The Sub-Committee recommends that the interest rate on loans to small scale sector 
should be rationalised. It would also recommend that the limit for 'exemption from payment of 
excise duty by small scale sector was required to be enhanced. The Sub-Committee hopes that 
the Union Ministry of Industry and Ministry of Finance would sit together on the suggestions 
indicated above for revival of small scale sector. 
4.15 The Sub-Committee agrees with the views of the State Government that 
ancillarisation policy. for public sector undertakings has been diluted. The Sub-Committee 
observes that it may be necessary to come out with a comprehensive policy so that large and 
medium scale industries obtain components, sub-assemblies etc. from small scale industries 
and also develop the ~rea around this facility. 
4.16 During discussion with State authorities, the Sub-Committee found some glaring 
irregularities under PMRY scheme like insistence on collateral security by bank managers, 
high service charges from--beneficiaries, excess power of banks in determining viability of 
project and .declaring a beneficiary as defaulter on previous loans. State Government 
authorities put forth the following suggestions to remedy the situation:-
(i) There should be an effective reporting system in the banks so that the officers of I 
& C department could follow up the cases; 
(ii) The various service charges debited to the account of the beneficiaries such as, 
processing fee, ledger fee, ledger folio fee, credit guarantee corporation fee, be 
reduced or waived off; 

199 
(iii) The bankers should release the sanctioned amount as and when the sanctions were 
made without waiting till the end of financial year; 
(iv) If the bank managers felt that the project was not viable, before rejecting the 
application the same should be placed before the screening committee consisting of 
a bank officer of a higher rank than the Branch Manager, Lead Bank Manager 
and the General Manager of DIC. The application could be rejected only after the 
screening by this committee and the powers of the Branch Manager to reject the 
applications be curtailed; and 
(v) At present applications twice the number of target were recommended to the 
banks. The banks selected the projects with minimum project cost and returned 
the remaining applications once the branch target was achieved. That was one of 
the reasons for poor sanctions and releases to SC/ST category. 
4.17 The Sub-Committee would like to urge upon the Government to work out the 
aforesaid suggestions with banking sector. The Sub-Committee is also looking ahead to take 
these issues with bank representatives in the next available opportunity and that too, as far 
as possible. with the lead bank officers at Karnataka. 
Meeting with the Management of Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Ltd. GP 60 (VISL) at 
Bangalore on lOth October, 1995 
5.1 The Sub-Committee V of the Standing Committee on Industry met the management 
of the Visvesvaraya Iron and Steel Ltd. (YlSL) on lOth October, 1995. The management at 
the outset, gave a brief history of the Company. They informed the Committee that the 
plant of YISL was situated on the banks of river Bhadra in Bhadravati, a small town 260 
kms. north-west of Bangalore city in the State of Karnataka. Starting as a wood distillation 
plant in 191~. the then known Mysore Iron Works, commenced its pig iron production in a 
charcoal blast furnace in 1923 to produce 60 tonnes of pig iron per day. A pipe casting plant 
was installed in 1927 to make profitable use of the pig iron produced. Mild steel production 
was started in 1936 and in the same year the name of the works was changed to Mysore Iron 
and Steel Works. Production of ferro-alloys began in 1942 with the addition of two small 
furnaces and the production capacity was augmented subsequently in 1962. Mild steel 
production capacity was also expanded in 1962 with th,e addition of two LD convertors, 
electric arc furnace and a blooming and heavy section mill. The plant was expanded further 
and diversified into the field of alloy and special steels production in 1965 with the addition 
of electric arc furnace, combined bar and rod mill and central heat treatment slip. 
Subsequently. a modern forge plant was established in 1977 to produce high alloy steels like 
high speed steeL die block steel and valve steel etc. With that, the production capacity of 
alloy and special steels went up to 77,000 tonnes per year. As a step to improve the quality 
and yield of steel, a vacuum organ decarbonising unit was added in 1983 ~nd a continuous 
casting unit for blooms and billets was set up in 1985. A new oxygen plant was 
commissioned in 1987. In 1989 VISL was taken over by SAIL. In 1994, 1200 KVA "B" furo 
silicon furnace was modernised and pollution control system was commissioned. In 1995, 
first indigenous 530 MZ blast furnace was started and 8T electric arc furnace was converterl 
~'''~"'P"""aa""u ... ~ .. --···o ······- -------o --.- --
6.2 These representatives underlined the significance of infrastructural facilities and 
emphasised urgent development of the same. According to them roads, power, civil aviation, 
railways, banking in addition to procedural facilities available for setting up industries in a 
State had significant role. As per their assessment the State had good prospects in computer 
technology and software. However, they were not so happy with the status of small scale 
industries in the State. They expressed serious concern over the power shortage in the State. 
In their opinion, installed ca'pacity of an industrial unit was severely affected by poor power 
supply. They were also critical of the single window clearance system in the State. 
Representatives from small scale sector emphasised for separate industrial policy for small 
and tiny units. They were equally worried about high rate of interest charged by banks 
which according to them should ~e regulated by RBI. They also wanted labour laws to be 
enacted for SSI sector. As.regards taxation, they wanted that taxation on divident should be 

200 
into lodle refining furnace in house technology. In short, VISL, is a story of continuous 
growth and today, it is on~ the premier alloy and special steel producers in the- country 
and the only one ,t9 have ;1ntegrated production facilities starting with baisc raw materials 
such as iron-ore, limestone, etc. Besides alloy and special steels, the product mix includes 
ferro-alloys, tor ~~eel . and pig iron. 
5.2 During the course of interaction with the management, the Sub-Committee inter alia 
wanted to know about th~ details of steel production during the last three years; whether the 
plant ha,d JlChieved capacity utilisation and also the suggestions/corrective measures to 
improve the same; the impact of liberalisation and delicensing on public sectors, the steps 
taken to tackle competition from private sector and the role of VISL as a subsidiary of 
SAIL. The management assured the Sub-Committee that a detailed reply to the points 
raised will be submitted later. During the stay of the Sub-Committee at Bangalore, the 
_ --- _.1! .a..L_ ....1.--t!...._ --~C ___ . .._ _ _..o_L_ ......., ________ -..1! .... L_ C'\ __ L 111""'\ _______ ~.._ ... __ 
202 
6.3 The Chamber of Commerce and other organisations in their written memoranda 
submitted to the Sub-Committee highlighted the following issues:-
(a} lt was mentioned that industrial development in Karnataka was suffering on account 
of shortage of power and poor infrastructural facilities. 
(b) Industries were suffering from inadequate water supply to industrial areas/estates. 
(c) The roads in the State were generally in bad condition and required to be imporved 
for better transportation facilities. 
(d) Heavy taxation on SSls viz., sales tax, turnover tax, entry tax, etc. 
(e) Liberalisation of laws & procedures in order to remove the hurdles faced by the 
industries. 
(f) Efficient pollution control measures in order to protect the environment. 
(g) Establishing a permanent exhibition complex. 
(h) Separate secretariat for rural and small scale industries. 
(i) Zoning of industrial areas viz., chemical, electronic, engineering, etc. 
(j) Establishment of industrial areas for development of hosiery industry, powerloom 
industry and automobile component industry . 
• (k) Assisting SSls for acquiring IS0-9000 certification. 
(l) Assisting SSis in marketing of the products. 
(m) Revival of sick SSls. 
6.4 Since the above mentioned issues were concerned with State Government, the Sub­
Committee transmitted the same to the Minister of Industry of State Government of 
Karnataka for necessary action. There were, however, certain other important issues which 
the Sub-Committee hoped the Central Government would look into. These issues were as 
under:-
(a) To increase the SSI limit from the present Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 1 crore on plant anc 
machinery. 
(b) To have uniform taxation policy for SSis throughout the country. 
(c) Increasing tbe exemption limit for central excise from the presem Rs. 30 lakhs to 
Rs. 70 lakhs 
(d) Uniform policy on banking to help SSis viz., inadequate funding by banks, heavy 
interest burden, etc. 
(e) Policy for revival of sick SSis on the lines of BIFR. 
(f) Privatisation of infrastructural facilities and formulation of policy by GOI. 
(g) Improving the telecom network and restoring the priority for-te.lephone connections 
to SSls. 

203 
(h) To improve the transport and communication infrastructure. 
(i) RBI to control and regulate the high rates of interest charged by banks to SSis. 
(j) To provide infrastructural assistance for promotion to EPIPs (Export Promotion 
Industrial Parks). 
(k) To improve the railway network for better transportation. 
(I) To enhance the container depot facilities. 
(m) To streamline the procedures for imports & exports. 
6.5 In addition to above, given the situation, the Sub-Committee strongly endorses the 
views of the representatives that small scale industries have not benefited by industrialisation. 
The spirit of technological upgradation has not percolated down to this sector. The Sub­
Committee recommends that Karnataka has immense potential of turnover and if given 
requisite thrust the turnover sector could generate a lot of employment 9J the State. The Sub­
Committee convinced the representatives that most of the issues raised by them form the part 
of the State Government's agenda. Rest of the issues were being noted down by the 
representatives of the State Government present in the meeting. 
6.6 The Sub-Committee hopes that wherever and whatever possible in the interest of the 
State, in particular, and the nation in general, the issues raised by industry representatives 
could be taken care of by the State as well as the Central Government with a collective 
approach. After all, practical experiences of these representatives carry a lot of weightage. 
Hindustan Machine Tools Limited (HMT) 
7.1 The Sub-Committee visited the machine toois and watch division of HMT at 
Bangalore on 11 October, 1995. 
7.2 During the meeting the workers union of the HMT informed the Sub-Committee 
that the company was suffering losses due to indifferent attitude of the Government. The 
workers of all twenty-two units of the Company were concerned about their livelihood. The 
plants and machinery needed to be modernised and the Company was looking ahead for 
budgetary support from the Government. According to them the recent policies of the 
Government exposed the company for stiff competition from private sector and unless and 
until funds were released, even the diversification process could not be taken up. The 
workers also wanted waiving of interest in respect of some units particularly Ranibagh unit. 
They further informed that Voluntary Retirement Scheme had been introduced which 
reduced the ma,npower from 28,000 to 23,000 during last three or four years. They suggested 
that unskilled manpower of the company needed to be retrained. The workers union also 
brought to the notice of the Sub-Committee about huge stocks of watches worth Rs. 30 
crores compiled under goods-held-in-trust scheme. According to them there was clear cut 
case of sabotage and malpractices under the scheme. 
7.3 The management of HMT informed the Sub-Committee that HMT is facing a 
serious situation. The target had declined from 945.82 lakh in 1992-93 to 927.48 lakh in 
1993-94 and 814.20 in 1994-95. The percentage of achievement had also fluctuated from 78% 
in 1992-93 to 62% in 1993-94 and 86% in 1994-95. 
Since the liberalisation of the Indian economy in July, 1991, there had been a paradigm 
shift in the business environment of public sector, in general and HMT, in particular. There 
had been a tremendous adverse pressure on the performance of each of the businesses of the 
company. The company faced challenges not only from domestic private sector competitors 

... 
. ' 
204 
but also from the international giants who in turn increased their presence in the Indian 
market primarily due to lower import tariff. 
7.4 In addition to the above, most of the products of the Company belonging to the 
capital goods sector, also faced recession till recently, upto 1993-94. 
7.5 The company incurred loss of Rs. 12.53 crores, 120.24 crores and 79.20 crores 
during the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 respectively. On being enquired about the 
reasons for losses year-wise, the management gave a detailed account of the limitations such 
as slack demand and greater competition coupled with higher interest burden, unabsorbed 
excise duty and input cost increases in 1992-93. According to the management the reason for 
losses I.,Lurred in 1993-94 was substantial drop in the production and sales. The company 
was c.:,, 1 . .tined to drastically reduce the production due to poor order inflow and the reduced 
mar!:.:e>. .:~~·li:y of the products. The watch division group had to face intense competition. 
Su ckr . ~.::rmol over credit sales (GHIT) and discontinuation of the system of bulk credit 
sales against the security of watches resulted in the lower turnover during the year. As 
regards 1994-95, the Company was not able to complete quartz segment due to cost 
disadvantage. According to the management the production cost of watch modules by HMT, 
with its far flung production facilities, dispersed assembly units and overheads was over 
Rs. 200, as against the cost of imported modules of Rs. 90 inclusive of duties. In tractor 
business group, the profitability of 1992-93 was passed on to consumers while the group had 
to bear the brunt of withdrawal of excise duty exemption to ports of tractors of engine 
capacity below lROO cc. in central budget of 1993-94 resulting in a loss of Rs. 11 crores. The 
profitability oi this group was further affected by central excise notification No. 11195 
consequent to the Finance Bill, 1995-96. 
7.6 The management highlighted the following short-term and medium-term strategies 
to reverse the trend of losses:-
(i) Promotion of high value added products and high-volume economy segments watches 
- Lalit Series. 
(ii) Sub-contracting to meet shortage of capacities. 
(iii) Liquidation of SIT Rs. 106.39 crores as on 31 August, 1995. 
(iv) Reduction of sundry debtors Rs. 105.42 crores as on 31 August, 1995. 
(v) Increased advances for machine tools. 
(vi) Quick collection and transfer of funds. 
(vii) Doubling sale of stand alone tractor engines from 459 to 925 Nos. 
(viii) Increase sales of spare parts. 
(ix) Productivity improvement/value engineering/cost reduction efforts. 
(x) Reducing warranty claims. 
(xi) IS0-9000-quality improvement. 
(xii) Improving working capital management. 
(xiii) Selective recruitments to compensate skill erosion in capacity critical areas. 
(xiv) Marginal investment for de-bottleneckinglcrucial balancing facilit-ies. 
(xv) Increase of tractor production (by utilisation of critical facilities during the third shift) 
to attain 19,000 Nos. during 1995-96. 
(xvi) Increase in selling efforts for tractors to attain sales turnover from the 1994-95 level 
of 16,841 to 19,000. 

205 
Medium/Long Term Strategies: In the global business environment small operators in the 
market would find it very difficult to compete/exist. The larger business with antiquated 
manufacturing technology can hope to survive only by modernisation. HMT's basket of 
business combines small market share and large business with antiquated manufacturing 
technology. The strategic options before the company are: 
(i) The funding of the investment programme from Government funds or from capital 
market. 
(ii) To seek strategic alliances through joint ventures with leading wood manufacturers 
to bring in technology, access to global markets, finance systems, Government has 
accorded in principle, approval to convert individual business groups/units into 
joint ventures. 
7. 7 As regard the ·goods-held-in-trust scheme the management clarified that in order to 
boost sales, in the earlier years, facility of clean credit was given to the dealers, to lift stocks 
during that period. However, with the increase in volumes and consequently the risk factor 
in giving clean credit, a part. ~f the watches sold to the de~lers was held back by the 
Company in the form of ·"goods-held-in-trust". These goods were held by HMT on the basis 
of authority letters issued by the dealers. 
7.8 These transactions were considered a.s valid sales, as per section 20 of the Sale of· 
Goods Act, and were accounted -accordingly in the annual accounts. However, in view of the 
long delay by a number of dealers in clearing the outstanding towards the payment of goods­
held-in-trust, it was decided to discontinue this practice with effect from the year 1993-94 
and a structured credit policy was evolved to regulate sales of goocls. 
The reasons for suspending the goods-held-in-trust scheme (GHIT) was therefore 
primarily to: 
(i) Limit the amounts of c;edit sales. 
( ii) Reduce the imbalances in sales_ during the last quarter of the year, compared to 
other quarters. 
7.9 ·The management also informed about the following marketing strategies adopted by 
the company in watch business group:-
(i) Emphasis on high-volume economy quartz analogue watch-Lalit Series; 
(ii) Increased market presence through appointments of re-distribution of stockist to 
serve about 6000 dealers all over the country; 
(iii) Strengthening of state-of-the-art retail outlets through franchise (Time Art) 
showrooms throughout India; 
(iv) Setting up o{ centralised watch innovation/concept development group at the 
corporate head office to translate latest in aesthatics/designs to marketable new 
products; 
(v) Emphasis on institutional sales through defence c~nteen (CSD). 
7.1() The management stressed the need of the Government investment so as to save the 
Company as at present, the Company was left with no money for the same. On being 
enquired the . management informed about the joint venture it eqtered in food processing 
sector. The plant was proposed to be set up in Aurangabad with annual tum over of 
Rs. 2.50 crores. 
.. ~·- '·"' ... 
. .. 

206 
7.11 TI1e management also highlighted the details of following revival proposals submitted 
to the Government of India in respect of its subsidiary Praga Tools Limited at Hyderabad:-
(i) As investment in new product technologies and expansion of existing products had 
become crucial and necessary for facing the severe global competition. The 
Government should immediately sanction budgetary support proposals submitted by 
the Company towards financing crucial balancing equipment and release funds to the 
extent of Rs. 5 crores immediately as proposed by the Company. 
(ii) Budgetary support funds by the Government for modernising the existing forge shop 
to enable the Company globalise its forge products and also shift product mix to 
automobile sector. 
(iii) Immediate action from the Government would be required for restructuring proposals 
put up by the Company consisting of waiver of accumulated interest due on the 
Government of India loans, aggregating toRs. 1202.70 lakh as on 31 March, 1995 and 
exemption of interest for 3 years i.e. 1994-95, 1995-96 and 1996-97. 
(iv) Release of funds to the Company by the Government during the current year to the 
extent of Rs. 1449.89 lakh, to compensate reimburse cash loses suffered by the 
Company for the last three years would be recommended to the Government. This 
would act as a spring board for the Company to take off immediately especially in view 
of the good order book position which the company enjoyed both in' domestic and 
international market. 
(v) Restructuring of the bank loans as proposed by the Company be implemented by the 
Company'!i bankers. In view of the good order book for the year 1995-96, the 
Company requested the Government to persuade the Company's bankers to extend 
further assistance by way of working capital. 
(vi) In view of the good past performance of the Company under the administrative control 
of Ministry of Defence_and as the entire production set up was built by the Company to 
meet defence requirement, the transfer of the Company from administrative control of 
Ministry of Industry to Ministry of Defence was recommended. 
7.12 On the basis of documents and the evidence tendered by the HMT management, the 
Sub-Committee came to the conclusion that this premier public sector undertakings had suffered 
a lot due to lack of foresightednesS in devising proper strategies. Watch group of the Company 
was poised for competition with private ~ector for a long. It was, therefore, in the opinion of the 
Sub-Committee pertinent· that implementation of sophisticated technology could have been 
resorted to. Though it was difficult to recover the losses incurred under GmT scheme but urgent 
steps were required to ensure that stocks, if any, might be suitably disposed of as there seemed to 
be a conflicting picture with regard to such stocRs. The Government should also release funds to 
the Company so that it might be able to execute its marketing strategies. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that excise duty on tractor divisjon may also be rationalised so that profitability of 
the division could be restored. The Sub-Committee also feels that diversification plan of HMT 
needs sound financial protection particularly in the field of software and dyecasting unit. The 
management is also required to gear up to meet the challanges by tightening its belt wherever 
desirable. Customer satisfaction should be the uppermost for the experts deYising strategies 
because in the present stage of stiff competition it is the customer who determines the market for a 
product. The Sub-Committee. hopes that it is still not too late for the management to think and 
work on those lines and that is the only way PSU's like HMT can face competition and survive. 

207 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) 
8.1 The Sub-Committee met the workers and the management of Bharat Earth Movers 
Ltd. (BEML) in two separate meetings, during its visit to Kolar Gold Fields (KGF) on 
12 October, 1995. 
8.2 The workers of BEML informed the Sub-Committee that total workforce of BEML was 
16000 out of which 8500 were employed in KGF. About seventy percent workforce belonged to 
backward classes. The workers were highly critical of new economic policy. According to them 
the company was facing the problem of orders and as a result workers remained idle. They 
wanted that more projects should be set up to enable- workers to contribute to the nation's 
economy and utilise their long experience in manufacturing earth moving equipment. They 
informed that the Mysore Complex needed more orders to sustain continuous production 
activities. The workers mentioned about power and water supply problems. BEML was facing 
acute power shortage due to unscheduled power tripping and low voltage. According to them 
Hola Halli Water Supply Project which estimated to cost Rs. 384lakhs, would solve the problem 
of water shortage to a great extent. The workers also highlighted the lack of orders from 
railways. The Company had the capacity to produce/manufacture 1000 coaches per year but in 
the current year the railways had asked for 200 coaches only. As a result no substantial work was 
available with Coach Division which affected total production. The workers indicated that 
industrial relations in the Company were very harmonious. On the. administrative side they 
would however wanted the management to provide appointments to the children of deceased 
employees on compassionate grounds or those who had retired and also to those who had 
completed twelve years of uninterrupted service in the Company. 
8.3 The BEML management informed the Sub-Committee that BEML was incorporated in 
1964, under the administrative control of the Ministry of Defence. The Company was engaged 
in the manufacture of heavy engineering equipment, catering to the core sectors such as mining, 
steel plants, cement, irrigation projects, railway and defence. 
8.4 In the construction & mining equipment area, BEML manufactured bulldozers 
dumpers, excavators, wheel loaders as also mining shovels and walking draglines. In the railway 
sector, BEML manufactured railcoaches,. DC EMUs, overhead equipment inspection cars, 
track laying equipment, spoil disposal units, railbus, etc. As regards defence sector, BEML 
manufactured Tata trucks which were used for army tank transportation, missile launching, gun 
towing, etc. BEML also manufactured vital aggregates for the defence sector like transmissions 
and final drives for the infantry combat vehicles and hydropneumatic suspension and stabilisers 
for tanks. 
8.5 BEML had an installed capacity to roll out 700 railcoaches annually. Of late, the unit 
had been facing a severe crisis. The withdrawal of roders from the Railway Board for 
railcoaches directly affected the bottomline of BEML and led to under-utilisation of large 
capacities and trained manpower. In the absence of high volume workload, BEML was finding 
it extremely difficult to maintain cost efficiency in the plant resulting in low morale. 
Incidentally, during 19?4-95 no orders were placed on BEML for railcoaches. 
8.6 For quite sometime now, BEML had been facing problems of both power interruption 
as well as voltage fluctuations. Frequent shutdowns badly affected the continuity of production 
at the plants. In spite of BEML's appeal to the State Government on several occasions to ensure 
constant supply of power without voltage fluctuations, the problem remained unresolved. 
Another major problem affecting the unit related of water scarcity which resulted due to 
the successive failure of monsoons and the fall in water levels of the main catchment area. 
8.7 The management further informed that BEML & Kudremukh Iron Ore Company 
Limited {KIOCL) alongwith a Ghana firm undertook prospecting of gold mining in Ghana. 

208 
The prospecting licence had been received and a team from KIOCL consisting of geologists 
and mining manager would shortly leave India for the project. 
8.8 On a specific query about the impact of Iiberalisation on the (BEML) Company, the 
management clarified as follows:-
(i) It increased the global competition which resulted in the loss of business and 
under-utilisation of installed capacity. 
(ii) Wherever business opportunities were available the customers did not agree on 
remunerative prices (due to competition) though the cost of .inputs continued to 
rise. 
(iii) Instability in the rate of exchange, low capacity utilisation, resistance from 
customers for price increases etc., resulted in low profit margins. 
(iv) In the case of global tenders where concessional project duty was allowed on 
imported components, customs duty at 25% was charged. The finished equipment 
was also subject to 10% excise duty, 4% sales tax and 1% other local taxes. In the 
absence of duty drawback for the indigenous manufacturers, there was a cascading 
effect of duties on the finished indigenous equipment, whereas for a fully imported 
equipment customs duty of only 25% was applicable thus making the prices of 
indigenous products non-competitive. 
(v) The foreign suppliers were quoting very low prices to capture the Indian market. 
Due to free availability of foreign exchange, customers preferred imported 
equipment (even second hand equipment). 
8.9 The management informed the Sub-Committee that there was a need to restructure 
the organisation, since in course of time the strength of the indirect workforce had increased 
disproportionately to the direct workforce. Also, because of steep wage/salary increases, the 
salary bill of the Company had jumped from a level of 11% to 14.6%. That had resulted in 
increase in the cost of operations and substantial reduction in profitability. 
8.10 The Sub-Committee feels that the curtailment in the orders for railways coaches has 
proved to be greatest stumbling block in the growth of the Company. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that the Government should ensure orders for the Company to enable it to 
achieve capacity utilisation and help in generating employment in the region. The Sub­
Committee would also urge upon the State Government of Karnataka to ensure proper supply 
of power to the Company. The Government of India should also help the Company in setting 
up a captive power plant. The duty structure should also be rationalised to enable the 
company in meeting the market challenges it has been facing in the global tenders/market. 
Meeting with District Magistrate, Kolar 
9.1 The Sub-Committee also took an opportunity to interact with the District 
Magistrate, Kolar, on issues concerning industrialisation of the district. The District 
Magistrate informed that Kolar had a population of twenty-two lakhs. Historically the 
people were em{lloyed in milk and silk sector. Bharat Gold Mines and Bharat Earth Movers 
Limited were two major industries. Gold extraction in the area had become uneconomical 
with per gram tonne availability of gold declining. The manpower of BGML had been 
reduced from 13000 to 7000. The surplus workers had no other employment opportunities. 
BEML on the other hand had done well in providing employment to more that 6000 
persons. 
9.2 Total eight industrial estates had been set-up in tbe district. Most of the industries 
were in small scale sector. At present, there were 6040 small scale units out of which 10% 

209 
were sick due to technological obsolescence. There were good prospects of seed production 
(commercial horticulture) and food processing industries in the district. Power supply 
situation remained quite critical though Karnataka Electricity Board was requested to 
upgrade the power grid. The District Magistrate also underlined the need of proper road and 
airport facility in the area. He also wanted that the Government should help in undertaking 
survey for extracting granite from the area. 
Bharat Gold Mines Limited (BGML) 
10.1 The Sub-Committee met the workers unions and management of BGML with a 
view to look into the matters related to the Company and the steps taken by the 
Government following the presentation of 7th Report of Standing Committee on Industry to 
Parliament in April, 1994. The workers informed the Sub-Committee that despite strong and 
favourable recommendations of the Standing Committee on Industry vide its 7th Report, the 
Government had not taken any concrete step to revive the Company. The Company which 
was referred to BIFR felt helpless so far as future of around 7000 workers was concerned. 
According to them the banks were not giving working capital to industries in the area. 75% 
industries were suffering due to high rate of interest the workers of BGML were worried 
about their livelihood. Even the salary was not being paid to them regularly. The workers 
also pointed out indifferent attitude of the management so far as coordination was 
concerned. Whatever may be their internal differences the workers stood with the 
management to work for the revival of the Company. The workers suggested that the banks 
should extend the requisite capital.· They also suggested for reduction in the rate of interest 
in the beginning. 
10.2 The management informed the Sub-Committee that following reference of the 
Company to BIFR, all decisions concerning development of the Company would largely 
depend on the outcome of BIFR proceedings which were in progress. A revival package was 
submitted the last year but the operating agency ICICI asked for a fresh revival package. In 
the meantime the Company was managing with plan provision of Rs. 6 crores and non plan 
of Rs. 3.5 crores on quarterly basis. The Company was under a serious burden of loan on 
which 18% interest plus penal interest had been paid. The Company was finding it difficult 
to pay even the salary of employees and continued to incur loans all alone. The Finance 
Ministry had turned down the request of Rs. 4 crores for ex-gratia payment. According to 
the workers, there seemed to be no possibility of a final decision on revival package in the 
near future. On a query as to whether it could be possible to revoke the reference of 
Company to BIFR, the management replied that there was no such provision under SICA. 
10.3 As a part of action taken on 7th Report of the Committee, the management 
strengthened the security by providing extra security gadgets. The plantation work in the 
surplus land had picked up. As regards the cycline of tailings, global tenders were issued. 
Five offers had been received and evaluated and partner for a prospective joint venture had 
been identified. An MOU with Ws. Normandy Anglo Asian Pvt. Ltd., a Company jointly 
owned by Normandy Possidon Limited and Anglo American Limited had been signed on 
6 October, 1995, subject to approval of the Government of India. 
10.4 The Sub-Committee feels that much time has been taken for the revival of BGML 
and the workforce has genuine fear psychosis. It would urge upon the Government to expedite 
the revival package fo: BGML so that this undertaking which was once a premier one for 
gold extraction, could come back to its track and a scheme for its further development could 
be executed. • 

210 
Meeting with Coir Board 
11.1 The coir industry had become a subject to debate in the meetings of the 
Standing Committee on Industry. Sub-Committee V, therefore, decided to study the 
problems and prospects of coir industry while visiting Kerala. The Sub-Committee was 
scheduled to visit coir units at Alleppy but on the spot study could not b~ made due to 
the law and order problem. It was finally decided to meet the Coir Board at Cochin and 
the visit to coir units was postponed to a later . date. 
ll.l The Chairman of Coir Board informed the Committee that coir industry was the 
fnost impOrtant traditional industry of Kerala. It was the means of sustenance of nearly 
four lakh workers in the coastal areas of the State. That was an export oriented industry. 
The environmental consciousness in foreign countries and the consequent affinity for 
natural fibres had caused a spurt in the demand for coir and coir products in foreign 
countries resulting in steady increase in the export of coir and coir products. The most 
important aspect of coir industry was that it was a labour intensive rural industry in 
which nearly 85% of the workers were women. 
11.3 According to the Coir Board, the coir industry consisted of two major 
sectors-spinning sector· and products manufacturing sector. The spinning sector was 
spread throughout the coastal belt of Kerala with concentration in the southern districts. 
The products manufacturing sector was concentrated almost exclusively in Alappuzha 
district. The spinning sector accounted for over 3.5 lakh workers. The share of products 
manufacturing sector in the work force was only about 30,000. 
There were two kinds of fibres used in coir industry as per details given below:-
White fibre: The traditional method of producing coir was by retting green coconut 
husk in brackish water for six to ten months, beating the· retted husk with wooden 
mallets and then spinning the fibre into yarq using manually rotated ratts. This fibre was 
called white fibre. Kerala had virtual monopoly in white fibre production. 
Brown fibre: Fibre was also extracted from coconut husk by the use of machinery. 
Such type of fibre was known as brown fibre. Other coir producing States were using 
that process. The brown fibre was generally not processed into coir products. 
11.4 The Chairman, Coir Board specifically highlighted the Integrated Coir 
Development Project (ICDP). He informed that the Government of Kerala with the 
assistance of the Government of India and the N.C.D.C., New Delhi was implementing 
an Integrated Coir Development Project to modernise the coir industry. The Project was 
implemented in the co-operative sector. 
It was proposed to establish the following units under the project:-
(a) Defibering mills of combing -
machine variety 
(b) Motorised coir ~pinning units 
each with 100 1 motorised 
ratts. 
100 mills 
200 units 
(20,000 motorised ratts) 

211 
The project cost of a defibering mill was Rs. 20 lakh and that of a spinning units Rs. 18 
lakh. The project was financed as per the details given below:-
Subsidy from the Government of India . 
Loan from NCDC 
Societies share of investment 
20% 
50% 
5% 
The project would give direct employment to about 25,000 persons-mostly women. 
So far, HCDC had sanctioned financial assistance to ninety two spinning units and 
thirty nine defibering mills. Two spinning units and one defibering mill had already been 
commissioned. The rest were in different stages of implementation. 
The NCDC had sanctioned financial assistance to thirty spinning units and seven 
more defibering units in September, 1995. The work on these units would be taken up 
shortly. 
11.5 The Coir Board further informed the Sub-Committee that the scheme of co­
operatives in coir industry was being implemented as a centrally assisted scheme with 
expenditure shared 50 : 50 by the State Governments and the Central Government. The 
financial assistance extended to the co-operatives under the scheme were (a) share 
capital assistance (b) managerial subsidy (c) equipment assistance, etc. The Integrated 
Coir Development Project was also included under co-operativisation scheme. 
11.6 On enquiring about marketing of coir products, the management informed. that 
under the market development assistance scheme it was proposed to popularise coir 
products and promote the sale of coir products manufactured by cooperatives and State/ 
Central Government agencies. The assistance would be granted @ 10% of the gross 
annual turn over rates. Approval of the Government of India was awaited. 
11.7 There was a great potential of foreign markets for coir products. The Coir 
Board had formulated an export promotion assistance scheme to assist the exporters of 
coir to participate in exhibitions/fairs abr.oad. The approval· of the Government of India 
was awaited. The Coir Board was also looking for an amount of Rs. 2 crores for various 
research and development activities every year. Under the Integrated Coir Development 
Programme of the government of Kerala an amount of over Rs. 4 crores was due for 
reimbursement. The matter was pending in the Ministry for completion of technical 
formalities for more than one year. Coir Board also emphasised the need to exempt coir 
machineries from excise duty. According to the Coir Board, a welfare assistance scheme 
for coir workers was pending with the Government of India for approval. 
11.8 After hearing the evidence of the Coir Board and going through the papers! 
documents submitted to it, the Sub-Committee feels that the prosperity of coir industry is 
based on the sweat and labour of poor HI paid coir work~rs. Various schemes initiated by 
Coir Board for overall development of the coir sector are pending with the Government 
of India. The Sub-Committee urges upon the Government to appreciate the significance 
of these 3chemes and expedite clearance on priority basis in the interest of the coir 
industry. 
Hindustan Newspri11t Limited (HNL) 
12.1 The Sub-Committee would have preferred to meet the workers and 
management of Hindustan Newsprint Limited (HNL) at its location at Kottayam district 
of Kerala but due to paucity of time and also because of some law and order. problem in 
the State during the period of Sub-Committee's visit, the meetings had to be arranged at 
Cochin. 

212 
12.2 The workers of Hindustan Newsprint Limited informed the Sub-Committee that 
the Company was faced with the problem of supply of raw material which if properly 
streamlined, could help the Company in doubling its capacity utilisation. They also informed 
that HNL was a subsidiary of Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC). Out of three subsidiaries 
of HPC only HNL was at present running with profits. However, the profit margin was 
reduced because of the burden of other two sick subsidiaries which was being compensated 
by HNL. The workers wanted that HNL should be delinked from HPC. The workers did not 
seem to be satisfied with the state of modernisation which was done on experimental basis. 
The workers also felt that modernisation had caused reduction in staff strength of the 
Company. In their opinion the Company needed requisite manpower. On a specific query 
about industrial relations in the Company, the workers informed that their relation with the 
management were very cordial. On the issue of compensate appointment raised by the 
workers, the Sub-Committee feels that Labour Commissioner of the region should take 
action in the matter. 
12.3 The management of Hindustan Newsprint Limited informed the Sub-Committee 
that the newsprint mill of HNL, with an installed capacity of 80,000 MT per annum and 
capital investment of Rs. 157.82 crores, was commissioned in 1982. The rated capacity 
during 1994-95 was 1,00,000 MT and the HNL product 1,05,369 MT which meant that the 
Company had achieved 105% capacity utilisation. HNL had also been improving upon the 
profitability year after year with a view to increase the value of investment for Hindustan 
Paper Corporation Ltd. The net worth of HNL which was Rs. 6904 lakhs in 1983-84 had 
gone upto Rs. 14,943 lakhs as on 31 March, 1995. Thqt was against the paid up share capital 
of 8254 lakhs. HNL also had the entire loan borrowed by HPC from Government of India 
for Kerala Newsprint Mill. 
12.4 The management highlighted certain problems in the area of raw material and 
marketing of newsprint. According to the management the availability of raw material from 
the State forest department was decreasing at an alarming rate. The situation turned worse 
after 1992-93. In the current year the availability of raw material was only 50% of the total 
requirement. From 1993-94 onwards HNL had to use imported pulp to make up the 
shortfall. During the current year the Company had contracted a large quantity of wood 
from Karnataka and was also contemplatingto procure Bamboo from Assam. HNL had also 
requested the Government of Kerala for the allotment of 10,000 hectares of existing field 
plantation to take up captive plantation. In fact the State Government had allotted 1000 
hectares of land for the purpose and the plantation had been taken up the current year. In 
order to operate the mill at the full capacity in the intervening period, HNL took up with 
the Government of India for permission to set up a 200 TPD de-linking plant at the cost of 
Rs. 80 crores. 
12.5 On a specific question about the impact of liberalisation and p1arketing strategy of 
the Company, the management informed that the Government of India brought the 
newsprint under Open General Licence w.e.f. 1 May, 1995. As a consequence, the 
newspaper establishments were importing newsprint in huge quantities from China, Russia, 
Finland, New Zealand and Canada. Due to the inferior quality of that newsprint, the C & F 
price was lower than the price of indigenous newsprint. As there was a scarcity of newsprint 
during 1994-95, the newspaper establishments, as a precautionary measure, bunched 
together, the import during the first half of 1995-96 to overcome any possible shortage in 
future. In the process, the stock of newsprint in various indigenous mills increased and one 
of the public ~ector mills reduced the price drastically to market its newsprint where as the 

213 
other mills resorted to softer options like extensjon of credit, etc. to market their product 
According to the management, unless custom duty was imposed on the imports, it would be 
very difficult for the indigenous newsprint mills to compete with imported newsprint. 
12.6 As regards diversification activities, the management informed that the Company 
had taken up the projects of writing and printing paper. The management also mentioned 
about power cut frc;>m 6.30 p.m. to 9.30 p.m. Though the Company has got its own 
generation still 60% of power requirement was met by the State Government. 
12.7 The Sub-Committee appreciates the efforts of committed workforce of HNL in 
achieving more than 100% capacity utilisation. Delinking of HNL from HPC could be a policy 
decision but it has certainly got to be examined by the government since some of subsidiaries 
like HNL which are performing well and earning profits generally tend to be exploited by 
holding company on account of loans incurred by other loss making subsidiaries. The Sub· 
Committee recommends that as a short term measure more autonomy may be conferred on 
Hindustan Newsprint Limited, the only public sector undertaking even suffering after 
achieving 100% capacity utilisation. 
12.8 The Sub-Committee feels disturbed over the shortage of raw material in HNL. The 
Sub-Committee is happy that the State Government has responded to HNL's request for the 
allotment of land for captive plantation and also for the sufficient quantity of forest raw 
material. The State Government has so far allotted 1000 hectares of land against the demand 
of 10,000 hectares. The Sub-Committee hopes that the State Government woulci take care of 
the remaining demand. The Sub-Committee urges upon the Government of India to expedite 
clearance for instalation of de-linking plant. 
12.9 The Sub-Committee feels that the Company requires lot .of support on marketing 
side. While it may not be advisable to revert back to pre-liberalisation stage and remove 
newsprint industry from OGL, indigenous public sector mills like HNL need equal protection 
from present import crittria. The Government, therefore, should consider to make suitable 
modifications, in Newsprint Import Policy. Imposition of customs duty on newsprint could 
perhaps help the indigenous newsprint mills to survive and cater to the requirements of the 
country. 
Meeting with State Government of Kerala 
13.1 The Sub-Committee held a detailed meeting with representatives of the State 
Government of Kerala on 14 October 1995 at Trivandrum. The State representatives 
informed the Sub-Committee that much remained to be done to increase industrial 
investment to a satisfactory level to ensure a growth rate atleast on at par with the national 
average within a reasonably short period of time. As per the figures given in the Annual 
Survey of Industries 1990-91, the number of factories was 3484 which accounted for 3.16% 
of all India total and involved only 1.95% of the total invested capital in the factory sector in 
the country. The total contributions of the national financial institutions to the industrial 
sector of the State continued to be low due to various reasons. 
13.2 The State representatives pleaded that the ·State should be declared as an 
industrially backward State. According to them in the States which had been declared as 
industrially backward the new industrial undertakings were exempted from payment of 
income tax for the first five years. The r~presentatives suggested that all districts of .Kerala 
should be declared as industrially backward on the lines of Goa, Pondicherry and Himachal 
Pradesh. 
13.3 The representatives informed the Sub-Committee that Kerala offers distinct 
advantages so far as social infrastructure and other ingredients of infrastructure like land, 

214 
water, power, communications, and manpower were concerned. Indicating the perception of 
the State Government, the representatives informed that the government assistance to 
industry was channelised through the industrial promotion agencies which were intended to 
promote and finance industrial development of the State. The assistance to such agencies 
was in the form of equity participation. Institutions like KSIDC (Kerala State Industrial 
· Development Corporation ~td. which promoted finance and developed large/medium sector 
industries) and KFC (Kenila Financial Corporation which financed SSI units, generally) 
made public borrowing by issue of bonds under State Government guarantee. Direct 
assistance was provided by the government to the industry in the form of fiscal and financial 
incentives and concessions. ,;/ 
13.4 According to the State representatives, the total number of SSI units in the 
backward districts before the coming of new Industrial Policy was 36035. The total number 
of units on 31 March 1995 was 59848 i.e., there had been an increase of 23813 units over a 
period of four years. In order· to accelerate the growth of small scale industries in the 
backward districts, in tune with the liberalised industrial policy of the Government of India, 
the State Government announced a number of incentives like higher investment subsidy, 
sales tax exemption for seven years, etc. The total expenditure in the backward districts on 
various schemes for the year 1994-95 amounted to Rs. 11.64 crores. The employment 
generated in small scale sector was 23118, 27564 and 35353 in 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 
respectively. The growth of SSI sector would have been much more if there was sufficient 
fund flow from financial institutions and enough power supply. The State Government as 
part of its new industrial policy extended following incentives to ensure accelerated 
development of industries:-
(1) 15% investment subsidy to all industrial units including large and medium, with 
a maximum ceiling· of Rs. 15 lakhs. For thrust industries like rubber, 
electronics, food processing and clay based industries etc., the maximum limit 
was 20 lakhs. The assistance was available for the units undertaking expansion, 
modernisation and diversification. 
(2) (a( Sales tax exemption for seven years to all new SSI units. 
(b) Sales tax exemption for three years for existing units undertaking 
expansion, modernisation and diversification. 
(3) Exemptio~ from electricity duty for five years for new units. 
( 4) Power tariff concession for five years for all manufacturing units. 
{5) 15% price preference to SSI products manufactured in the State for purchases 
made by the State government department and undertakings. 
(6) EMD exemption on tenders submitted to the government department and 
undertakings. 
13.5 Apart from the above, in order to speed up various clearances required for setting 
industries a new system namely Green Channel Counter was formed in all districts. To 
monitor the progress and to sort out various other issues, a district level Industrial 
Development Committee under the Chairmanship of the District Collector was also formed, 
ensuring participation from various conne<;ted departments like local body, town planning, 
forest, health, Kerala State Electricity Board etc. 
13.6 As regards the growth centres in Kerala, the State representatives informed that 
the total contribution o!Jhe centre for the two growth centres sanctioned would be Rs. 20 
crores. The project cost as approved by the Government of India during February, 1995 for 

215 
the two growth centres was Rs. 79.12 crores. -The Government of India so far released 
Rs .. 6.52 crores, the contribution of the State Government was Rs. 3.13 crores and Rs. 4 
crores were released by KSIDC {being the implementing agency with effect from 1 June 
1995). State representatives put forth the following suggestions for improving the function of 
the scheme:-
1. Since industrial growth centres were proposed to be established in backward 
districts and their gestation period was about five to ten years, the chances of 
mobilising funds from national financing institutions, banks and the public were 
remote. Hence it was suggested to set up the growth centres with joint 
participation from private entrepreneurs by giving attractive incentives. e.g. 
exemption from income tax on such investments in equity of the growth centres. 
2. The growth centres were to be declared as an "industrial undertaking" under the 
Industrial Development Regulation Act, 1956. 
3. Growth centres were to be declared as a "strike free Zone" for a minimum 
period of ten years. 
4. Extend income tax holidays for a minimum period of ten years for the 
companies setting up the growth centre and also establishing the industrial 
undertakings within the growth centre, as the scheme were being implemented in 
backward areas. 
5. The requirement of permission from various departments for establishing 
industrial undertakings within the growth centres should be dispensed with. 
6. The reporting of progress, after it was reviewed quarterly by the State level 
committee might be dispensed with. Instead the report furnished by the 
implementing agency might be accepted by the Ministry of Industry, 
Government of India. 
13.7 On the issue of Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana (PMRY), the State authorities 
submitted before the Sub-Committee that during 1994-95, against the target of 15,000 loans, 
the banks sanctioned only 11,123 loans, which were 74% of the sanctioned loans. Out of 
these only 48% loans were disbursed by the banks. The cooperation of private sector banks 
in implementing the scheme was not at all encouraging. Infact their achievement was only 
34% in 1994-95, against the State average of 74%. Even with the best efforts of RBI and 
SLBC (State Level Bankings Committee) they were not able to achieve the targets. The 
State authorities suggested that only nationalised banks should be entrusted with the task of 
implementation of PMRY. 
On enquiring as to whether there was need to redefine the role of banks under the 
scheme, the State authorities suggested that their role could be extended to the activities like 
identification of applications under PMRY with the restriction to route such applications 
through PMRY interview committee/district industries c.entres. 
13.8 On the question of power situation as infrastructure facility, the State 
representatives informed that power shortage was one of the important negative factors 
which adversely affected the uniform growth of industries in the State especially the seven 
northern districts of the State. In order to over come that the State Government proposed to 
set up diesel generating station at Kasaragod and Calk:ut along with Brahmapuram in 
Ernakulum district. However, it would take some time to get these projects completed and 
in any case the prevailing situation was not much conducive to the growth of industries so 
far as power supply was concerJ!ed. 

216 
13.9 The State authorities also deliberated on the impact of liberalisation on the 
industrial growth of the State. According to them after the announcement of the new 
Industrial Policy about 23000 IEM's (Industrial Entrepreneurs Memorandum) were filed all 
over India for setting up large and medium units and out of which the share of Kerala was 
about 200 IEM only, which did not even make one per cent of the total IEMs. It showed that 
. there was not much reflection of the liberalisation policy of the Government of India, on the 
: industrial scene of Kerala. 
Presentation of lead Bank Management at Trivandrum 
14.1 The observations of the Sub-Committee regarding arrangements for meeting at 
Triva,ndrum are mentioned in para No. 1.6. The Sub-Committee would not like to repeat the 
same and ·instead proceed ahead with deliberations with bank authorities on the basis of the 
brief· of the proceedings received through Ministry of Finance. 
14.2 The Convenor of the Sub-Committee, initiating the discussions sought clarifications 
from the bank authorities about the complaints the Sub-Committee had received about 
insistence of collateral security by banks for sanction of loans, non-sanction of applications, . 
non disbursal of amount under PMRY. He further mentioned about the representations 
from small scale entrepreneurs requesting for raising the loan limit about Rs. two lakhs with 
reduced rate of interest. Clarifications about poor performance of private banks under 
PMRY were also sought. 
14.3 The bank authorities clarified that banks in Kerala attached a lot of importance to 
PMRY and committed to achieve targets assigned to them. With regard to the reasons for 
rejections under the scheme, the Sub-Committee was informed that the non-viability of the 
project outside the service area, applicants not turning up, non-availability of premises, 
saturation of similar activity in the area etc., were found to be the main reasons. The Bank 
of India, however, deputed officers to go out and identify proposals and sponsor them to the 
branches. 
14.4 As regards the collatoral security, the representative of the Ministry of Finance 
informed that strict instructions were given to the Chairman and Managing Directors 0F 
banks to initiate disciplinary action against erring officials and the controlling ~)fk.0rs of 
banks should ensure that the instructions on that were passed on to the b:' uiC~1 <.ltl'icials. The. 
representative also suggested that to ensure achieving targets i:1 t[m<: .· ·.!istrict industries 
centres (DIC) should sponsor the applications in the beginning o: the y...:ar as the banks 
would be busy with the work during the closing month. Banks wete advised to sanction 
atleast 80% of their targets by December itself and re•naining 20% before March and also 
not to send back the applications pending in the previous year to DICs. 
14.5 The representative of the Reserve Bank of India, Trivandrum admitted poor 
performance of private banks under th.:: sch,;;me which felt dissatisfied due to non-inclusion 
of their borrowers under the Debt Rtl~ef Scheme of the Government of India. The matter 
was brought to the notice of Central office of RBI. The representative of the RBI said that a 
sizeable number of applications were rejected by banks on account of various factors which 

217 
resulted mainly due to inadequate scrutiny at DIC and task force levels. He disputed the 
issue of under financing highlighted by the State Government and informed the Sub­
Committee that a recent study conducted by RBI in three districts indicated that none of 60 
borrowers complained of inadequate finance. 
14.6 The Sub-Committee appreciates the spirit with ~hich PMRY was launched i.e. 
primarily to finance the projects for educated unemployed youth and help them in getting 
self employment. However, on the basis of discussion the Sub-Committee has come to a 
broad conclusion that there seems to be an apparent lack of coordination amongst different 
agencies such as banks, DIC and the monitoring bodies at the central level under the 
scheme. 
14.7 The Sub--Committee expresses its utter displeasure on the manner in which the 
applicants are subjected to harassment under the scheme by different agencies in their 
respective area of functioning. These agencies viz. the Central Government, State 
Government and bank authorities do not seem to be coordinating amongst themselves and 
instead are confined to their own functioning. The Sub-Committee is anguished to learn that 
DICs and task forces do not bother to expedite applications. The ball then falls in the court 
of banking sector where collateral security is insisted, failing which applications are not 
screened for disbursement. The Union Government has left everything to be settled by 
DICs, task forces and banking authorities. The Sub-Committee feels that the scheme cannot 
be implemented properly by simply issuing instructions for disciplinary action against officials 
demanding collateral security and by setting targets for banks for disbursement of loans. The 
Sub-Committee recommends that the guidelines framed for PMRY needs to be overhauled. 
More sincere coordination is required for the success of the scheme. It is understood that 
RBI has deputed one representative at Trivandrum and similar representatives must be 
deputed at all State capitals. The Sub-Committee appreciates that the scheme cannot be 
monitored from New Delhi directly but it is equally important to empower RBI officers 
deputed in the Stait':> to strictly monitor the scheme there. Performance of private banks could 
also be monitored by these officers. For this centralised data may be maintained. 
14.8 The Sub-Committee recommends that the officers of the State Governments, 
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Industry and bank officers should sit together and review the 
procedural issues including guidelines for PMRY to ensure that (i) no beneficiary be 
compelled to accept a lower amount with the motive of limiting the loan, (ii) viability of 
projects is examined in proper way, and (iii) personnel having better experience be included 
in the task forces. 
14.9 The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that at present there is no 
system of collecting the figures pertaining to financing the women under the scheme. The 
Sub-Committee strongly recommends that such data should be maintained so as to 
encourage women entrepreneurs having skill and potential to set up industries. 
14.10 The Sub-Committee further recommends that to achieve the targets, banks should 
depute senior officials of their branches for closer monitoring of the implementation of the 
programme. It would also be appropriate if banks which show a better performance and cross 
the targets are suitably awarded. The officers of such banks could be given incentives. 
14.11 Another item in the agenda during meeting with bank authorities was 
the credit facilities for small scale entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee brought to the notice 

218 
of the banking authorities, the demand of small scale entrepreneurs for extending loans of 
about Rs. two lakhs with reduced rate of interest. Reacting to this, the General Manager, 
RBI clarified that at present banks are free to fix the rate of interest on the loans of about 
Rs. 2 lakhs. The Sub-Committee hopes that this genuine demand of small scale 
entrepreneurs will be examined by the Reserve Bank of India sympathetically. 
. 14.12 The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that the.re is a general 
reluctance on the part of banks in lending and the credit deposit ratio of the State has also 
been abysmally low. There are certain firms in the State where even though the production 
has been much higher the needed finance was not forthcoming. from banks. The Sub­
Committee noted that the matter has already been brought to the notice of the Finance 
Minister. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government of In~ will suitably address to this 
issue concerning the State of Kerala. 
Study Report of the Illrd Phase Visit of Sub-Committee-V of the Department-Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry to.Kerala and Karnataka during 19th to 23rd 
November, 1995 
In the IIIrd phase of its tour, the Sub-Committee-V of the Committee on Industry 
visited the remaining places and the industrial units in Kerala and Karnataka from 19th to 
23rd November, 1995. The Sub-Committee assembled at Cochin on 19th November and 
commenced its business by interacting with workers as well the representatives of Modern 
Food Industries Ltd., on 20th November, 1995. On the same day the Sub-Committee visited 
the coir units located at Alleppey and met the workers unions of the industry. 
The Sub-Committee then left for Calicut on 21st November where it interacted with the 
district authorities regarding the status of growth centre at Calicut. On 22nd November, the 
Sub-Committee left for Bangalore and met the workers and management of Indian 
Telephone Industry (ITI) at Bangalore. The next day, the Sub-Committee met the 
representatives of different nationalised banks regarding the Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana. 
This was followed by discussions with the workers and management of Cement Corporation 
of India, the representative of Vijayanagar Steel Ltd. and the management of Metal Scrap 
Trading Corporation Ltd. 
The Sub-Committee was earlier scheduled to visit the growth centre at Hassan. 
Unfortunately, due to unfavourable law and order situation, the Sub-Committee had no 
alternative but to hear the District Collector, Hassan ·at Bungalore itself on 23rd November. 
I 
The details of the discussions of the Sub-Committee with various agencies/organisations 
during the visit are indicated in the following paras. 
Meeti!'g with Workers/Ma11agement of Modem Food I11dustries at Cochi11 , 
The Sub-Committee started its business on 20th November, 1995 at Cochin with the 
workers/management of Modern Food Industries Ltd. The Sub-Committee was informed by 
the management that the Industries started business in 1966. At present the total strength of 
the Company was 2700. In 1991-92, the turnover of the Company was 60 crores which 
increased to 112 crores in 1994-95. A net profit of Rs. 5 crores was achieved in the last year. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that the Cochin unit of the Industry was started in 1968 
and· since then it was a profit making unit because of the steady increase in production and 
demand. The unit also started manufacture of cakes which was in great demand. The Sub­
Committee was informed thut the Cochin unit wus not able to produce and meet the high 

219 
demand because of capacity constraints. Since bread manufacturing waa reserved for the 
Small Scale Industries sector, the Food Industries '.Vere not ali owed to open a new plant. 
They told the Sub-Committee that their main competitors were private bread manufacturing 
industries. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Government of India to help in 
increasing the plant capacity of the bread producing unit and if possible exempt it from Small 
Scale Industries Sector so that Modern Food Industries Ltd. could open a plant on its own. 
Meeting with Workers Union of Coir Industry 
The Sub-Committee met the workers of the coir units at Alleppey. The workers 
informed that the coir industry was spread throughout the coastal belt in the State and 
provided more than 4.5 lakhs employment to the people in the State. As regards production 
30 per cent of the production were exported and 70 per cent were marketed in India. The 
Committee was informed that nearly 85 per cent of the workers were women. The 
Committee was also informed that at present 450 cooperative societies were working in coir 
sector. 
While going around the units, the Committee found that coir industry was totally 
dependent on age old wooden spinning machines. The workers had to work mechanically 
throughout the day to complete the task. The Committee was informed that though coir co­
operative societies played an important role in the industry by protecting the interest of the 
workers by giving reasonable wages and providing better service conditions still four to five 
lakh workers needed improved working conditions. 
The workers put forth the following suggestions for the improvement of working 
conditions and overall development of coir industry:-
(1) The Government of India should extend rebate for 120 days in respect of khadi 
industry; a similar rebate should be considered for the coir. industry, i.e. 20 per cent 
rebate for coir and coir products be extended throughout the year. 
(2) Cash credit to the primary societies be extended to 90 per cent on the coverage of 
stock. 
(3) All assistance should be given to the co-operative sector f()r getting export orders. 
(4) The Central and the State government be persuaded to exempt coir yarn and coir 
products from sales tax. 
(5) Primary societies be strengthened by providing adequate funds. 
(6) The Kerala State Co-operative Coir Marketing Federation Ltd. (COIRFED), was 
the apex federation of primary co-operative societies and it should be provided 
necessary funds for its proposed projects so that workers in coir indusfry can be 
benefited. 
(7) Coir Workers Welfare Fund Boatd should be provided enough funds for 
implementing . the welfare scheme. 
(8) The Central Government should increase the present limit of Rs. 75/- p.m. as a 
pension and it should be modified. 
(9) A representative of the workers should be the member of the Coir Board i.e. its 
constitution should be modified. 
The Sub-Committee feels that all the suggestions mentianed above need to be 
sympathetically examined on priority basis. The Sub-Committee would like to draw attention 
to some positive suggestions, on more or less same lines, as suggested by the Coir Board 
during its meeting with the Sub-Committee at Cochin. The Sub-Committee hopes that Coir 

220 
Board representatives who accompanied it throughout its visit and meeting with the worken 
of coir industry could provide much more feedback to the Sub-Committee about the fielc 
problems which the Sub-Committee would place before the Government of India fo1 
redressal. The Sub-Committee urged upon the Government to ensure protection of coiJ 
industry in general and workers in particular. 
Meeting with District Collector Ca/icut 
The Sub-Committee after completing its business at Cochin stopped off at Calicw 
primarily to take stock of growth centre located there. The Sub-Committee was informec 
that at present two growth centres were proposed by the Government viz., Kannur anc 
Alappuzha growth centres and they had been split into five small centres. The Kerala Stat( 
Industria! Development Corporation Ltd. had been appointed for implementing tht.­
indu~.r~·hd growth centres. The Sub-Committee came to know that an amount of Rs. 600( 
bkhs had been earmarked for the scheme and amount so far released by the Centra 
Gover·:ment was Rs. 752.00 lakh. The Sub-Committee was given to understand that the cosl 
of lar.d in Kerala was very high. The State Government officials wanted the Centra 
Government to review the amount in view of high cost of land as the sanctioned amount wa~ 
not sufficient. The officials felt that it would be better if the Central Government release( 
Rs. 20 crores for the smooth running of the scheme. 
The State Government officials also suggested that the growth centres were to bt 
declared as industrial undertakings under the Industrial Development Regulation Act so m 
to get the benefit of tax exemptions. They also emphasised that since the growth centre~ 
were to be established in the backward areas and their gestation period was about five to ter 
years, it was proposed to establish them with private participation by giving attractiv<. 
incentives. 
The Sub-Committee strongly recommends that in view of the high price of the land in 
Kerala, it should be well within the consideration of Government of India to enhance its shan 
of fund for the proposed growth centres in Kerala. 
indian Telephone Industries (IT/) 
The Sub-Committee met the workers and the management of the Indian. Telephone 
Industries Ltd. (ITI) on 22 November, 1995. At the plant site the Sub-Committee noted that 
lTI was well equipped with. the modern instruments. The 48 years old ITI Ltd. had a sound 
infrastructure and excellent work force of experienced persons. The Sub-Committee was 
informed that the ITI worked under the Department of Telecommunications (DOT). The 
designing was done by DOT and production of telecom equipment was done by ITI. At 
present 27,000 employees were working in ITI, and it was producing all types of 
telecommunication equipment like equipment for defence, space, research and satellite 
installation. 
The Sub-Committee was given to understand that at present ITI was in critical position 
as its capacity utilization· was not satisfactory due to lack of orders by DOT. During the year 
1995-96, percentage of orders by DOT was around 8% of the total demand. The 
management informed the Sub-Committee that order placed by DOT were generally 35% by 
quota and 20 to 30% on tender basis. The problem of ITI was further compounded by the 
steep fall in prices. The Sub-Committee was informed that tender quotation submitted by 
private parties was quite cheaper than the tender quotation submitted by ITI, as a result 
private parties got the orders from DOT. These private parties started anti-dumping for 
getting orders and their quotation price was just equal to the cost price of the equip1:1ent 
built by ITI. 

221 
The Committee was. also ihformed· by the officials of ITI that the ratio of allocation of 
reserved quantity was not commensurate with the capacities available at ITI and HTL 
(Hindustan Telecommunication Ltd.). The ratio of allotment was 30:33, while the workers' 
ratio in these public service undertakings was 10: 1. HTL was allowed to create additional 
capacity for switching equipment, C-DOT, etc., even as m got large capacity for such 
equipment. On the issue of diversification, the management informed that a special 
technology scanning group was formed under the corporate planning department to explore 
the areas of wireless and local loop, CDMA, digital loop carrier technologies, etc. They 
further informed that the company was also planning for backward integration of business 
like power plant at Raibareli. The related area of diversification were radio paging service, 
mobile trunk radio service, software business and agriculture equipment, etc. 
On the basis of the discussions the Sub-Committee came to the conclusion that this 
· premier undertaking was a victim of DOT, a department which was its only patron allowed it 
to become sick because of its some wrong strategies and unhealthy policies. Following 
recommendations were made by the Sub-Committee, and perhaps a positive attitude in this 
regard might be helpful in the revival of the Company:-
(i) The ITI should be given price preference while quoting the tender. 
(ii) There should be some reservation in order supply by DOT. 
(iii) At present ITI capacity utilization is 80%, so it should be provided more orders as 
per the MOU. 
(iv) Under the new policy, old agreement (with ITI and DOT) should be changed. 
Meeting with Representlltives of Different Nationalised Banks 
The Sub-Committee then met the representatives of different banks and discussed 
regarding the loan disbursement in connection with Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana. The Sub­
Committee was informed that banks had been participating actively in the implementation of 
the scheme since its inception. They informed the Sub-Committee that various task forces 
had been formed in the districts· for interviewing prospective beneficiaries and applications of 
these beneficiaries were forwarded to the branches of banks under the scheme. Loans were 
then sanctioned by banks under industry, service and business sector after scrutinising the 
applications and finding them in order. The list of selected candidates was sent to DIC and 
these candidates were trained for twenty days; after the completion of their training loans 
were disbursed. The Committee was informed that the performance of loan disbursement in 
Kamataka was much better as compared to other States. 
The Sub-Committee was given to understand that there were some problems which 
came in the way of effective implementation of the scheme; these were due to lack. of co­
ordination between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Industry. Besides that, banks 
representatives informed the Committee that DIC personnel were very slow in sending 
applications to branches which reached there very late generally after the lapse of six to 
seven months of the financial year and branches were directed to sanction, those applications 
upto by the closing month of the year . for their speedy disposal. Some delay was usually 
observed between sanction of the loan application and its final disbursement because a 
twenty days training was to be,..arranged by DIC during that time. The representatives also 
clarified that in respect of projects that require power supply, the borrower needed time to 
get the power coimection from electricity authorities which was one of the reasons for delay. 
Lease of premises was also a big problem for its smooth operation as borrowers were unable 
to offer the asset to be financed as security after the completion of lease time of premises. 
Bankers were sometimes unable to sanction loans as per the recommendations of the task 

222 
force because the projects recommended for sanctions were repetitive in nature for the 
same locality leading to oversaturation. Banks, representatives demanded that banks 
should have the right to take up, the assets of the defaulter without any legal process as 
it was time consuming and required as unnecessary exercise. Wh~n banks, representatives 
were enquired about the complaints of the collateral security asked by the bankers, they 
denied it and clarified that the banks were working under the guidelines issued by 
Reserve Bank of India from time to time and which they were bound to follow. The 
Sub-Committee was informed that the main reasons for the complaints were non-viability 
of the project, premises and saturation of the similar type of work. When asked about 
the status of loan disbursement of land based programme under Prime Minister Rozgar 
Yojana, the Sub-Committee was informed that banks were working according to the 
potential linked gradation plan sponsored by NABARD. The bankers were of the view 
that such land based industries like poultry, dairy, sericulture, etc .. should be categorised 
by the Government and registration of the land for these industries should be made 
without stamp duty. 
The representatives of the Reserve Bank ·of India, Bangalore informed the Sub­
Committee that strict instructions received from the Finance Ministry were issued to these 
banks from time to time and they were directed not to ask collateral security and also 
advised to sanction 80% of their targets during the current year .. 
Meeting with Management/Workers of CCI, Kurkunta Unit at Bangalore 
The Sub-Committee met with workers and management of Kurkunta unit of Cement 
Corporation of India in Bangalore. The Sub-Committee was informed that CCI was the 
only central public sector undertaking in the cement industry having an installed capacity 
of 42.2 lakh mt. p.a. It had at present 11 units located at Mandhar, Nayagaon and 
Akaltara in Madhya Pradesh, Adilabad, Y erragunta and Tandur in Andhra Pradesh, 
Charkhi Dadri in Haryana, Kurkunta in l_(arnataka, Bokajan in Assam and Rajban in 
Himachal Pradesh and Delhi unit. The Kurkunta unit was the second oldest operating 
unit in Karnataka with an installed capacity to produce 1.98 lakh tonnes of cement per 
annum. The Kurkunta plant was based on the wet process technology and this plant was 
commissioned in October, 1972 at a total cost of Rs. 12 crores. The Sub-Committee was 
informed that this plant had its own captive mine located about 4.5 km. from the unit 
and had its own wagon facility for transportation of the limestone to the factory. 
As regards the quality of cement, this plant had a full fledged laboratory for the 
physical and chemical te.sting. Tests wer~ conducted for raw materials as well as for final 
products and the testing was also done at different stages of manufacturing. At present 
this plant was producing ordinary port land cement of forty three grade. The Committee 
was informed that the unit was facing some. problems which were as under:-
(i) The coal consumption was very high because the plant was very old and was 
based on wet process technology. The coal being used was also of very poor 
quality containing a large percentage of ash. 
(ii) The plant required frequent repairs and maintenance which required high stores 
and spares consumption. 
~ ~ 
(iii) Due to infrastructural constraints, like power, coal ;md wagons, production 
performance of the unit was adversely affected. " 
(iv) Short supply of wagons, against the fixed quota and directional restrictions 
affecting production and despatches. 
(v) The unit required funds for modernisation and exp~~sion whereas the Cement 

223 
Corporation of India did not get any budgetary support and its internal sources 
were also limited; and 
(vi) Due to a cluster of cement plants situated in the unit area, the plant was facing a 
stiff competition. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that some units of Cement Corporation of India 
were making loss because of non-availability of limestone, Charkhi Dadri unit was one of 
the loss making units because of non-availability of limestone and this plant had to procure 
limestone from Rajasthan which required extra budgetary support. 
On the basis of discussion held with the representatives of Cement Corporation of India, 
the Committee feels that most of the problems of the unit were self created. There is lack of 
foresightedness on the part of the management. The Sub-Committee wonders as to why the 
new technology was not adopted for the last so many years. The Committee observes that 
either the management failed to convince the Government for replacing the technology or 
reluctant to apply the same. At a time when the rapid advancement in technology is taking 
place and the number of competitors increasing considerably. The management has exhibited 
its inefficiency by managing with old technology/machinery at the cost of nation. Whatever 
may the earlier circumstances there is still time to awake. The Sub-Committee would caution 
the present management not to repeat the policies of their predecessors and also not to blame 
them entirely but go ahead with a strong proposal for change in technology. The Government 
should also help the management in finding out the solution and extend the necessary 
budgetary resources to revive the units of Cement Corporation of India. The Government 
should also ensure orders for the units to ensure their survival. 
Meeting with representatives of Vijayanagar Steel Limited 
The representative of Vijayanagar Steel Limited informed the Sub-Committee that 
during December, 1982, an independent company under the name and style Ws. 
Vijayanagar Steel Ltd., was incorporated under the Ministry of Steel and Mines, 
Government of India. A total of 9341 acres of land was acquired (8791 acres for the steel 
plant and 550 acres for the housing colony) near Thorangal forming part of the villages of 
Thorangal, Vaddu, Kurekuppa, Yerabanahalli, Nayakanahalli, Chikanthapur, Kudithini and 
Thimmalpura. Mecon was commissioned to do various pre-feasibility step/reports towards 
setting up of the steel plant. However, due to insufficient budget provision and the lack of 
firm decision as to go ahead with the steel project, the company could not proceed beyond 
the initial steps of land acquisition and pre-feasibility steps/reports preparation upto 1991. 
Subsequent to the economic and industrial liberalisation policy, it was decided by the 
Government of India not to set up any new steel plants in the public sector but to encourage 
private sector investment in various areas including steel plants. Accordingly, several private 
companies/industrial houses of India came forward to set up steel plants in the private sector 
in various parts of the country including Karnataka. A report prepared by the Ministry of 
Steel and Mines, Government of India indicated Mangalore and Hospet-Bellary region as 
two possible locations for setting up of the integrated steel plants in Karnataka. 
The Government of Karnataka, immediately after the economic liberalisation in 1991, 
moved to the Government of India for the transfer of Vijayanagar Steel Limited from 
Government of India to Government of Karnatka and also for the transfer of 9350 acres of 
land acquired for the project to the Government of Karnataka, so that, the Government of 
Karnataka could identify suitable private sector partner and set up the Karnataka 's first 
integrated steel plant at Hospet-Bellary area in the joint sector. Accordingly, a 
III!cl!ssary revenues. 
The Management was of the view that the proposed diversification project of MSTC 
should be given top priority for clearances by the Ministry, Planning Commission, CCEA, 
etc. so as to enable MSTC to create its own productivity and give sufficient business volume 
to its existing infrastructure. 
On enquiring as to what had been the impact of liberation on the Company, the 
Management clarified that liberalisation primarily involved decanalisation of import of scrap, 
reduction of import duties and simplification of systems and procedures in that sphere. 

224 
Memorandum of Undertaking was signed between the Government of India and the 
Government of Karnataka on 23 February, 1994, whereby the share holdings of the 
Government of India in Ws. Vijayanagar Steel Limited were transferred to the Government 
of Karnataka alongwith the land and other assets of the company for setting up the steel 
plant. Subsequently, the deed of conveyance was also executed by the Government of India 
m favour of the Government of Karnataka on 2 January, 1995 in this regard. 
The Government of Karnataka, immediately after signing the Memorandum of 
226 
As a result of these measures, the following developments took place:-
(a) A number of private units including large ,organisations such as Reliance. TISCO, 
lTC, etc. and international traders as well as individual furnace units came into the 
field of import of scrap. This resulted in foreign suppliers taking advantage of a 
number of players in the field and dilution of strict quality criteria followed by MSTC 
during the canalisation period. MSTC also had as a result to follow the suit, since the 
prices offered to MSTC otherwise were unnecessarily higher and as such 
uncompetitive. The mushrooming led to simultaneous import by number of parties and 
avoidable infructuous cost by way of bunching of vessels at ports, demurrage, necessity 
to keep material in stock for extended periods due to inability to sell in advance, 
introduction of extra commercial practice, etc. 
(b) Impact of reduction duties: Import duty on melting scrap had been reduced to 5% 
Simultaneously, duty on finished products had also been reduced. For example, duty 
on billet stood at 20%. As a result, billet was being imported in preference to scrap, 
since billet, produced out of imported scrap after melting in furnaces was costlier than 
the landed cost of imported billet. As a result of this as well as the hike in 
international price of scrap, a large number of furnaces were closed down, resulting in 
gross under-utilisation of investment and capacity build up. 
(c) Irlpact of removal of definition of heavy melting scrap rerollable scrap: Heavy Melting 
Scr~lp (HMS) was defined in the import policy in 1985-88. However, in the last few 
years, that definition had been withdrawn and as a result large scale imports of HMS 
were now being undertaken. Material, actually coming under this category, however, 
was in higher sizes which could only be categorised as rerollable scrap. Duty on 
rerollable scrap ranged upto 40%, whereas duty on HMS was just 5%. This led to 
large scale evasion of duty. MSTC could not obviously be party to such practices and 
was not in a position to import HMS, being otherwise unv~able. 
In the presen~ decanahsatim. regime, HMS was being imported from sources which 
includes zones of conflict. As a result there had been a number of cases of presence of 
explosive:; in such consignment& which led to the loss of life. That was primarily due to non­
enforcement of quality control and the inability of private importers to enforce such a 
discipline on the sellers. 
The Management highlighted the following facts regarding import of scrap after 
decanalisation:-
1. There had been several instances where scrap impc:-t.;-d by private importers had been 
m:companied by explosives and on a few occasions there had been serious casualities. 
2. There had been every possibility of radio-active contamina!.inn being present in such 
material imported. 
3. Due to substantial differential in customs duty between HMS a11d rerollable scrap, 
there was every possibility/tendency on the part of private importers to import 
rerollab!e scrap in the guise of HMS which naturally resulted in revenue bss to the 
country. 
4. Price manipulation through under-invoicing/over invoicing depending upon the 
circumstances could not be ruled out· which evidently was at the cost of revenue and 
loss of foreign exchange to the country. 
On the basis of evidence of the management and the papers/documents submitted before 
it the Sub-Committee feels that though it would be difficult to extend full monopoly to the 
Company in the field of importing scrap but the Government may still help out MSTC by 
rationalising the duty structure for raw materials and to enable it to compete with private 

227 
sector. It should also be well within the consideration of the Government of India to expedite 
clearance of the diversification proposal of the Company. The Ministry of Railways and 
Defence may also be persuaded to prefer MSTC in respect of disposal of their scrap. 
/ 

Study note regarding the visit of Sub-Committee· VI of the Department Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
1. The Sub-Committee VI of the Committee on Industry was constituted to study the 
problems of industrialisation in backward areas and capital goods industry with particular 
reference to the conditions of women participating and employed in this sector. The Sub­
Committee consisted of the following five members :-
1. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
2. Smt. Suseela Gopalan 
3. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
4. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
5. Smt. Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil was the Convenor of the Sub-Committee. 
The Sub-Committee visited Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra from the 9th to 13th 
October, 1995 and held discussions with the ~presentatives of Chamber of Commerce and 
Industries, officers of the State Industry and other departments, .district authorities of 
Indore, Bombay and Pune and other women workers organisations~~ The salient features of 
the study are as under:-
Meeti11g with District Magistrate and Representatives of State Industry Department, lndor4 ._,, .. 
On the 9th October, 1995 the Sub-Committee heard the views Qf the officers of the 
State Industry Department and district authorities. The Sub-Cominittee was given to 
understand that the Industrial Policy and Action Plan, 1994 of the .Qpvernment of Madhya' 
Pradesh aims at accelerating and strengthening more capital investment, ensuring balanced 
regional development and providing additional employment opportunities for 
industrialisation in the State. This industrial policy also takes into account the liberalised 
economy at the national level as also changes at the international level. For this purpose the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh is committed to increase · the budgetary allocation for 
industry at present around 4% to 7% over next two years. The officials clarified before the 
Committee that the Government of Madhya Pradesh was keen for the industrial 
development of the State and a number of steps such as new opportunities for Small Scale 
Industries (SSI) and rural industries, greater· utilization of manpower, encouragement to 
women entrepreneurs and the entrepreneurs belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and other Backward Classes and No'n-residential Indians, private sectors participation 
in ·infrastructure development, simplification of administrative procedure, promotion of 
cooperative sector for industrial development had been taken. 
231 
I • 
.. 

232 
Commenting on the specific efforts taken to promote SSI, the State Government 
officials apprised that the following special efforts had been made to promote the Small 
Scale Industries in the State:-
(i) Allotment of land at lower rate; 
(ii) help in procuring loan; 
(iii) capital subsidy of 15% (This subsidy has been abolished for medium and large 
scale industries); 
(iv) interest subsidy to the tune of Rs. 2500 for three years, -subsidy is paid directly to 
the institution; 
(v) sales and Commercial tax exemption in various forms; and 
(vi) development of infrastructure (23 Industrial Growth Centres have been 
developed). 
Apart .from this the "ABHIBHA YAK" (Guardian) Yojana has also been launched 
where a few small scale units are given to one Government, officer who helps the 
entrepreneurs in· getting their various administrative matters solved. For improving the 
position of finance to SSI, the State Government is working out a system for joint appraisal 
of a project by financial institutions and banks for the fixed and the working capital. The 
Madhya Pradesh Finance Corporation which generally provides term loan is also starting to 
provide working capital for small scale industries. 85% of the capital subsidy of 15% has also 
been given to small scale industries which have not gone into production. On the specific 
query of sickness in small scale industries, the State Government officials stated that 
according to 1991 census 40% of the small scale industries were sick due to various reasons 
but most of them are sick due to the lack of finance. The Sub-Committee was informed that 
though Single Window Scheme was not in operation in the strict sense but all the formalities 
for establishing an industrial unit was completed within three months and if there was any 
problems, a Committee headed by Collector existed in ea$!h district to help in the matter. 
Even in the industrial Growth Centres the entrepreneurs do not have; to run to respective 
district authorities to get appropriate sanctions. For this purpose representatives of various 
departments are available at one place at the Growth Centre itself to help the entrepreneurs. 
Since one of the main objects of the Sub-Committee was to study the conditions ;;.,;< 
women pafticipating and employed in various industries in the State it was deposed before 
the Committee that as envisaged in the Industrial Policy and Action Plan 1994, women 
entrepreneurship in the State were being encour1,1ged by giving priority in land allotment ::~iO 
additional tax concession for a further period of one year to the small scale industries set up 
by women entrepreneurs. It was also informed that there were 6.5 lakhs bidi ~::mployees in 
the State out of which 80% were women in the districts of Sagar, Damoh, Jabalpur and 
Satna. These bidi workers are getting Rs. 22.50 for per thousand bidi. On enquiring, the 
officials of the Labour Department informed that· these employees, were on contract basis 
and were getting less salary. There were also cases of delay payment, etc. It was also 
informed that cooperative sector in bidi which had been started in Jabalpur was not in good 
condition. On housing facilities for bidi workers, it was deposed that houses were being 
provided to bidi workers with the participation of the Central Government but such houses 
are very less in number. The bidi workers are also provided maternity benefit i.e., three 
months leave-one and a h,alf months before and one and a half months after the delivery. 
Creches are also ma<fe available to them. Where 30 women are employed, one creche is 
provided for them. fn 'other small scale industries, working hours, remuneration and 
minimum wages, welfare activities and safety measures for women provided .under various 

233 
laws are regulated byadministration. For women workers there are separate rooms and 
toilets in the factory. In certain industrial units subsidised transport facility is also provided. 
The performance of the State under the Prime Minister Rozgar Y ojana (PMR Y) is very 
encouraging and this year there is 110% achievement by the State in the field. However due 
to lack of reservation (although preference to women is envisaged in PMRY) for women 
nothing remarkable has been done for women. It was also informed that minimum wage Act 
was being adopted in all units. 
Visit to Growth Centre, Pithampur 
The Sub-Committee also visited a Growth Centre at Pithampur where it met the women 
workers in a diamond cutting industry separately. The Committee was told by the 
management that most of the women belonged to the needy class and only 12% of the 
workers are women because taking women in employment was highly expensive in Madhya 
Pradesh and despite the encouragement schemes like subsidised transport the response from 
women was very poor. The Committee was alsq told that women workers were generally less 
efficient as compared to their male counterpart though this was denied by women employees 
interviewed. There were total 62 workers with a monthly income of Rs. 16001-. One creche 
was there where only one Aya was provided to look after their children. Some medical 
facility was provided to women as are given to their male colleagues. They were getting a 
sum of Rs. 100/- as housing allowance. 
The Sub-Committee also visited a pharmaceutical industry and found that most of the 
workers were engaged in packing work and were being provided the necessary benefits as 
per the rules. Out of the total of 250 women workers 40 were engaged in packing and 
sorting work. Transport was provided to women worker and they were getting between 
Rs. 1000/- and Rs. 1200/- as wages and Rs. 1SO/- as bonus. No House Rent Allowance 
(HRA) was given to them. Three months maternity leave and during that period a sum of 
Rs. 3000/- were paid to them. No medical facility was given but during illness they got leave 
for which they were not paid. 
Visit to Readymade Garment Industry, Indore 
The Sub-Committee visited a readymade garment industry and had discussion with the 
women employees. The Sub-Committee was satisfied with the working conditions and 
facilities given to women employees in the industry. 
Visit to Bidi Making Factory, Indore 
The Sub-Committee came to know while discussing with the bidi workers that their 
main problem was of housing and even after serving for twenty-five to thirty years this 
facility was not given to them. Apart from this these pidi workers w~re getting only 
Rs. 22.50 per thousand bidi which was quite low. Women bz'di workers also informed the 
Committee that because of a dispute between the two partners, they had not been getting 
their wages for the last three months. 
Visit to ~mall Industries Service Institute (SIS/), Indore 
The Sub-Committee was informed that much emphasis had been given by the State 
Government on development of women entrepreneurship and for this purpose various 
entreprenurship in self employment assignment developmental programmes, especially 
product-cum-process oriented programme had been launched. The Sub-Committee a-lso came 
to know that SISI, Indore was the first institute in the nation which had a women cell for the 
upliftment of women. While deliberating with the trainees the Sub-Committee was informed 
that training in all walks of entrepreneurship, including procuring finance, marketing and 

publicity was imparted in the training programmes but the trainees were actually facing 
problem in obtaining loan and finding market for their products. 
The Sub-Committee, thereafter, held discussions with women entrepreneurs who 
informed that they were· facing difficulty due to:-
(i) Non-implementation of announced policy; 
(ii) lack of infrastructure; 
(iii) lack of power and its high rate; 
(iv) marketing of the product; and 
(v) recently announced provident fund scheme for workers. 
The Sub-Committee was given to undetstand that banks were reluctant to provide 
working capital even if the project had been held viable by·-DIC because they did not have 
confidence in the women; and male member would get benefit in the name of women. 
Banks were asking for collateral security and in few cases they. were also reluctant to 
provide loan for small projects of five to ten lakhs. 
Although PMRY envisaged that preference might be given to women but no 
percentage had been fixed undei\ the scheme for women due to which not much headway 
had been made in the field. 
MeetiRg with Workers, Bombay 
The Sub-Committee met women workers engaged in rubber, textile, food processing, 
pharmaceutical, tobacco and diamond and gold jewellery industries and during the 
discussion it was informed that barring one or two cases medical facilities including routine 
check-ups were provided in every establishment and women were also given maternity 
benefits. There were creches almost in every establishment. The Sub-Committee also came 
to know while holding discussion with women workers of a computer component 
manufacturing industry that the minimum wages have not been fixed for employees of 
service industries. 
The Sub-Committee observed that the conditions of women employees working in 
small scale units was not on a par with others because most of these- women were 
employed on contract basis. They were getting only Rs. 30/- per day with no other 
facilities. 
Meeting with Women Entrepreneurs and Representatives of Maharashtra Chamber of 
Commerce (Women Wing) 
, The Sub-Committee was informed that 20% of industrial flats had been reserved for 
women entrepreneurs by MIDC and this reservation had been fully utilised by women 
entrepreneurs. The main problem which the Sub-Committee was apprised of was the 
registeration of home-made products manufactured by women. Due to the lack of 
registration; women entrepreneures were finding it difficult to market their home-made 
products. Some women entrepreneures were also not getting perMission to manufacture 
home-made products in residential areas which according to them did not harm the place 
or disturb its peace. Some women also informed that though for their welfare many 
facilities were announced by the State Government, they had not, however, been 
implemented and for their implementation it took very long time. The Sub-Committee was 
informed that for PMRY banks were reluctant to· provide fund and even the Mahila 
Udyam Nidhi Scheme for women entrepreneures was also not running effectively. 
The representatives of the Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce (women. wing) have 
submitted before the Sub-Committee that the excise rules may be revised to make them 

235 
simple and rational and banks/financial institutions may be directed to help SSI in order to 
save them from extinction. 
The Committee was informed that minimum wage had been fixed but most of the 
women were drawing more than minimum wage. In the unskilled sector women workers 
were earlier getting Rs. 6001- to Rs. 700/- per month which had now increased to Rs. 850/­
per month. ESI and schemes like the Provident Fund were also there in every industry. 
Meeting with Representatives of Industry and Labour Department of the Government of 
Maharashtra 
The Committee was told that Maharashtra was the leading State in establishing· various 
kinds of industries in the country since 15% of the nation's factories wer.e located in the 
State and nearly one fourth of India's industria·! output was produced in Maharashtra. The 
Committee was given to understand that Maharashtra's new industrial policy announced in 
April, 1993 aimed at further sharpening of competitive edge of the State and strengthening 
its premier status. 
The most outstanding features of the policy are:-
(i) The revision of the industrial location policy for Bombay Metropolitan Region 
permitting non-polluting, high-tech industries within the rationalised municipal 
zones of Greater Bombay; 
(ii) non-requirement of the Collector's permission for purchase of land for industrial 
use and its NA conversion in certain areas; 
(iii) export-oriented agro processing projects permitted to hold land in excess of 
ceiling; and 
(iv) liberal benefits under the Package Scheme of Incentives and special benefits for 
100% Export-Oriented Unites (EOU), regardless of their location. 
Besides this the new Industrial Policy also provided for private participation in power 
projects and setting up of new industrial estate and infrastructure. There are thirteen 
corporations and Directorate of Industries which help in implementation of the State's 
Industrial Policy. SICOM a Government of Maharashtra undertaking provides versatile 
package of services for promotion of medium and large scale units. It also implements the 
State Government's Package Scheme of Incentive and works as nodal agency in Maharashtra 
extending all the assistance to NRI entrepreneures to set up Industrial units. The Sub­
Committee was apprised that the Udyog Mitra offered general guidance to entrepreneures 
seeking to set up industries, in respect of various rules and regulations, policy matters, 
approvals and clearances which had to be necessarily complied with at several stages during 
the progress of a project and also provided assistance for submission of formal requests to 
different organisations and in following up such requests for appropriate sanctions. 
On specific query on reluctance of banks to give working capital to the projects cleared 
by DIC or to the units which are sick, the Sub-Committee was apprised that the main 
reasons for reluctance of banks to provide working capital was due to the fact that many 
times the amount of loan required as working capital was very high since it was assessed by 
private organisation. In order to help industries financially, MSFC had also started granting 
financial assistance by way of seed capital besides giving term loan. 
The Sub-Committee was informed that there were many women in the electronic section 
and MEL TRON was giving training to women and helping them to get jobs on regular basis. 
The Sub-Committee wa~ told that DIC (District Industries Centre) had also started 
MCEDP (Maharashtra Centre for Entrepreneur Development Programme) which was 
~.'\7{ 

238 
cultivate atleast 0.05 acres land in order to supply the produce to the sugar factories. On 
reservation for women, the Sub-Committee was infonned that reservation for women 
member was provided in the managing committee. which looked after day to day 
management in the following. manner:-
( a) One seat on the Committee consisting of not more than· 9 members' Committee; 
(b) Two seat~ on the Committee' consisting of 10 or more, but not exceeding 19 
Committee members; 
(c) Three seats on the Committee consisting of 20 or more Committee members. 
As per the above provision, there were 2 or 3 women Directors on the Commi-.e of 
most of the sugar factories depending upon the total strength of Directors and there" were 
5 sugar factories which are having women as Chairpersons. 
Commenting on women labourers, the Commissioner told that labourers were required 
for harvesting and transporting sugarcane from field to factorie~ and these were temporary 
workers ~ho were not employed directly by factories. 
At present there are about 2 lakhs female workers. Since- they are not employed by 
factories they do not get salary and other benefits. However, besides reward at the time of 
closure the following facilities are given:-
(1) Medical facilities at factory site; 
(2) Anganwadi or. primary school at factory site; 
(3) Maternity benefits; 
(4) Family Planning operations at the cost of the factory; 
(5) Arrangement for bringing them from their place to the factory site and sending 
them back to · their places; 
(6) Some factories give dresses at the time to closure; 
(7) Facilities for water, electricity, etc. at factory site; and 
(8) Some factories hcrve given insurance facilities to tl* labourers. 
Meeting with District CoHector and Representative of State Industry and Education 
Department , 
The Sub-Committee was informed that Pune was one of the industrially developed 
districts in Maharashtra. The Sub-Committee was .also given to. understand that there were 
275 large and medium industries in Pune district with the total investment of Rs. 9930 
crores. There were also 21391 permanent SSI registered units in the district and for the 
benefit of entrepreneurs simple and modified process had been adopted in the office. For 
coordination and problems solving the meetia..g of Zila Udyog Mitra Committee was 
convened once in every month:-under the Chairmanship of the District Collector. On the 
position of women entrepreneurs the Sub-'Committee was told that following special 
measures in respect of infrastructural and credit facilities had been taken:-
(i) MIDC has resolved to keep !b% reservation of plots, sheds for women 
entrepreneurs up to one year. 
(li) Municipal Corporation Cquncil gives preference for allotment of constructed sheds 
to women beneficiaries for self employment. 
(iii) Preference is given in allotment of Plot and shed by cooperative industrial estate. 
(iv) Priority is given in telephone connection for women entrepreneurs. 

239 
(v) Various special schemes have been launched by MSFC, BOI, KVIB for women 
entrepreneurs. 
Apart from this, Mahila Udyog Nidhi an exclusive xheme of providing equity support 
to wamen entrepreneurs la11nched by SIDBI is also under Gperation and preference to 
women entrepreneurs is also given by PMRY, Seed Money Scheme and DIC Margin money 
Scheme. The Committee came to know that in marketing Mahila Vikas Mahamandal 1lnd 
Maharashtra SSI Development Corporation was helping women entrepreneurs. The Sub­
Committee felt that the various scheme launched shou''td not be on papers only and must be 
put into practice if women entrepreneurs were to be given benefits in real terms. 
On the status of literacy amongst women in Maharashtra the Sub-Committee was 
informed that the female literacy rate in the State is 52.32% which is slightly above the 
national female literacy rate of 39.29%. The Sub-Committee was further apprised that total 
literacy campaign was being implemented for eradication of illiteracy in the State and right 
now thi~ campaign was being implemented in 13 districts. The Sub-Committee was happy to 
know th\tt the response of women in this total literacy campaigns was more encouraging than 
men. The Sub-Committee expressed its satisfaction over the percentage of women literacy in 
the State and hoped that with the help of total literacy campaigns the literacy of women 
would further increase. 
Visit to Handmade Paper Industry, Pune 
The Sub-Committee had a round of various stages of manufacturing of handmade paper 
and expressed its opinion that more such environment friendly units might be set up. 
Visit to Telco Grihini Udyog, Pune 
The Sub-Committee visited· the Telco Grihini Udyog where it was informed that Telco 
Grihini movement was started so that housewives were provided with opportunity to work in 
spare time. The Sub-Committee also came to know that Telco Grihini Udyog had'come a 
long way from making ordinary articles to the wide range of products which included spices, 
condiments and engineering component required for Telco's assembly lines. 
The Sub-Committee expressed its satisfaction over the functioning of Telco Grihini 
Udyog. 
On the basis of the discussion held by the Committee with different Associations, 
Workers Union, representatives of Stat~ Governments of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, 
the Committee arrived at certain conclusions. Some of the important observations/ 
recommendations of the Committee are as under : 
1.0 Considering the problems of bidi workers, the Sub-Committee recommends that the 
housing problem of the bidi work~rs may be looked into sympathetically an,d more houses 
may be provided to them as early as possible. Their wages may be increased and disputes 
involving their demands may be settled. The working condition of the bidi workers in the 
factory are far from satisfactory and in most of the cases unhygenic. The Committee 
recommends that their working conditions need to be considerly improved by the 
Government. 
1.1 On the basis of the discussion held with small entrepreneurs, the Committee 
recommends that it should be made compulsory that whatever products women entrepreneurs 
mak'e in the small units SO'Ine percentage of it must be purchased by the ·Government 
departments. 
1.2 Job sheds system should be introduced where women will come and work on difficult 
projects under one roof and get proper remuneration. The central worksheds for women 

r ... 
240 
sbctuld be opened in eaeb district which are financed by the State Government itself or set up 
with the help of KVIC. There should be a Joint Committee of social workers and Government 
representatives to supervise and coordinate the marketing of the product produced in these 
worksbeds. 
1.3 The Committee recommends that dler.e should be women cooperative banks in each 
district and 50% matching contribution be allocated by the Government for &ranting the loan 
to ladies who are small entrepreneurs. 
1.4 The Sub-Committee also recommends that with a view to ensuring effective financial 
arrangement a scheme may be evolved for joint appraisal of projects by financial institution 
and banks for the requirement of the small scale units for the fixed and the working capital as 
early as possible. For revival of sick units in Madhya Pradesh which at present are suffering 
from the paucity of finance, the Sub-Committee recommends that Madhya Pradesh Finance 
Corporation must ini~iate for providing. finance after getting the viability examined by DIC. 
· 1.5 The Sub-Committee recommends that some percentage of Prime Minister Rozgar 
Yojana may be fixed for women and their project must be sanctioned after due care so that 
the provision of reservation is not exploited so as to defeat the main objectives of the Yojana. 
1.6 With regard to the condition of working women the Sub-Committee recommends that 
as has been done in the case of other industries, minimum wages for, small scale industries 
may also be fixed depending on the economic condition and viability of the SSI unit. The Sub­
Committee further recommends that the question of enhancing the earning and improving the 
working conditions of the women workers may be dealt with sympathetically. 
; 
1.7 On tbe,basis of the discussion with Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(Ladies win&), the Sub-Committee is of the view that State Government must. find ways to 
help the women eQgaged . in manufacturing of home made product to get their product 
marketed. They should be provided business licences at their residential permises~ The Sub· 
Committee feels that for the first five years concession be given in electric tarrif which will 
definitely help the small entrepreneurs. Some concession should also be given to them with 
regard to sale tax, income tax, etc. 
1.8 The Committee feels that the objectives of MA VIM in Maharashtra have not come 
upto the mark and its working should be re-organised. Voluntary o~·ganisations should be 
encouraged and helped by MA VIM like institutions in each State. Voluntary organisations 
should al.so be encouraged to give employment to needy women. The Committee also endorses 
the view of . reservation of women in all vocational training course to enhance their 
participation in industrial sector in the country. 
1.9 On the basis of the discussion held with the representatives of the Khadi and Village 
Industry, Bo~nbay, the Sub-Conunittee recommends that in order to increase the earning of 
charkha weavers, modern charkhas on subsidised rates may be provided to the weavers. The 
Sub-Committee further recommends that to boost the export of Khadi and Village Industries 
products, the quality of products have to be improved in order to compete. For the purpose of 
giving impetus to export, representation in the Export llfomotion Council may be given to 
KVIC. The Sub-Committee also recommends that the National Renewal Fund may be utilised 
for the purpose of training the person and their re-deployment. The Sub-Committee expresses 
its displeasure over the red-tapism in KVIC and hopes that it will devE!Iop into a public office 
sheding its bureaucratic attitude. 
2. The Sub-Committee feels that Khadi and Village Industry has done pride to the nation 
and its activities should not be neglected. For this purpose the Sub-Committee 

241 
recommends KVIC may be given an independefft financial status and should not be left at the 
mercy of RBI or other banks. The Committee recommends that there should be a specific cell 
in KVIC for promoting women entrepreneurs. For this purpose, the Committee feels, that 
KVIC should be provided some budgetary support.' 
2.1 On the basis of the discussion held with representatives of the National Informatics 
Centre, Pune, the Committee suggests that the centre can feed data about women 
agriculturists, their minimum wages fixed in each State and other facilities provided to them. 
The Sub-Committee expresses its satisfaction over the functioning of NIC in the region. 
2.2 On the basis of the discussion held with social workers, the Committee has learnt that 
the daily wages workers are getting very little amount. Most of them are unrecognised 
workers and are being exploited by their employer. The Committee strongly feels that their 
condition should be improved by paying them minimum wages declared by the Government 
and special legislation may be brought forward to help them. 
2.3 The Committee recommends that food processing units run by women entrepreneurs 
should be provided special assistance by the Food Processing Ministry • 
... 
2.4 The Sub-Committee feels that some institutional support for increasing their 
knowledge should be provided to women entrepreneurs who are engaged in making papad, 
pickles and mid-day meal work. They may also be provided some financial, technical and 
marketing support. 
2.5 On the basis of the discussion held with Sugar Commissioner, Pune the Sub­
Committee felt that mobile creches should be provided to women workers during tbe working 
season. Literacy camp should also be started in the factory premises. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that the minimum wages of the women workers should be fixed strictly and the 
provisions relating to them should be implemented accordingly. 
2.6 The Sub-Committee held the discussion with district officials and State industry 
department. The Committee was informed that various schemes are operating for upliftment 
of women entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee is of the view that the various schemes launched 
, by the State Governments should not be on the paper only and these must be put into 
practice, if women entrepreneurs are to be provided benefits in real terms. 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that women's work in the construction industry is 
not recognised. Most women fall in the category of unskilled workers and there is no effort to 
promote them as skilled worker and improve their earning capacity. 
The Sub-Committee suggests for removing disparity in wages between men and women 
employed in the industry as well as ensure minimum wages to women. The Sub-Committee 
further suggests for the compulsory registration of women workers, provision of creches,; 
housing facilities, extension of ESI scheme and Provident Fund benefit, mobile medical service 
to non-ESI category of workers. The Sub-Committee feels that the facilities mentioned above 
should have t>rovided to the women engaged in construction work. 
' 

' 