198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
PROFESSIONALISATION OF BOARDS OF CPSEs
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  8TH MAY, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  8TH MAY, 2007)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/CHAITRA, 1929 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                 
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                                                                                       
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                           
4.OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
5.MINUTES 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2006)
 
                  Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
      Shri  G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.      Dr. Prabha Thakur     
4.      Shri Kalraj Mishra      
5.      Smt. Hema Malini      
6.      Dr. K. Malaisamy      
7.      Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.      Dr. Vijay Mallya        
9.      Shri Rahul Bajaj         
10.  O.T.Lepcha
                   
                           LOK SABHA
 
11.
  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri S.K. Biswamuthiary        
13.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty           
14.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                 
15.  Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh        
16.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan         
17.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria         
18.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani                                     
19.  Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel
20.  Shri P.Rajendran        
21.  Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
22.  Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana   
24.  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
25.  Shri K.C. Pallanisamy            
26.   Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh                  
28.  Shri V.K. Thummar                

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
29.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
30.  Shri Umakant Yadav
31.  Shri Mohan S. Delkar
     Secretariat
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been authorised by the Committee, hereby
present this One Hundred Ninety Eighth Report on Professionalisation of Boards of CPSEs.
 
 
5.         The Committee at its meeting held on 3
rd May,  2007 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
3
rd May, 2007
SANTOSH  BAGRODIA
 Chairman
 Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
 
1.
                  The Committee while assessing the Annual Report of the Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE) also undertook the examination of the policy of ‘Professionalisation’ of the Boards of the Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs). 
 
2.
                  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of HI & PE that “the PSEs need to be restructured in the new liberalized regime to make them
competitive.”  In a query regarding the viable alternative to the privatization of PSEs.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry that alongwith
other factors like greater functional autonomy, Professionalisation of Boards of PSEs could provide a viable alternative to the privatization. 
 
3.
                  The Committee was also informed that the policy of Professionalisation of Boards was designed “to distance them (PSEs), to the extent possible
from administrative Ministries.”  To this objective the known expert independent Directors were included in the Boards of PSEs.  It was envisaged by
the Government that a Board managed company should be able to take prompt decision and facilitate the implementation.
 
4.
                  The Committee was informed by the DPE that emphasis was laid on inclusion of such persons from outside into the Boards who had experience
in the industry or academics or research in the relevant fields. The policy advocated that measures were required to be taken to make these enterprises
more growth oriented and technically dynamic which was not possible without inducting professionals on the Board of Directors. The non-official
Directors to be inducted on the Board were to be drawn from the public men, technocrats, management experts and consultants and professional
managers in industry and trade with a high degree of proven ability.
Composition of Board of Directors of Public Sector Enterprises.
 
5.                  The Committee was apprised that the Boards of PSEs generally consisted of Directors of three categories :
 
(i)                  Functional Directors: - These are full time operational Directors responsible for routine functioning of the Enterprise . The Economic
Administrative Reforms Commission (EARC) had recommended that each Board should have an adequate number of Functional Directors
on it. This was considered by the Government and the Bureau of Public Enterprises had issued guidelines in 1984 that the posts of Director
(Finance) and Director (Personnel) be created in all Schedule A' and Schedule `B' enterprises and on a selective basis in Schedule `C'
Enterprises. Apart from these two functions, the enterprises could have representation at Board level for other disciplines such as production,
marketing, project, planning etc.
 
2.             The Committee held elevan meetings to consider and examine the subject. In the course of its examination, the Committee held detailed discussions with the representatives of
the Ministries of Defence, Civil Aviation, Petroleum and Natural gas, Power, Telecommunication, Chemicals & Fertilizers, Shipping and Railways and the CPSEs under these Ministries.
The Committee also interacted with various CPSEs during its visit to their headquarters.  The Department of Public Enterprises too attended these interactions as the nodal Department
which issues the guidelines on the subject. 
 
3.             The Committee’s recommendations and observations are reflected in the end of this Report.
 
4. The Committee acknowledges the cooperation by the Department of Public Enterprises   and the Ministries of Defence, Civil Aviation, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power,
Telecommunication, Chemicals & Fertilizers, Shipping and Railways and the CPSEs under these Ministries.

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
The number of such Directors on a Board should not exceed 50% of the actual strength of the Board. In cases where the number of
Functional Directors on the Board is more than the 50% of its actual strength (not sanctioned strength), Administrative Ministries will
immediately undertake a review of the strength of the Board in consultation with Department of Public Enterprises and PESB. On such
Boards where the posts of Functional Directors do not exist, Administrative Ministries will take immediate steps to create such posts in
accordance with the prescribed guidelines.
 
(ii)
                Government Directors: They are appointed by the Administrative Ministries and are generally the officers dealing with the concerned
enterprise. In most cases there are two such Directors on a Board; the Joint Secretary or Additional Secretary dealing with particular
enterprise and the Financial Adviser of the Ministry. The question of representation of Government Directors on the Boards of PSEs was
examined by the Arjun Sengupta Committee and following its recommendation, the Bureau of Public Enterprises have issued guidelines in
1986 that the Administrative Ministy concerned should not have more than one nominee Director on the Board of a PSE.
 
As per the guidelines of DPE the number of the Government Directors on the Board of Directors of an enterprise should not exceed one-sixth
of the actual strength of the Board. It will be preferable to have only one Government Director from the concerned Administrative Ministry
on each Board. The choice of the nominee Director would vest with the Administrative Ministry of the concerned Enterprise. In case of PSEs
where it is considered essential to give representation on the Boards to other concerned Government agencies/Ministries/State Governments,
only one representative from the Group could also be appointed on the Board as part-time Government Director. The number of Government
Directors on a Board should in no case exceed two.
 
In this regard, the Committee took note of the DPE’s OM No. 18(24)/2003-GM-GL-49 of 4
th December 2003 on “Role of Government
Directors, that states
 
“ … the association of Government officials with the Boards of Public Enterprises can be of advantage as this provides for a liaison role and
a channel of communication between Government and the Public Enterprises. They have also emphasised that the dual role of a Government
Director should be clearly recognised – as a Director of the company and as a representative of the Government. He should be allowed to
function freely and use his own judgment without any formalised briefing by the Ministry before a Board meeting with discretion whether to
seek a briefing or make a report. The Government Director should identify himself with the objects and goals of the enterprise, engage in
joint thinking on equal terms and not assume a superior status. He should not reserve his position on matters before the Board. However,
others on the Board should not expect him to commit the Government in respect of matters which require to be referred to the Government.
In all subsequent examination of the Board approved proposals, his role should be mainly elucidatory and he should not sit in judgment over
the Board. Reference to the Ministry for approval, sanction etc. should be addressed to the Government representative on the Board whose
responsibility should be to process the matter and obtain the necessary Government approval promptly.”
 
( iii )            Non-official Directors : -  The induction of Non-Official Directors on the Boards of PSEs has been considered essential by various
Committees and Commissions in order to make the Boards more professional. They are to be drawn from the public, technocrats,
management experts consultants and professional managers in industry and trade with a high degree of proven ability. As per DPE’s OM No.
18(6)/91-GM dated the 16
th March, 1992 that provided the outside professionals should be inducted in the Boards of PSEs as part time non
official Directors and that number of such Directors should be at least 1/3 rd of the actual strength of the Board.  The policy was further
defined by DPE OM No. 18(6)/2000-GM dated the 26.11.2001.  As per the O.M. in case of the listed PSEs headed by the Executive
Chairman   the number of non-officials Directors should be at least half of the strength of the Board.  
 
6.
                  The Committee was informed that a Panel of suitable persons who could be considered for appointment as Non-Official Part-Time Director on
the Boards of PSEs is maintained centrally by Department of Public Enterprises. This Panel is prepared in consultation with PESB and the Secretary of
the concerned Administrative Ministry.
 
7.
                  The Committee was also informed of the eligibility criteria for the non-official part-time Directors.  As such non-official part-time Directors
should be in the age group of 45-65 years which can be relaxed up to 70 years for eminent professionals after the reasons for extension are recorded in
writing. The minimum qualification for the part time non-official Directors is graduation from the recognized University with an experience of not less
than 10 years at the level of Joint Secretary and above in the Government or CMD/MD in Corporate Sector/PSE or a professor in an Academic
Institution or a professional of repute including the chartered accountants/cost accountant at the level of Directors of the Institute or the Head of the
Department.
 
8.
                  The Committee was further informed that in case of selecting the Academics as Part-time non-official Directors, their area of specialization is
relevant to Company and this should also be borne in mind.  As such academics from the disciplines like management, finance, marketing, technology,
human resource or law were considered relevant.
 
9.
                  The Committee was informed that the Government made exercise of functional and financial autonomy by Navratna and Miniratna  PSEs
incumbent upon professionalisation of their Boards. It was made pre-requisite to include atleast 1/3 of total Directors as independent Directors subject to
minimum four incase of Navratna and three in case of Miniratna Enterprises for them to exercise enhanced financial powers.
 
APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS
10.
              Functional Directors :  The Committee was informed of the institutional mechanism for the appointment of Directors. Appointment of
Functional Directors is done on the recommendations of the Public Enterprises Selection Board. The recommendations of the Board are processed by
the concerned Administrative Ministry/Department and with the approval of concerned Minister/ACC.
11.              Non Official Independent Directors : In case of PSEs other than Miniratna and Navratna, the appointment of non-official Directors is done by

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
the concerned Administrative Ministry or Department on the recommendation of PESB and with the approval of ACC. In case of Navratna  and
Miniratna PSEs, the Government has set up a Search Committee for selection of Non-Official Directors. The recommendation of Search Committee is
processed by the Administrative Ministry or Department for obtaining approval of ACC.
ROLE AND COMPOSITION OF PESB
12.
              The Committee noted the functions assigned to the P.E.S.B include the following :
 
1.                  to be responsible for the selection and placement of personnel in the posts of Chairman, Managing Director or Chairman-cum-
Managing Director (Level-I), and Functional Director (Level-II) in PSEs as well as in posts at any other level as may be specified by
the Government;
2.                  to advise the Government on matters relating to appointments, confirmation or extension of tenure and termination of services of the
personnel of the above mentioned levels;
3.                  to advise the Government on the desired structure at the Board level, and, for senior management personnel, for each PSE or group
of PSEs;
4.                  to advise the Government on a suitable performance appraisal system for both the PSEs and the managerial personnel in such
enterprises;
5.                  to build a data bank containing data relating to the performance of PSEs and its officers;
6.                  to advise the Government on formulation and enforcement of a code of conduct and ethics for managerial personnel in PSEs;
7.                  to advise the Government on evolving suitable training and development programs for management personnel in PSEs. 
 
13.              The PESB consists of one Chairperson and three Members. The Chairperson and Members shall be persons who have had a long and
distinguished career in management of public or private corporations or public administration and have a proven record of achievements, preferably,
in the field of personnel, finance, production or marketing. The three Members of the PESB shall be :
 
                   •  A distinguished former Chief Executive of a PSE;
                   •  A distinguished behavioural scientist with experience in selection of top management personnel;
                   •  A distinguished former civil servant with experience in management of PSEs or in areas of finance, industry or economic affairs.
                       
Opinions of Expert Groups and Committees on Corporate Governance :
 
14.              The Committee also assessed the relevant recommendations of some of the important previous studies on the issue of Corporate Governance. 
 
15.
              The Committee took note of the recommendations of Kumarmangalam Birla Committee (1999) which suggested that at least 1/3 of the Board
should comprise of Independent Directors and incase a Company had and Executive Chairman at least half the Board should comprise of the
Independent Directors.
 
16.
              The Naresh Chandra Committee (2002) constituted  by the Department of Company affairs recommended that not less then 50% of the Board
of any listed  Company as-well-as unlisted Public Limited Companies with the paid Share Capital and Free reserves of Rs. 10 Crores or above or
turnover of Rs. 50 Crores and above should include  Independent Directors.
 
17.
              These recommendations were also largely reflected in the Concept paper on Company Law 2004 issued by the Department of Company
Affairs.  Another Committee viz. J J Irani Committee, set up by the Department of Company Affairs recommended that a minimum of 1/3 of the total
number of Directors should be Independent Directors.
 
18.
              The Committee also noted that the Clause 49 of the Listing Agreement of the SEBI stipulates 50% of the Members of Board should be
independent if the Chairman was Executive otherwise the number of Independent Directors could be 1/3 of the Board.
 
19.
              The Committee acknowledged that the guidelines issued by DPE on the subject of inclusion of Independent Directors in the Boards, were
largely in line with the recommendations of the Experts Committees. 
 
20.
              The Committee also considered the relevant observations and recommendations of the Report of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on the
Empowerment of the CPSEs ( 2005). The Ad Hoc Group considered several models of ownership of companies and an arms-length relationship of
Government with the Board of Directors and the Management and came to the view that the governance of CPSEs, and especially the Navratnas and
Miniratnas and other profit making companies should continue to be supervised by the three tier system, namely, the Ministry concerned representing
the Government, the Board of Directors, and the Management, with the role, powers and functions of each of them clearly defined and codified.
 
21.
              The Committee noted that the Ad Hoc Group of Experts was very categorical about the autonomy of the Boards of Directors.  The
observations of Ad Hoc Group in this regard were as under :
 
“The views of the Ministry should be communicated for consideration by the Board of Directors through the Government Directors, who
would take up these matters at the meetings of the Board of Directors. The Ministry should not give instruction directly or indirectly to
the management. That should be the prerogative of the Board of Directors.
 

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
The Government Director(s) should interact with the companies only as Members of the Board, where decisions in general should
continue to be taken by a consensus or a majority.  If the Government Director(s) feel that the Board of Directors has not appropriately
taken into account the views of the Ministry on a given subject, they ought to refer the matter back to the Ministry, which after consulting
the Supervisory Body, can instruct the Board of Directors and the Management to follow its directions. But such instructions must be
given in the form of Presidential Directives. The issuance of such Presidential Directives should have the approval of the Cabinet.   
 
The Ministry should not normally review the functioning of a CPSE more than twice a year. Such review should be based on reports of
the Board of Directors and selected major performance indicators. These indicators, numbering not more than five, may be chosen from
among the indicators agreed upon in the MoUs and considered appropriate by the Cabinet Secretariat and other agencies. The Ministry
should be able to assess the performance of the company in terms of these indicators and also consider the fulfillment and non-fulfillment
of the obligations of both the management of the company and of the Government departments concerned as spelt out in the MoUs. A
special review may, however, take place in addition to the half-yearly session, if the concerned Ministry wishes to take stock of any issue
of outstanding importance referred by it to a CPSE.”
 
22.
              The Committee therefore took note that the Ad Hoc Group was of the view that maximum two officers could be nominated by the
Government on the Boards of Directors of the Navratna , Miniratna and other profit making PSEs.  The performance of Government Directors on
Board of Directors of CPSEs must also be suitably reflected in their Confidential Reports. It was further suggested that a suitable appraisal system for
performance review of non-official Independent Directors may also be developed.
 
Committee’s Interaction with the Ministries and 
CPSEs
 
23.
              In the course of examination, the Committee met the heads of Coal India Ltd., NALCO, Hindustan Copper Ltd., MSTC Ltd., KIOCL, BPCL
and Chennai Petroleum Corporation, Goa Shipyard, HAL and BEML and discussed the policy of professionalisation of Boards of these PSUs
including appointment of Independent Directors in their Boards and its impact on Professionalisation  of Boards during its study visits in 2004-05.
Based on its initial interactions with the representatives of these PSEs under the administrative controls of different Ministries/Departments, the
Committee made its comprehensive observations and recommendations in its 168 th Report on Demands for Grants ( 2005-06) pertaining to Ministry
of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises presented to both Houses of Parliament on 5 th May, 2005.  The text of
relevant recommendations contained in that report are given below :
 
“21.5      Despite elaborate policy intentions to include persons of proven expertise in the Boards of PSEs, the Committee has observed that
former bureaucrats, serving representatives of autonomous organisations under Government, representatives of subsidiary companies, have
been included in the Boards as Independent Directors in addition to Functional and Official Part-time Directors. In several cases the retired
bureaucrats are reappointed as Independent Directors. The Committee feels that such an arrangement does not fall in the spirit of the policy of
appointing Independent Directors on the Boards of Directors of the PSEs. The Committee also expresses reservation on the practice of renewing
the tenures of existing Directors in some cases. The Committee urges the department to ascertain that the implementation of policy is in
consonance with its true objectives and bring to the notice of this Committee any dilution in the 'Professionalisation' of Boards.
21.6      While interacting with the PSEs, the Committee has observed a clear disjoint in the Central and State Governments that has seriously
imperiled the viability of such PSEs.
21.7      The Committee is of the view that greater involvement of the stakes of the respective State Government is essential to clear such
disjoints. Also a senior representative of the concerned State Government should be included in the Boards of PSEs as one of the two
Government Directors.
21.8      The Committee observed that distinct preference was given to serving officers from Armed Forces in the Board level appointments in the
PSEs under the Ministry of Defence, on the plea that Armed Forces were the premier customers of these PSEs. The Committee wonders, if such
an arrangement reduces PSEs as a captive Company instead of an autonomous commercial entity. The Committee is of the view that the
products of these PSEs have a large civilian market too. The Committee feels that if the private sector is being involved in the defence  sector,
why cannot the defence related PSEs harness potential in civilian and export market with their dual-use products and technology.
24.3      The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the qualification, selection and mandate of Non-Functional Part-Time
Directors, as too many categories within one Board may affect its efficiency and autonomy. The Board must be defined in terms of its mandate
and the interest of the Company and not by the categories of its Directors. The Committee would like to have Government's comments on the
need for uniformity in Part-time Directors.
25.1      The Committee expresses grave concern over large number of unfulfilled vacancies of Directors and delay in appointments. The
Committee is informed that the appointment of Directors on the Boards of PSEs is the responsibility of the concerned Administrative
Ministry/Department.
25.2      The Committee is informed that in some cases delay has been taking place in appointments to some board level posts due to non-
availability of suitable candidates in the case of some sick/loss making PSEs.
25.3      The Committee is also informed that a time-frame for selection and completing other formalities has been laid down. The vacancies are
monitored from time to time. On the basis of review carried out by DPE, the Administrative Ministries have been advised at the highest level to
expedite the process for filling up the vacancies at the Board level.
25.4      The Committee recommends that the Government must impress upon the concerned Ministries to adhere to the time frame for the

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
selection of Directors and expedite the appointments of Directors.
25.5      On the Committee's query, if the DPE had considered recommendations of Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee, Naresh Chandra
Committee and Narayan Murthy Committee, on corporate governance, particularly on the role, selection and composition of Board of Directors
particularly the criterion of Independent Directors and their role in the Audit Committee of Board of Directors, the Committee was informed by
the DPE that "As far as Kumar Mangalam Birla Committee and Narayan Murthy Committee are concerned, they were appointed by Securities
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), which is under the control of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. The Naresh Chandra
Committee was set up by the Ministry of Company Affairs to give the suggestion about the corporate governance."
25.6      The Committee is constrained to observe that the information provided by the DPE was not only evasive but also insufficient and
incomplete. The Committee observes that DPE has not reacted to the criteria of "Independent Directors" as elaborated by the Naresh Chandra
Committee. Similarly the DPE has not responded to the Narayan Murthy Committee's recommendation on "Nominee Directors".
25.7      The Committee observes that these expert Committees were set up by the Government or the agencies under its control. The Reports of
these expert Committees are extremely relevant to the issue of Professionalisation of Boards as they deal extensively with regard to the mandate,
functional 
autonomy, obligations and the constitution of Boards of Directors. Their findings can be applied to enhance the autonomy and efficiency and
draw greater degree of professional excellence to the Boards of Directors.
25.8      The Committee recommends that the DPE should assess these reports more fruitfully instead of dismissing them for administrative
nuances and inform the Committee of its view and rationale thereof.
26.2      The Committee feels that the minimum educational qualification should be raised to a Post-Graduate Degree/Diploma from a premier
institution in a professional course, management, engineering, financial management or HR management. Also the size of corporate body should
be specified for the CMD/MD being appointed as the Independent Directors.
26.3      The Committee feels that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service, he may not have requisite and relevant expertise to become
an Independent Director in a PSE unless he has the experience of those many years in the field relevant to the functioning and corporate
objectives of the PSE. The Committee recommends that this aspect should be specified in the eligibility criteria for Independent Directors.
26.4      The Committee feels that the maximum age for Independent Directors too should be appropriately reduced to maintain uniformity in the
Board of Directors.”
24.
              The action taken given by the Government on the report recommendations of the Committee, largely re-affirmed the status quo. The
Committee in its 179th Report dealt with the ATRs submitted by Government and observed that majority of the replies given by the Government were
not in tune with the Committee’s recommendations.  In most of the cases, the Committee reiterated and further elaborated its recommendations.
 
25.              The Committee underscored its observations and recommendations on the lack of professional expertise of the Government Directors,
reappointment and delay in appointments of the Independent Directors, predominance of former bureaucrats/retired executives of the PSEs in
appointments of Independent Directors without relevant professional background. The Committee also underlined the need for training of Independent
Directors. In this regard the Committee had asked the Government to look into the recommendations made in the Naresh Chandra Committee Report. 
 
26.
              Therefore, the Committee pursued the sector-wise appraisal of the implementation of the DPE Guidelines on the Professionalisation  of the
Boards by the PSEs.
 
Defence
 Sector
 
27.              During its interaction on 7 th January 2006 with the representatives of Ministry of Defence and its CPSE namely, HAL, BEL, BDL, (all
Miniratna), BEML (Listed Company), MIDHANI, MDL, GSL and GRSE, the Committee observed that the positions of Independent Directors had
remained vacant and there were protracted delays in appointing the Independent Directors. The Committee also noted that in addition to Functional
Directors and Government Directors, there was a predominance of serving officers of defence forces, on the plea that they were the primary customers
of the Defence PSEs.
 
28.
              The Committee was informed by the DPE that the serving Defence officers could not be considered as Independent Directors. Moreover, a
customer can not be considered as an Independent Director.  The DPE had not given any exemption to the Defence PSEs in this regard.
 
29.
              The Committee observed that by including their primary customers on the Boards, the Defence PSEs will be reduced to captive units of the
Defence Forces and will loose their functional and commercial autonomy as envisaged in the Industrial Policy. 
 
30.
              The Committee reviewed the issue on the 7 th December 2006 in its interaction with the representatives of Ministry of Defence  and its CPSEs.
The Committee took note of the inclusion of new Independent Directors.
 
31.
              The Committee however noted that still former Government servants or Executives of CPSEs were being appointed as Independent Directors. A
few more vacancies were yet not been filled, pending the selection procedure and decision by the ACC.
 
32.
              The Ministry of Defence informed the Committee that of the actual strength of 16, HAL had only 6 Independent Directors on its Board; BEL

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
had 9 Independent Director out of actual strength of 18 member Board of Director; MIDHANI had three vacancies of Independent Directors. BDL had
only 3 Independent Directors out of actual strength of 9; BEML though had full quota of Independent Directors, however several of them are former
bureaucrats or retired Executives of the PSEs; in case of MDL, out of required number of four Independent Directors three were in place; GRSE had 3
Independent Director out of actual Board strength of 8; and GSL had only two Independent Directors out of 7 member Board.  
 
33.
              The Committee also noted that despite the prescribed age limit of 45-65 years most of the Independent Directors were towards the higher end of
the age limit and had attained the age of superannuation in their respective service with Government/CPSE before joining the Board.
 
Petroleum and Natural Gas sector
 
34.
              The Committee held two interactions with the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and its PSEs namely ONGC, GAIL
(India) Ltd., BPCL, HPCL, Indian Oil Corporation ( all Navratna)  Balmer & Lawrie & Co Ltd, Oil India Ltd., Numaligarh Refinery Ltd., Bongaigaon
Refinery & Petrochemicals Ltd., Engineers India Ltd., Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. ( all Miniratna)    Mangalore Refinery & Petrochemicals
Ltd., on 21st April 2006 and 27 December 2006.
 
35.
              The Committee noted that there was a distinct lack of earnestness in implementing the Guidelines. The Committee expressed its serious
reservations over lackadaisical approach on the part of Ministry in selecting and processing the panel of appropriately suitable candidates for positions
of Independent Directors of the PSEs. In addition, the Committee also observed the prevalence of former bureaucrats and retired Executives of CPSEs
as the Independent Directors. Despite the age band of 45-65 years for the Independent Directors, most of the such Directors were approaching the higher
end of the age limit.  The Committee also took note of the view that remuneration offered in CPSEs was not competitive enough to attract and retain
professional talent.
 
Civil Aviation Sector
 
36.              The Committee held two interactions on 31 st May and 26th July 2006 with the representatives of the Ministry of  Civil Aviation and its PSEs
namely  Air India Ltd., Indian Airlines Ltd., Pawan Hans, Airport Authority of India to make PSEs-wise assessment of the Boards of these PSEs.
 
37.              The Committee was informed that due to earlier decision of disinvestment and subsequent in-principle decision to merge Air India and Indian
Airlines, there were delays in the appointment of Independent Directors. Instead the Directors for the respective Companies were placed on other’s
Board.
 
38.
              In the case of AAI, the Committee was informed that as per the Section 3(1)(3) of the Airport Authority of India Act 1994, the Authority were to
consist of not less than 8 and not more than 14 members. On that date the Authority had ten members, with none Independent Member. There had been
a predominance of Government representatives. In addition to two Government Directors from Ministry of Civil Aviation, three more Directors
represented the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and Indian Airlines respectively.
 
39.
              The Committee also observed the Boards had predominant presence of the Government officials like DG Civil Aviation or Chairman AAI on
the Boards of PSEs on the plea of special requirements of Civil Aviation Sector.  In case of Pawan Hans Ltd. representatives of ONGC and Indian Air
force were included in the Board in addition to two Government Directors representing the Ministry, on the plea that the ONGC is a primary customer
of Pawan Hans land owned 21.5% stakes in the Company.
 
40.
              The Committee was of the of the view that Directors of ONGC and IAF or representatives of Directorate General of Civil Aviation or Bureau of
Civil Aviation Security or Airport Authority of India could not be considered as Independent Directors and such representatives should be included only
as one of the two Government Directors and not as Independent Director.
 
41.
              The Committee has been informed that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will take up the issue with the Department of Company Affairs.
 
Power Sector
 
42.              The Committee on 9 th June 2006 interacted with the representatives of  the Ministry of Power and the PSE under its administrative control,
namely NTPC ( Navratna), PGCIL, REC, PFC ( Miniratna ), NHPC, NEEPCO, SJVNL and THDC ( both Joint Ventures with the State Governments of
Himanchal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh respectively).
 
43.              The Committee was informed that apparently only NTPC and PFCL had all the vacancies of Independent Directors filled. In case of NEEPCO,
there were 11 Government Directors to accommodate the representatives of North Eastern States. In case of PGCIL, REC and NHPC the Independent
Directors were under-represented.  In case of SJVNL and THDC, there were no Independent Directors instead representatives of Central Electricity
Authority and Central Water Commission were appointed as expert Directors. In addition, there were Four Government Directors, two each from the
Ministry of Power and respective State Governments.
 
44.
              The Committee considered the situation in respect of SJVNL and THDC as unacceptable due to over representation of Government Directors.
The Committee considered the representatives of CEA and CWC as Government servent and therefore not independent. The Committee also observed
that REC and PGCIL despite being Miniratna companies did not have required numbers of Independent Directors and were therefore constrained from
exercising the fullest autonomy.  
 
Telecommunication Sector
 
45.
              The Committee also made an appraisal of the performance of the Ministry of Telecommunications and the PSEs namely, BSNL, MTNL

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
(Navratna), TCIL ( Miniratna) and ITI on the 9th June 2006.
 
46.              The Committee observed that in BSNL all 5 positions of Independent Directors were vacant. In case of MTNL 3 positions were vacant but the
effective strength of Government Directors was 4 instead of permissible 2. In case of TCIL and ITI all vacancies of Independent Directors were lying
vacant.
 
47.
              The Committee noted that Navratna MTNL and Miniratna TCIL are constrained from exercising the fullest autonomy due to under
representation of Independent Directors.
 
Chemical and Fertilizer Sector
 
48.              On 20th September 2006 the Committee interacted with the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and the PSEs namely,
IDPL, HAL, BCPL, KAPL, RDPL, HOCL and HIL.
 
49.
              The Committee noted that almost all the PSEs had maximum number of Government Directors, both belonging to the same Ministry.
 
50.
              The Committee also noted that of the eleven PSEs under Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals none have any Independent Director.
 
51.
              The Committee was informed that a few Units were sick and therefore appointment of the vacant posts of Directors has been kept in abeyance.
 
52.              In case of Department of Fertilizer, of the ten PSEs, only National Fertilizers Ltd. had three Independent Directors. Two of the PSEs namely,
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corp. Ltd and Madras Fertilizer Ltd had Government Directors much in access of permissible two.
 
Shipping Sector
 
53.              The Committee on 20 th September 2006, interacted with the representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road transport and Highways
(Department of Shipping).
 
54.
              The Committee noted that of the eight PSEs under Department of Shipping, three PSEs namely Hoogly Dock and Port Engineers Ltd, Hindustan
Shipyard Ltd and Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. did not have any Independent Director. Instead, Central Inland Water Transport
Corporation Ltd. had 4 Government Directors.  
 
55.
              Further, the remaining, three PSEs had only one or two Independent Directors. These also include Dredging Corporation of India Ltd. Only
Shipping Corporation of India had 5 Independent Directors out of required 8 Independent Directors.   Shipping Corporation of India and the Dredging
Corporation of India both are Miniratna Listed Companies and therefore needed to have 50% of the Independent Directors under the Clause 49 of the
Listing Agreement with SEBI.
 
Railways Sector
 
56.              In its meeting on 28 th September 2006, the Committee interacted with the Chairman and the representatives of the Railway Board, regarding
Professionalisation of Boards undertaken by the PSEs under Ministry of Railways.
 
57.              Of the 9 PSEs under the Ministry of Railways, 6 PSEs had Government Directors much in access of permissible two. In all the PSEs, either
Chairman or the Member of the Railway Board was the Part-Time Chairman of the PSE.
 
58.
              The Committee was informed that under exceptional conditions Government Officer as the Part-Time Chairman, was permissible under the
Guidelines. Though such cases should be only exception rather than a rule.
 
59.
              As the PSEs had Part-time Chairmen, as per the guidelines their respective Boards should have only 1/3 Directors as Independent Directors.
 
60.
              The Committee noted that though all the PSEs, barring three had Independent Directors. But even in such cases, the requisite numbers of
Independent Directors were not in place and there were still vacancies of the Independent Directors. Also most of the Independent Directors are retired
Railway officials or former bureaucrats.
COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
61.
              The Committee feels that the policy of Professionalisation  of Boards was a bold initiative by the Government to bring the PSEs out of the
domineering interferences of the Administrative Ministries or Departments and allow them to flourish as autonomous commercial organizations.  Yet in
practice it still remains an artificial arrangement. The Government remains the major investor and promoter of these PSEs. For long, these PSEs have
been held as the captive Units by their Administrative Ministries or Departments with majority of investments coming from the Government. Similarly
the orders too come largely from the sectors where Government was major service provider e.g. infrastructure sector, railways, oil, energy, railways or
transport. The Government’s policy support still pervades over these PSEs. The system of MoU between the Government and the respective PSE though
apparently aimed at providing autonomy, essentially indicates the inherent owner and client relationship between the Government and the PSE.
 
62.
              The Committee observes that in view of the Government’s predominant role, the Ministries/ Departments have been extremely reluctant in
appointing the Independent Directors, a condition that is closely linked to the policy objective of granting autonomy to the PSEs and an essential
benchmark for the corporate governance in PSEs where public investments are involved.  The Committee therefore directs the Government to be rather

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
proactive in filling up of ten vacancies so as to achieve the policy objective. 
 
Composition of the PESB
 
63.
              The P.E.S.B was set up with the objective of evolving a sound managerial policy for the Central Public Sector Enterprises and, in particular, to
advise Government on appointments to their top management posts.  While taking cognizance of the current composition of the PESB, the Committee
observes PESB too has been reduced to a parking bay for retired bureaucrats.
 
64.
              The Committee feels that the objective is not likely to be achieved as is evident from the current composition of PESB which is not at all in tune
with the spirit of the objective.  The Committee desires the Government to ensure that Board is constituted accordingly. 
 
65.              The Committee finds the nuanced interpretation of rules and provisions to accommodate certain groups of people as downright subversion of the
policy intent and in contradiction with its mandated autonomy. Behind the window-dressing of autonomy, the Government servants try to retain their
pre-eminence at every stage of selection in PSEs.
Government Directors
 
66.
              While the Guidelines propose that maximum two Government Directors could join the Board of Directors of a PSE, only in such cases where
the stakes of more than one Government agencies were involved, the Committee observes that the presence of Government Directors in maximum
permissible strength of two or often more than two is in gross violation of the guidelines. In almost all the cases, the Committee observes that both the
Government Directors belonged to same Ministry/ Department and in several cases the representatives of other Government agencies too were included
as Government Directors over and above this limit in gross violation of policy provision.  The Committee dismisses the argument that the Financial
Advisor of the Ministry being representative of the Ministry of Finance and as such can not be considered as representing the Ministry. The Committee
finds such argument too nuanced to be of any merit. The Committee recommends that this practice must be dispensed with urgently.
 
67.
              The Committee also finds the presence of Government Directors without any expertise relevant for the Sector. The Government Directors do not
have the academic or professional expertise required to independently discharge the onerous responsibilities required by the assignment. The Committee
finds such practice patently contradictory to the objective of Professionalisation  of Boards. The Committee recommends that notwithstanding their
assignments in the Administrative Ministry or Department, relevant expertise should be made mandatory for the Government Directors.  Government
Directors, in view of the Committee do not passively represent the Ministry or Department but should also actively espouse the interest of their
respective PSEs.  Government Directors should act independently as the Directors of the PSEs and should have the knowledge of its business scenario in
domestic and international markets and align the Company’s business with the Government’s policies, RBI’s regulations and the statutory requirements.
 
68.
              Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the Government must take actionable measures on the recommendations and observations of the
Ad Hoc Group of Experts on the Empowerment of CPSEs. The Committee is in agreement with recommendations of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts that
the Ministries should not communicate directly or indirectly with the managements of the CPSEs instead they should communicate through the Boards
of Directors.  Subject to Government policy, RBI guidelines and the statutory requirements, the Board of Directors should have powers to pursue
independent business line.  
 
69.
              The Committee is of the view that as Government is entitled to safeguard its investments in the CPSEs and the returns thereon, the Ministry or
Department should be represented with Financial Advisor on the Boards of the PSE. Presence of another representative concerned with the PSE in the
Ministry, is not required as the obligations of the PSE and the Administrative Ministry are clearly defined in the MoU.  Any interference in the routine
commercial, corporate or HR policy by the Ministry through its representative Director on the Board of Directors should amount to undermining of such
MoU.
Independent Directors
 
70.
              The Committee was informed by the Secretary, DPE that till October 2006 there were 200 posts of CMDs, 469 post of Functional Directors and
700 positions of Independent Directors of which only 240 were in position. Of the remaining 460 vacancies recommendations for about 250 positions
have been made and were at various stages of approval. Still action to fill up remaining 210 vacancies needs to be initiated expediently.  The Committee
impresses upon the DPE that it should actively pursue with the concerned Ministries and ensure that remaining vacancies are filled up expeditiously. 
The Committee directs the DPE to apprise the progress made in this regard. 
 
71.
              The Committee is particularly concerned about the Ministries’ reluctance in filling up the requisite vacancies of the Independent Directors in the
Boards of Directors of the CPSEs. The Committee during its interactions with the Ministries repeatedly encountered lame alibis for delays in
appointment of such Directors. It was observed by the Committee that the Ministries or Departments have not appointed Independent Directors for years
together.
 
72.
              Even in such cases where the selection process was underway, the procedural complexities and layers of approvals have led to delays. The
Committee was informed in response to its recommendations in 168 th Report that necessary directions had been duly reiterated by the Department of
Public Enterprises to the Administrative Ministries/Departments.  However the Committee was constrained to note during its interactions the abysmal
performance of the Administrative Ministries and Departments in following up with the repeated exhortations by the Department of Public Enterprises
and this Committee, to initiate the process of selection for the forthcoming vacancies in time.  The Committee strongly feels that there is a need to
streamline the procedure.  DPE must assess which are the stages of approval that are most time consuming and if layer of approvals could be reduced.
The DPE may also consider framing sector-wise panels or database of such professionals who could join the Boards as Independent Directors.
 
73.
              The Committee feels there is an obvious reluctance on the part of the administrative Ministries or Departments to dilute their control over the
PSEs. In view of the reluctance on the part of the Administrative Ministries or Departments in implementing the guidelines in respect of appointments of
independent directors, the Committee recommends that the DPE must assume a more pro-active role in ensuring the timely appointment of appropriate
Independent Directors, instead of remaining a hapless mute spectator. The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with the

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
guidelines empowering the DPE not merely to take proactive role in the earnest implementation of this Policy but also monitor religiously.  The
Committee directs the DPE to furnish the report to the Committee where delay takes place in appointment alongwith reasons therefore. 
 
74.              The Committee’s view is further strengthened by the fact that as against the professed objective to professionalise the Boards to make them
independent of the respective Ministries or Departments, in most of the cases the Independent Directors were retired bureaucrats, Government servants
or former Executives. In most of the cases, the retired Government servants had no proven expertise relevant for the Company. The Committee finds
that such state patently contradicts the very objective of this policy.
 
75.
              A perusal of the Database of Independent Directors compiled by the Department of Public Enterprises shows conspicuous predominance of
former bureaucrats and retired CPSE Executives in this   database. The Database is a sure evidence of Department’s reluctance in reaching out to a
wider spectrum of talented professionals and attracts them to join CPSEs as its Independent Directors, the Committee observes.  The Committee directs
the DPE to be more proactive in reaching out to a wider spectrum of talented professionals. 
 
76.
              The Committee had observed in its 168 th Report that the minimum educational criterion for the Independent Directors has been very basic to
render any professional expertise.  The Committee had therefore recommended to raise the minimum educational qualification to the Post Graduate
Degree/Diploma from a premier institution in a professional course. Regarding the CMDs and MDs joining the Boards of PSEs, the Committee had
recommended that the size of the corporate body should be specified. The Committee further recommends that the CMDs/MDs of only listed corporate
entities should be considered as Independent Directors.  Further, former bureaucrats with ten year of more experience as Joint Secretary and above are
eligible to become the Independent Director. The Committee reiterates its view that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service and may not have
expertise required of an Independent Director of a PSE unless he has experience in the field relevant to the PSE. The Committee therefore asks DPE to
modify the eligibility criteria.
 
77.
              Further, the Committee finds it  remarkable that majority of Independent Directors were towards the higher limit of the permissible age-band of
45-65 years, indicating that they were appointed Independent Directors only upon attaining the superannuation in their respective careers.  Even a survey
of the Database for Independent Directors compiled by the DPE, indicates predominance of only such candidates. The Committee wonders if this was
the objective of the Policy of Professionalisation  to make the Boards of Directors the parking lot for retired government servants.  The Committee
recommends that the Ministries/Departments should appoint younger professionals from non-Governmental agencies as Independent Directors.
 
78.
              The Committee considers it to be yet another evidence of Government’s preference for Government Servants. It was with this objective that the
Committee in its 168th Report had suggested to reduce the maximum age limit to 60 years, which is also the age of superannuation in Government.  The
Committee reiterates its recommendation. 
 
79.
              The Committee also observes that in several cases the term of Independent Directors was renewed.  The Department of Public Enterprises has
chosen not to act upon the Committee’s previous recommendations para 21.5 of 168 th Report.  The DPE has neither informed the Committee of the
sound logic behind not accepting its recommendations in this regard.  The Committee impresses upon the Government to review the guidelines and
inform the Committee of the decisions along with the reasons.  The Committee views such renewal as another manifestation of reluctance on the part of
Ministries or Departments to allow a broader and wider talent to join CPSEs Boards as Independent Directors.
 
80.
              In its 168th Report (para 21.5) Committee, while commenting upon the appointment of former bureaucrats in the boards of PSU as independent
director also their re-appointment, observed that such arrangement falls short of spirit of objective of the policy.  The Committee urged the DPE to
ascertain the implementation of the policy in consonance with its true objectives. Having considered the reply of DPE to this recommendation, the
Committee in its 179th Report observed that the reply lacked earnestness in implementing the spirit. 
 
81.              In their further reply to the Committee’s observation, the DPE informed the Committee that of 145 recommendations made by the Search
Committee during last two years, 100 were academicians/technocrats/professionals/former PSE executives/ CAs or Private Sector experts, Similarly, of
the 105 names recommended by the PSEB, 65 persons belonged to these categories.  The existing Independent Directors can be re-appointed for another
term depending on specific need of the CPSE, provided they continue to fulfil the laid down eligibility conditions and their name is proposed again by
the concerned Administrative Ministry/Department is recommended by the Search Committee/PESB and is approved by the competent authority. 
However, the Committee is not convinced with the reply by the Department regarding the renewal of term of the independent Directors. The Committee
reiterates its recommendation in its 168th Report that the term of independent Directors should not be renewed and fresh professional expertise should be
given chance as independent Directors. 
 
82.
              The Committee while acknowledges some representations of the academicians and management professionals on the Boards, yet there was
virtually negligible representation of the corporate sector.
 
83.
              In an era of close cooperation between private and public sectors, and considering the recent global acquisitions by the Indian companies, the
Committee finds it an imperative that the Directors of the Companies should have much broader vision of the global trade. The repeated exhortation of
public-private partnership should actually be reflected in the structure and functioning of the Boards of  CPSEs.
 
84.
              While the Committee does not wish to preclude any group from becoming the Independent Director, it certainly expresses its serious reservation
over predominance of former bureaucrats and the executives of the PSEs, at the cost of a larger spectrum of professionals. The committee, therefore,
desires the Government to explore availability of talent from a wider spectrum of larger society. In respect of selection of the Independent Directors the
Government should not confine its choice largely to a select group of retired persons but include young entrepreneurs and professionals and if required,
revise the guidelines.
 
85.
              Delay in appointment or not filling up the posts of Independent Director for considerable period of time has been the concern of Committee

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
constantly.  The Committee noted that the Administrative Ministries and Departments are actually responsible for it.  The Committee accordingly
recommends that they must assume a more pro-active role in ensuring the timely appointment of appropriate Independent Directors. The Committee
strongly feels that in the case of non-compliance of guidelines, DPE should take appropriate action.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government should come out with the guidelines empowering the DPE to take even punitive measures against the respective PSUs for the earnest
implementation of this Policy.
 
86.
              The Committee acknowledges the initiative taken by the Ministry of Company Affairs in setting up the National Foundation for Corporate
Governance, which should organize intensive training programmes for the Independent Directors. In this respect the Directors Certification Programmes
organized by the SCOPE, Academy of Corporate Governance and the DPE, could be useful. The Committee recommends that such Certification should
be also made mandatory for the Government Directors.
 
87.
              The Committee is in agreement with the recommendation of the Ad-hoc group of Experts for Empowerment of CPSEs that some mechanism
must be created to monitor and assess the performance and contribution made by the Independent Directors.
 
88.
              The Committee takes note of the broader dynamics in Indian corporate sector with which the PSEs have to compete to survive even in the
domestic market. The Committee also acknowledges the buoyancy in the PSEs in those sectors that have been opened up for private sector and where
the PSEs have been granted greater autonomy. In an era when Indian industries are charting out larger Joint ventures, mergers and acquisitions in global
market, the PSEs must not be allowed to remain stymied by a limited choice of personnel in their Boards of Directors to give the enterprise a strategic
direction in this era.
 
89.
              The Committee recommends that the DPE must revise its Guidelines accordingly to attract such talent with global vision of the business.
 
90.
              In this respect the Committee takes an affirmative view of the recent statement of the Prime Minister at the Conference of Chief Executives of
the Public Enterprises on 8 th March 2007- “ Induction of Independent Directors on the Boards of PSEs would,…., ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness in the decision making processes as well. We must, therefore, pay greater attention to how we identify “independent” Directors and ensure
that they are truly independent “professionals”.
 
91.
              Prime Minister further, underlined the nature of impending competition in market “ public enterprises also need a new strategic vision. In the
increasingly globalised world that they operate in now, they must learn from private sector and seize opportunities for mergers, acquisitions,
amalgamations, takeovers and creating new joint ventures”   
 
92.
              The Committee expects that the remaining vacancies of Independent Directors in all the PSEs shall be filled up expeditiously with appropriate
persons give due cognizance to the recommendations of this Committee.
 
93.
              The Committee notes a remarkable under representation of women as independent Directors on the Boards of the CPSEs.  The Committee
recommends that the priority should be accorded to include at least one such women professional having the expertise relevant to the CPSEs, as the
independent Director on the Boards of CPSEs. 
 
94.
              The Committee reiterates its recommendations in 168 th Report and commends the Government to take cognizance of the observations and
concerns expressed by the Committee in lackadaisical implementation of the Policy of Professionalisation of Boards of the CPSEs. The
 
95.              Government and administrative Ministries should be more forthcoming in involving new sets of experts from outside the government agencies.
The vision set by the Prime Minister in his address to the Conference of Chief Executives must be followed up earnestly with actionable measures. The
Committee also seeks a detailed explanation from the Government on the status of implementation of the recommendations of the Ad hoc expert Group.
 
            The Committee directs the Ministry to furnish the detailed action taken and if recommendation is not acceptable, the reasons therefore.
 
***
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
 
MINUTES
 
 
            RAJYA SABHA
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
 
***
            The Committee met at 4.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 3
rd  May, 2007 in Main Committee Room,  Ground Floor,  Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
 
Present
       
          Shri Santosh Bagrodia                —        Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
2.
                  Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3.                  Shri O.T. Lepcha

198th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/198th%20Report%20of%20Committee%20on%20Industry.htm[04-07-2016 13:08:09]
4.                  Shri Rahul Bajaj
 
            LOK SABHA
 
5.
                  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
6.                  Shri Subash Sureshchandra Deshmukh
7.                  Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya
8.                  Kunwar Manvendra Singh
9.                  Shri V.K. Thumar
10.              Shri Giridhari Yadav
 
            SECRETARIAT
            Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
            Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Girija Shanker Prasad, Committee Officer
 
            WITNESSES
           
            Ministry of Small Scale Industries
            Dr. Chandrapal, Secraetary
            Shri Jawahar Sircar, Addl. Secretary & Development Commissioner
            Shri Pravir Kumar, Joint Secretary
           
            Ministry of Finance (Banking Division)
            Shri Rakesh Singh, Joint Secraetary
            Shri Tarun Bajaj, Director
 
            Reserve Bank of India
            Shri G. Srinivasan, Chief General Manager
 
 
            SIDBI
            Shri Rakesh Rewari, Dy. Managing Director
 
            CGTSI
            Shri S.L. Choudhury, CEO
 
            NSIC
            Shri H.P. Kumar, CMD
 
2.
                  The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and asked the Committee to consider and adopt the Draft 198 th, 199th, 200th, and
202nd Reports of the Committee.  The Committee then unanimously adopted the Report and authorized Shri O.T. Lepcha and in his absence
Dr. K. Malaisamy to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha.  The Committee also authorized Shri Swadesh Chakraborty and in his absence Shri
V.K. Thummar to present the Reports in Lok Sabha.  The Committee also decided that the Reports be presented in both the Houses of
Parliament on the 8th May, 2007.
 
3.               *                                  *                                  *                                  *
 
4.               *                                  *                                  *                                  *
 
5.
                The verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
6.                The meeting was adjourned at 5.20 P.M.    
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to the other Matter.
 
 
 