' 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
Jnd .:s·yg 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY · STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY '. 
TWENTY -FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
(PR ESENT£0 ON THE 9TII JULY, ! 99fll 
RA.JY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY. 19<)8/ASADHA, 192{). (SAKA) 
• 
,. 

2. 
3. 
''· 
"' 
.C O;-<T E'<f S 
. ' 
C O M!-"OSJ110N OFTI4..E C o )...u.nT''I EE 044 · · · · -· · · · · · · -· · · ·· · ···· · ·· · ···· · · · · ·· · · ··· .. .. . ... . I•\ , , , , ' • • • 
REPbRll"' OF T,H_f. ~O MM)TI'EI! ...... ... . . ......... ! .. ................ . . ............ .. ...... . 
. .. .. ............ .. ......... . . ..... . ... .... . 
• 
,. 
(i)-(ii) 
1~ 
9--18 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Gov indrao Adik 
3. Sbri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Kanna Topden 
5. Shri Rajubbai A. Parmar 
6. Sbri Ramdas Agarwal 
7 . Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shci C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy 
10. Shri Sanjay Dalmia 
11. Shri Nagrnani 
12. Sbri Gaya Singh 
13. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
15. Stu·i Muni Lall 
16. Shri M. Srinivas 
17. Shri V ijay Shankar 
18. Sbri Gyan Singh 
19. Sbri Tarachand Sahu 
20. Shri Ramanand Singh 
21. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
22. Shri Jual Oram 
23. Sbri Anand Rama Maurya 
24. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
25. Shri Nadcndla Bhaskar Rao-
26. Sbri Kallappa Awade 
27. Sbri K.H. Mun iyappa 
28. Shri Dutra Mcghe 
29. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
'33. Shri A.nanda Pathak 
34. Shri K irti Vardhao Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
l 
38. Shri Malyala Raj aiah 
39. Shri Prabhar Kumai Samanraray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
.. Naman:n<:d w.c:.f. 09.06.98 ~i~ Shri Moinul Ha.<;san. 
(i) 
.•. 

f#¥6i' N SW"kWf 
41. Sliri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S. S. Palan imanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P. C . Pajkray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Comm inee Officer 
• 
( .. , n; 
,. 
] 
1 
! = 

I 
• 
TWE NTY-FIFT H R E PORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
L the Chairman. Department- related Parliamentary StanJing Commiuee on Industry 
ha,•ing been authorised by the Committee to pre~em the Re;x>rt on its behalf, present tho~ 
Twenty-fift h Report of the Commiucc. The Repon is .on the Dcmamls fo r Grants of the 
\ jinist ry of Industry for 1998-99. 
(2) Tile Commi llee til its meet ings held on the 16lh, 17th , 22nd ~ nd. 2:1rd June. 1998. 
cxamjned the relevHnt doc uments and papers receoved from the Minisu·y of Ind ustry and also 
h e ~rd the oral evide nce of the Secre taries of the Ministry of Industry on thos con nection. The 
Commin ee also held discuss ions with t h ~ r~prcsc nt atives of Cll, FICCI, ASSOCHAM. PHD 
. Chamber or Commerce and Indus try. Confederation of Small Scale lnduqrics of India and 
Laghu Udyog Bharati. Representatives of Trad..: Llnions like C'ITU 3n_d 1}-.TUC also 
interacted with the Commiuc~. 
(3) The Commillce adopted the Report at 1\s meeting held on the ist July . 1998. 
( ~) T he Department of Industrial Development has bee n prov ided with a budgc1ary 
allocat ion of R s. 361.59 cro re under both plan anti non-piau com ponen ts for 19'18-99. Of thos 
tot;o l o utlay of R~. 361.59 cro rc. Rs. 342.77 crorc fn ll under the plan segmem and remainin g 
i.e. Rs. 18.82 crorc is set asodc fo r cx pcn di ttorc unde r non-p lan But wha t evo kes Commille c\ 
uner surprise is a colo~sal sum of Rs. 300 crorc out uf Rs. 3J2 .77 crorc of plan outlay that has 
hecn earmarked to be utiiised for implementing NRF scheme;,. It " not the intention of the 
Commia..:~ to find fault with the implementation of this scheme "' 'uch but wh:ot actually 
l>afl1es o: i' the skewe:.l utilisation of thos fund A fund which o.·a~ and " originally meant for 
the rehabilitation and redeployment of worker.. as parr of a safety net has been and is being 
used only for VRS The o ral evidence t.:ndcred by the Scc rctar). Departmen t of lnd ust ri;•l 
Deve-lop men t. before the Commi11ee and the Annual Report of the Monostry of l n d u ~ try 
mine& no words in sta ting that the o verall aim of the Nat io nal Renewol Fund ts w provide a 
sa fety net t o the worke rs. E ver since the inc;:p tio n o( NRf way bac k in 1992, Rs. 2308 crorc 
have been spent fo o i t~ imp leme ntation ou t of which a paltry sum ol Rs 16 crore has been 
us.:d for purpo~c ' other than \'RS. On the (lthcr hand , 64.8118 "-Orkcr.. were surveyed by 
Employe~ Assistance Centres out of which 32, 703 were: counselled. ::!5.916 rctraoned anti onlv 
o,-l::!Q were rederloyed . A comparison between the figur es for \ ' RS and reh[tbilit2tion clear!) 
reOects the swong on favour oi VRS . The Secrctar) ' on behalf of hi' Department justified thos 
nit on the pretext of ksser budgctarv allocation under this head. Howeve o. thts JUStification 
bi ls to stand the scout i n~ b) the Committee. If :H •!I there w ere hudgctory coos trairns th.:n 
wh) the Voluntary R~ tirem e nr Scheme Hlonc w;ts singled out to be imple men ted? 
All this leads the Commitloe to arri v~ <tl a s im ple conclusi on that Na tional Renewal Fund ;, 
spe cificall y mea nt to mee t the requirement> ol' \'RS am1 rest of the objectives of this: fund are 
nothing but n mere cyew~~ h . 
The Cornmillee. therefore . exp11!s~es its u!ter d isma~ o'e r th~ manner in ..-hich the 
l\1inisu-~- has utili~ .. d tb;s fund regardless of t!oe repeated recommendatior" of !hi< Commi<tee to 
utilise it for objet•th cs other than YRS. Tht Committee once more. r<iter:o:<" i!S considecd 
''iew that ~a tiona! Rentw:!1 Fund should be us ~rl a~ a re3J scc!ai saf~!~· nt t for ··1 oake:-s. Sc t"ar 
~s the !mpieme!'tation of \t\.S i: eonce:-tH:d, !h~ Com mittE:~ recommends for e2r~2:-i\iu~ u 
separ!lte bud11~1a:- ~· aHoc!!!it>n for the pur p o:- .~ . 
, 
• 
, 

(5) While gomg into :he details oi the approp n auon of .' •. ;ionai Renew~! Fund. the 
Commiuee had an occasion to ponder over the role bemg played by Depan mem o f 
Industrial Development. A glance at the demands of the Department shows that a big chunk 
of its budgetary allocations is meant for the National Renewal Fund and rest is divided 
among a host of other activities undertaken by institutions like National Productivity 
Council, National Institute of Design , Quality Council of India, Trade Mark Registry, Patent 
Office and Automotive Research Association of India. Now the quest ion arises, is there 
essentially any need to have a separate Department within the set-up of Ministry o f 
[ndustry , just for the sake of the implement ation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme through 
Nationa l Renewa l Fund? The Committee fails to appreciate any such need and strongly 
believes that this Department should be dispensed with as the very, nomencl ature of it -
Industrial Development - sou.nds a misnomer to this Conunillee. In the opinion of the 
Committee, it should rather be merged with the Department of Industrial Policy & 
Prom otion. ' 
(6) With the liberalisation of lndian economy, the;: doors were opened for foretgn 
investors to .bring in huge investments in almost all the sectors of the economy with the 
emphasis being on the infrastructmal projects Although it has been eigh! years ever since 
the foreign investments began to flow in, the picture that bas emerged is not very 
encouraging. As against the total direct investment approvals worth Rs. 160255.44 crorc, the 
actual inflow of foreign inves tment stands at Rs. 36420 .71 crorc upto April. 1998. According 
to the submission of. Secretary, Department of Indu strial Policy and Promotion, tht.: overall 
approvals of the total FDI proposals stand at 52 per cent whereas the actual inOow is even 
lower than that i.e. 22 per cent. Our of th is 22 per cen t, infrastructure, power and tclccorn 
sectors accouni for 50 per cent. He admitted that the low rate of inflow is, primarily, due to 
the procedural delays at the Secretariat level. Evidently, we did not set our house in order 
before knocking at the doors of others. This is. perhaps, the reasons why our next door 
neighbour China has left us far behind in her ende3vour to allract huge foreign investments. 
Even after the reconstitution of the Foreign Investment Promotion Board and the 
subsequent mception of "a single window investor-£riendly mechanism", the foreign 
investment scenario is still far from .being satisfactory . Already reeling under recession. 
[odian Industry has been groping for direction . Investors ' confidence is already suffering in 
India. The Department of Industrial Policy :1nd Promotion should initiate action to restore the 
confidence of the investors and allay their fears regarding economic and investment climate in 
India. Therefore, the need of the hour is to put the process of approving the FDI propos:tls 
particularly in infrastructure, power, telecommunication etc. on acceleration so that the mood 
of the inve$lOr is not put off by the time he geL~ the nod to invest. T his becomes all th e more 
essential as the clouds of economic sanctions against India have begun to hover over her. 
Further, the Foreign Investment Promotion Board has, at present, r.stri cted its role to 
merely appro,•ing a proposal. It has not done any exercise on as to what happens ther eafter . 
What hardships an investor actually encounters after tile approval stage, is not being taken 
care of and the investor is left to (end (or himself. It is a matter of regret that the FIPB has 
not undertaken any exercise to address to these problems faced by the investors. Perhaps, this 
could be the reason for the wide gap between the approvn.l o( proposals and the actual inflow 
of FDI. 
(7) The Growth Centre Scheme was l~unched in the year 1990-91 to promote 
indusrrialisation in selected disuicts spread across the country. Till date, 71 such centres are 
proposed to be developed with basic infrastructural facilities like power, water, telecommu -
• 
,. 
' 
• 
1 

-
r 
• 
noc::uon and b"n"Jng. etc . Tnougn tl is a Cent: :o..y sponsored schc::nc, :he dec"ion to select 
the site , to form ulate the project 3nd to !mpie oncnt tt, remains with the States. Given the 
<itu.otio n, tbe role uf the Ceoural Gove rnm ent os confine d on ly tu the extent of spo nsori ng 
the seuing up of such a centre 1n an areu odentoficd by a Stat~ Govern ment. ln the view of 
the Com mittff, the Ministry of Indu stry sho uld pby a larger role than that of a sponsor or a 
scheme of such an impo rtance and sho uld also have a mechani sm to get the fecback o n the 
functioning of the Growth Centre nfter it com es into existence. 
In effect, it is the Ministry of Industry which 5hould bavc a national survey cond ucted to 
identify industrially backward areas and then 54'1 up growth centres in areas so identified by 
taking the concerned State Governments in confidence rather than letting the fate of 
hack"ard areas be decided by State Governments. A posili,•e step in this direction would not 
only help in identifying backward :1reas across the length and breadth of ll:oe country with a 
national perspective but would also prove helpful in formulating a national plnn to set up 
/ 
growth centres. · 
The Committee strongly recommends t.aking up of Ibis project on priorit y basis and 
hopes that sufficient amount o r budgetary supp ort wou ld be forthcoming once a programme 
' like this is put into action. 
(8) Bure<~u or Indu strial Costs and Prices w:os truncat ed towards the end o r 1997 with 
the sett ing up or the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Auth ori ty (NP PA) and the Taritr 
Commiss ion. The Tariff Commission was set up 10 take up tariff and associated work but it 
i~ yet to commen ce work. Though the Commis sion's terms of refe rence were finalised at the 
time of its incepti o n, its Chairman has propo sed revtsion o[ those terms. The Committee is 
also told that the full compos ition o f the Commi ssio n is yet t<l be completed. With its revi_•~d 
terms of referen ce still hanging fire and its constitution still halfway through, the Committee 
f:Jih to comprehend the ha5te with which lhis Commission was constituted without completing 
the initial spade work. At a Lime "hen Bureau of Industrial Costs and Prices was already in 
place, the idea to have a Tariff Commission without ~ny preliminary work, t~ also beyond the 
comprehension of the Com mitte e. It has left the Committee to ponder over as to what precise 
role, in this financial year, the Commiss ion is going to play in tariff related matters when the 
indu strial ,-owth is in the decline. 
(9) The recent cyclo ne whi ch caused massi ve de~truction in the coastal area\ of Gujar at 
coincided with the Commillee·s delibe rati ons on the role of the Sall Comm issione r in the 
salt producing areas. A larg e num ber of salt workers are report ed to have los t their lives and 
are at the top of the worst a{fcctcd people. The Committee is given to unde rstand that the 
annual salt cess collect ion is utilosed fo r developm ental work s for the salt indu stry including 
the welfare of salt workers. Dut in view of the Commi ttee. a lot more is requored to be don e 
for the welfare or salt workers . Apart from providing ex-graua paymen!S to the affec ted salt 
workers, the Committee recommends that SaJt Commissioner should make it mandato ry for 
salt producers to r~gistcr the actupl number of their workers with it so that in times C?f any 
calamity, llfl'ectcd workers could be provided ade11uatc cornpen s:ttion. An accid ent insurance 
policy ~ hould also he made compulsory for the workers. Besides, the cyclone nl~rm signals 
should per>olate down and a mass awareness protramme be started to educate the workers in 
this regard so that in future the y do not assess the magnitude of a forthcoming cyclone on lhe 
basis of their past experienc~. As far as the overall welfare of the s:.lt worker s is concerned, 
tho Committee recomiJlcn<i• that there should be :1 com prehensiv e programme for the welfare 
of th e.~e workers ~o that the arrect~ of the welfnrc activities percoh1te down to th em. 
(10) While deliberating on the role of Salt Commiss ione r. the ossue of iodo$ed 'alt came 
' 

up for dis~n ss i on. l l has been m;uic mandat<.lry thai salt m~de for hu mon consumptio n 
should have the pres cribed content o f iodine to chec k tile incic.lcr.ce of diseases caused by 
iodine deficiency 1n human body. But the inctderx:e of such disc<~!><!' is localised only and not 
universa l. 
Accord ingly, the Committee recommends that reg ions which are not prone to the 
incidence of di seas~s related to the deficiency of iodine should not be subjected to the 
compulsory sale or iodised salt. 
(11) The Gene r al Budget f or 1998 -99 dearly underlines the Govern ment's policy to off 
load its equit y share i n non-stTategic PSUs uptO 74 per cent on the basis o f the ge nerality of 
cases. The impli cations of this policy are sign ificant so far as the D isirivestm cnt Commission 
is concerned. Di~i n vestment Commission W3~ constiturcd to adv ise the Governm ent 
rega rding the disinvestment o f shares in the PSUs referred to it by the G overnme nt. Now 
that the Governmen t b as already mad e up its mind to go in fo r acros~- the-board 
distnvestm ent in non -stra tegic PSUs the role of Disinvestment Commission becomes more 
tmpo rtant and the Commission sho uld be allowed to play tiS role effect ively . The 
Commission has pres ented seven re ports till da te but accordin g to the Memb e r-Secreta ry o f 
the Commissi on the net resu lt o r the whole process comes to a naught. The imple me ntati on 
aspec t of the recom me ndatio n o f the Disinve stment in respe ct o f 41 o ut of 43 PSUs has b een 
left to the ~inis t ries concerned . This bas led to a considerable delay in implemen t ation and 
has led to the situat io n w here pra ctica lly very littl e has been ach ieved by way of 
disinvestment. The Committee feels that there is need for a Central implementation 
mechanism wh ich cou ld monitor tbt implemcntulion aspect or disinvestment. F•asibility or 
h:t11dling over this job to Disinvestment Commi ssion may be ex;~mined. T he Committ•e was 
given to underst:tnd that proceeds from disinvestment went to meet budgetary deficit and 
hence no clear idea was availabl e on the use to "bic.b these fun ds "ere put to. The Commille e 
recommends that Government may consider setting up a ''Di sinvestment Fund .. into which all 
proc~eds of disinveshnenl could be deposited and these funds nre prim~rily used for the 
Industria l development of tbe country. 
(12) Another issue related to the di s in ve~tme n t is the polic y o f the Gover nmen t tO 
dtsmvcst its equity share i n non \tra tegic PSUs upto 74 per cent. The Department of Heavy 
industry has identi fied 23 of its PS Us on which this pol icy is propose d to be applied . While 
off-loa ding equit y shar e;, two th ings are req ui re<' to b e kept in mind first , the rea l ma rket 
v;tluc of t.he equ ity and second, the financi a l competence o f the jo in t ventur e par tne r. This, 
in turn . wou ld e nsu re handsome value of eq ui ty o n the one hand and the effective use of the 
expert ise o f t he equ ity holding compa ny to bnng abo ut a mrn arou nd of a particu li!T PSUs, 
on the other. 
The Commilt ce r ecommend s that before selling out its equit y sh"re the Government must 
tnke the advice of capital market professionals of repute and recognition about the reHI 
market worth of the equit ies or the PSUs whose equity shar e is proposed to be off-load ed. 
(13) Ano ther point of concern for rhe Committee was the concep 1 of form tng "Holding 
Company'' like Bharat Ya nrra :-.ligam Ltd. and Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam Ltd consisting of 
ic:w p rofit and loss maki ng umt~. The Committ ee fails to comp rehend what net r•sult such 
holding compani es have yielded so far. The sick unitS have not been able to r cvi<e, at the 
same time their poor per formanc e in turn, has affected the profitability or the profit making 
units. 
(14) The Departmen t of Heavy industry has identified 23 of tt~ PSUs out of the tOt3l of 
~8 PSUs whose equtty would be put on the blocks. The process is said to have been imtiated 
• 
I 
§ 

• 
for jis•~vcstment vf Government' eqdtJ share :n ,., .e ::3 PSL'< While the disinvestment 
pro·· ... s; 1~ on a!l..:! L :tt various SU:f.; .. !he Dcpa.~men" of He a'" y Indust:y bas asked for 
hudg c:ary 'uppon under the head .. L·;vestmem m Puol ic Enterprises .. ior some of these 23 
t'SUs namely Pr;1ga Tools, Hinduswn C.tbles Ltd ., Scooters India Ltd ., Tyrc Corporation of 
India Ltd .. llindustan Salls Ltd., Bharat Leather Corporation, Nepa Ltd., Hindustan 
Mlchinc Tools . In~trumemation Ltd., Hindusran Photo Films and Cemem Corporation of 
India. The argurnent of the Secretary of this Depanment that the investment is justifiable as 
no joint venture panncr would invest in a loss making company docs not appea r to be 
tenable. The irony of the argument is that when the Department has decided to enter into 
the JOint ventures on the grounds that the Government lacks the wherewithal and expertise 
to resurrect these PSUs then where and how the need arises to invest in them? To say that 
these PSUs are required to be made healthy before inviting joint venture bids is to negate 
the Government's own stated position that it is not in a positio n to infuse life into these 
PSUs. The contradiction is crystal clear. when it comes 10 joint ventu_re partners, the 
Department is ready to take initiative 10 make the~ ?SUs presentable and healthy to some 
exten t and wh ~-. it comes to the Department making all out efforts revive them on Its own, 
it tends to shrug off the responsibility. The result. of this indifference on the pan of 
Department of I Ieavy Industry towards its PSUs, is the constant deterioration in their 
health. 
The Committee has taken a serious note of this dithering on the part of the Department 
or Heavy Ind ustr y and holds the view thai Che Department should desist from going iu 
stra ightaway, for disinvestment In itS PSUs up to 74 per cent, particularly in the case or profit 
making PSUs. The Committee feels that in profit making PSUs, the disinvestment of equity 
should be taken as a last resort and as far as possibl e it should not go beyond 49 per cent. 
(15) One of the PSUs of Department of Heavy Industry named, Hindu stan Cables Ltd., 
(HCL) is caught in a web of problems. This company manufactures telecom cables for the 
consumption o( telecom sector . Despite being a pioneer in k~ field. it is facing severa l 
Jifficultics ranging from inade q uate capacity utilisati on, acute shortage of working capital to 
hrgher finance and employment cosL According to the Secret;try. Department of hc3vy 
Industry, this Compamy is revivable. 
The Com mill ee holds the view that Dcr>nrtment of Heavy Indust ry sho uld not I><! found 
want i n~; in seeing thai HCL is re,·ived to ils fullest c:apacity. It also recommends that lhe 
Department or HeaYy Industry shou ld explore l he pos.~ibililies to hand over this PSU to the 
Department of Telecommunicati ons for the optimal utili~tion or its production capacity or 
alternati•cly it shou ld come to a long ter m understandin,:_: with the Department of 
Telecommunications in the matter of supply or HCL manufactured cab les t~ thM Department. 
(16) Small Scale Sector plays a vital role in the Indian econ omy . ll\ contribution to the 
economy is to the tune of 40 per cent. Keeping thrs factor rn mind, this Committee has 
reco mmende d ior l1igher budget ary allocations Cor Depart ment of Small Scale Industries and 
Agro and Rural Industries over the past year.; while examining the Demands for Grants of 
the Mini~try of Indu stry. But much 10 the ch<tgrin of this Committee. not much water has 
Oowerl down the river Yamuna rn all these years. The budgetary alloca tion s remain 
nom inal ly en hanced falling way short of the acruul requirement ~nd fu t ur~ projections of the 
D~partmeoL The Planning Cornmt ssion ltas granted only Rs. 4085 crore as aga inst the actual 
requirement of R~ . 22.::!62 crorc of thi~ Department for the 9ih Plan period. 
In the opinion or the Comm ittee, a secto r or the economy as vital as the sma ll scale 
sector. should be accorded highest Jlriority hy t!be plan makers nnd in accor dance with that 
• 
, . 

• 
budgetary aliocaiiorts be st! ~ide for it. ":"he CommH!l'f ~rg~s upon t~e :\linic;try of Financ-e 
and Planning Commission to reconsider the requirements oi small SC3Ie sector so that a more 
rationalistic approach is adop ted to meet them throu~:ho ut the entire 9th Plan period. So far, 
as the Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rurol !ndus~r i es i ~ concerned, tht 
Commi ttee expei:!s thai it wouid leave no stone unturned in convincing the cu,tod ians of the 
exchequer about the real and prl'ssing demands of small scale sector. 
(17) There was a demand from all quarters of smilll ,c~k sector tn enhance the 
investmen t limit from Rs. 60 lakh s to Rs. I crore in the ~mull i ndumi~l units. The 
Purliameiuary St3nd ing Comm if!ee on Industry had Jlso. in it!> 21st Report, recommended 
the same. Responding to the demand, the Government enhanced th't inve~tment limit from 
Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 3 crore instead of pegging it at Rs. 1 crore as demanded. As expected, 
thts generous enhancement of investment limit has prove d counterproductive for this s<octor. 
This enhancement enab led a large number of medium class entrep reneur s who had sound 
financial standing and were equipped with sophisticated machinery ~nd technology and were 
hitherto, hovering on the fringes of small scale sector. to encroach upon this sector. As a 
result, ihe surviv3l of lakhs of tiny and small industrial units '" in ;he danger of compkte 
decimation. The situation is alarming and fCq~ircs immediate Htt~ntion if Jakhs of SSi units 
are to be prevented from being shut down and lakhs of workers emplo}'ed in them arc not to 
be rendered jobless. 
Gh·en the ~riousness of :he situation, ihe Committee r~com:ne11ds thnt the raise in 
investment limit for SSI units be rolled back to the level of Rs. 1 crore so that lakhs of SS.J 
units could be saved from being extinct. 
(18) Closely linked with ihe investment limit is the annual turnover limit for excise dcty 
c>.emption. The Union Budget, 129~99 has increased this limit from Rs. 30 lakhs to-Rs. 50 
lakhs. It b 3 welcome step_ but this increase is sought to be negated by another decisinn of 
the Government to icvy excise duty on M3Ximum Retai l Price :ts against the ex-facto ry price 
as was in cxi;tence till now. This system of levying excise <luty 011 M.R. P. would render the 
enhancement in annual turnover limit meaningless. 
The Committee, therefore, reconun~nds th<~t this policy of levying excise duty on M.R.P. 
should be scrapped forthwith in Mdt:r to provide succour to SST units. ' 
{19) i\Jwther anoouncem~nt made in the Finance Mintster's Budget speech is to 
dcr<:scrve the manufacturing of 10 types of implemen•s and equipmcnts used in the 
agricuhurJl sector. These implements were being manufactured by small industrial units but 
with the dcrcservation the entry of big companie; in this field is all but a maHer of time 
because a huge market is full of temptation for them . The entry of big companies with 
access to easy finance, beucr technology and wider marketing network, will definitely harm 
the imere5ts and busines'\ of thousand~ of small unns catering to the nee<h of rural india. 
It is the opiu ion or the Committee that the dereservation of the m11nufacturing of 
agriculturn l illlplemeots must be revoked lo save thousands or tiny and sm:Jil industria l units 
operat ing in rural India. 
(20) The imporl<lnce of small scale sector and the crucial role pl3ycd by it in the 
national economy is a foregone conclusion. Even then this sector ts beset with a whole lot of 
proble ms. These problems such as av,tilability of easy and timely finance, infrastructurn l 
bottlenecks like land, power . etc .. encroachment of its arc;~s of operation by big and 
multinational companies. lack of sophisttcated technology with poor R & D support s~tept, 
l:tck of clear-cut policie.~ and a host of nther things conrinue to dog the small scale sector 
• 
,-

7 
There is no gainsaying the fact thai there have been efforts on the part of the Governm<:nt tO 
ameliorate this sector but at the same time it is also a fac< that much more needs to be done and 
that too wholeheartedly, to ensure all round growth and development of it. Some of the 
problems ment ioned above have become petenn ial. Small industrial units as susceptible as they 
are, easily fall prey to them. 
Therefore, the need of the hour is to immediately address to these problems and to weed 
them out to the ex1ent possible. The Committee rcconunends that a Cabinet Committee or a high· 
·powered Committee or Commission with wide terms of reference should ~set up lo look into tbe 
problems endangering the small scale sector. 
(21) Khadi sign ifies the roie and presence of cottage and villzge indu stries in India's 
eGonomy and is a symbol of national integration. It is also considered a comnfon man's clotil . 
But at the same time it has w take on the synthetic drcs:,' material which is in vogue and has 
become the fashion stateme .nt of today's generation. That is why Khadi neerls protectionjf it has 
to survive against the onslaught of western cloths. But what appears worrisome to this 
Committee is the soaring prices of Khadi products as a result of which a common 01an is finding 
it bcyond his reach. To make Khadi products affordable, two things are essemial, one is to lay 
more emphasis on P- & D activity so that the production !eve! increases with less cost input and 
second is to p1·ovide budgetary support to enable the KV!C to give mqre rebate to Khadi 
products in order to promote the sale of Khadi. It is. in effect, a matter of sat isfaction for the 
Comminee that the Department is concerned about technolog ical upgradation in KVTC which is 
in the process of signing an MOU \\~th. CSIR whose laboratories have developed technologies 
for the purpose. However , what is of concern to the Comminec is tb~ t R & D activity has been 
linked with Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP) whic!J awaits Cabinet 
approval. The budgetary stlpport to KVIC in BE 1998·99 is Rs. 218.70 crore whereas in RE 
1997-98 it was Rs. 330.05 crore. For the puq~ose of reba te, KVIC has been provided Rs. 86 
~'rore as aga inst the actual requirement of · Rs. 186 crore for !he current financial year. 
Therefore, the Committee recommen.ds a multifold increase in the budgeta·ry support to 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission to enable it to give more subsidy to Kbadi products to 
keep their prices down and make Khadi more affordable than ever. The Department should aiso 
initiate adion to see that latest technologie>1! knowhow is ava ilable to the Khadi industries. 
(22) The census of SSI units carne up for di~cuss ion and the Committee was informed that 
there are at present 22 lakhs registered units and about 70 lakhs unregistered umrs. The 
Committee feels !hal keeping in mind a large number of unregistered units, it is of urgeotl Jeed 
that unregistered units are brought to the fold of registered units. Such a step would go along way 
to not only maintain stat istics but also help in better policy formulation. 
(23) The General Budget 1998·99 envisage ·s that special additional duty of 4 per cent will 
apply to all imports except goods imported under Advance Licence Scheme . A~ a resulr small 
exporters wbo do no< tak.e advanta~e of this scheme and pref~r to export on drawb~ck bas!s will 
not get higher drawback due to this 4 per cent ndditionnl duty, Such exporters ~uy raw materir•ls 
or finished goods from the market (inclusive of Cemral Exc ise and Import duties 
-basic, additional and now special additional dll!t)') and effect of such levies are compensated in 
drawback rates. Because of 4 per cent add itiona l duty, they will not get higher drawback . . 
The Committee recommends that small exporters who are not in a position to take. advantage 
of advance licnece scheme and export on drawback basis should be exempted from 4 per cent 
special additional duty. 
(24) The Finance Minister bas also proposed to impose excise duty of 8 per cent on 
• 
,. 

brdlldcd spices and brand ed eatab le p rep~r:~t' ons. These t:~ms are l ~trgely produced in 1he 
small scale sector, hence the impol>iticn of the proposed rate of excise dut~ would hit !he 
manu facturers of these products. 
The CommHtee is or the co tiSidcr~d view that this impositio n of 8 per cent excise duty on 
branded spices and branded edib le preparations sho uld be withdrawn in order lo save 
bundr~as of small unils engaged in LO,e production of these items. 
(25) 1!1 !he light of the above observ ations and recommendation s o f the Committee , l 
hope that the Ministry of Industry would make seriou s efforts to tmplemcnt them. 
NEW DELH1; 
July 1, 1998 
• 
RA GHAVJI 
e hairman, 
Depamnen;·Related Parliamentary 
Standing Commiuee on Industry . 
,. 

r 
Al"lNEXURE 
(MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS) 
n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Deparlmcnl -Relatcd Parliamentary St~mding Gommittee on 
10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16th June, 1998 in Room ~o. 139, First 
House Annexc, New DeU1i. 
PRESEI'.'T 
1. Shri Raghavji--Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Sh ri V .N. Gadgil 
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
7. Shri C.O. Poulosc 
8. Shri Nagmani 
9. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
11. Shri Muni l.all 
12. Shri Ramanand Smgh 
13. Shri Annasah e b M. K. Patil 
14. Sh.ri Anand Rarna Maurya 
15. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
18. Dr. Shakecl Ahmad 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
20. Shri Ananda Pathak 
21. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
22. Shri Prabbat Kumar Sarnantaray 
23. Shri Ajay Ch ~•krabony 
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secrctnry 
Shri P.C. l:'aikray, Under Secret ary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Comminee Officer 
0 
• 
,. 
Industry met at 
Floor, Parliament 

r 
1\) 
w1TNESSES 
Representatives of Confedera tioo of indian Industry (Cil) 
1. Shri K.A.P. Singh, 
2. Dr. S.K. Gupta, 
3. Shri S. Bane rjee , 
4. Shri S. Sen, 
5. Shri Dilip Chenoy, 
6. Shri Tapas Dana, 
7. Shri Dccpak Roy, 
' 8. Shri Rajesh Gupta , 
9. Shri V.S. Bapna, 
Cha irman , Steel Industry Divtsion. 
DirectOr (Commercial SAIL) 
Vice-Chairman, Jindal, 
Vijaynagar Steel Ltd. 
Assn. Gen. Manager, SAlt. 
Dy. Direc uor Gene ral 
Diieaor 
Dy. Director 
Director 
Managing Directo r, Lloyds Sl'ecl 
Director, h p;lt I ndustries 
·Represent ali l'eS..o~o~ot I ndiao -otartrlJerll~oc. .Commerce and Industry (FICCO 
1. Shri Yogendra Kumar Modi, Cbainnan, Banki ng~ ..Finance C<>mniittee 
2. Shri Y. P. Srivastava, . Dy. Secretar y-General 
Representative of the Associated Chambers of Commerce and lndu$Lry of India 
(ASSO CHAM) 
1. Dr. T.P. Bbat, Advisor 
Representalives of Centre · of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) 
1. Dr. M.K. Pandhc , Genera l Secretary 
2. Sbri W.R. Varada Rajan, Secretary 
Representative s of Indian National Trade Union Congress (INT UC) 
1. Shri Chnndidas Sinha, • "' 
Secretary 
2. Shri S.L. Passey, General Secretary 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of rbc above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
.Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministry of Lndustry, Steel and Mines. ~embers 
sought clarification from lhe witnesses on various points. Tbe Chairmnn directed the 
witnesses to c0nsider lhe points ra ised b,t the Members dur ing the meeting and send an 
~pdated note on the same at tbc carlte§!' for Commit tee's perusal. 
A verbatim record of lhe evidence wl(s kep t. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet again at 10.00 "·"'· on 
Wednesday, the 17th June, 1998 at the same venue. 
• 
' 
-
I 
" 
• 

I 
Ill 
THTRD :O.IEETINC 
The Department -Related Parliamen tar y Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the l7th Jun e, 1998 m Room No. 139. First Floor, Parliame nt 
House An nexe, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
I . Shri Raghavji-Choirman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
J. Shri Mauri ce Kujur 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. SILri V .N. Gadgil 
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
7. Shn C.O. Poulose 
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Muni Lall 
10. Sh ri Ram;mand Singh 
11. Shri Annasabeb M. K. Patil 
12. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
13. Sbri :-ladendla .Bhaskar Rao 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
15. Shn Konijeti Rosaiah 
16. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
17. Shri Sun il Khan 
18. Shri Ananda Pathak 
19. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
20. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samamar-Jy 
21. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
22. Prof. Jogcndra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shr i Satish Kum ar, Joint Secrewry 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Depu ty Scc.;retary 
Shn P.C. Pailaay, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh , Commincc Officer 
WITNESSES 
Repre sentative s or Department or Industrial Policy and Promotion (IPP), at 10.00 A.M. 
l. Shri T R Prasad, 
2. Shri. A.V . Singh, 
3. Shrimati Pratibha Karan. 
4. Shri Vijay L. Kelkar, 
5. Shrimatl Jyotsana Khanna , 
6. Shri Shrawan Nigam . 
• 
Secret"ry 
AS & FA 
Joint Secretary 
Chairman (Tari(f Commission) 
Chairman, BJCP 
Eco. Adviser 
11 
,. 

• 
3. Shn Gopai Knsh an, i'resi den t, COSSI 
4. Shri Tarjecl Singh Negi, Secre tary. C OSSI (Delhi C nit) 
4. Rep resentatives of Department of Small Sca le Indu.~tries aud Agro & Rural Industries 
(Ministry of I ndustry) at 4.30 P . M. 
1. Shri Ashok Parthasa•·alhi , Secretary 
2. Shri Christy Fernandez, Chairman, Coir Board 
3. Shri K. V. lrniraya, Add!. Secretary and 
Dy . Commissione r of SSI 
4. Shri A .V. Singh, AS & FA 
5. Shrimati P. Swaminathan, F.A. 
6. Shri Brahm Dutt, Joint Secretary 
7. Dr. C.S . Prasad, ADC 
8. Shr i K.S. Ludo, ADC , 
9 Shri Arun Kum ar, JDC(SSI) 
10. Shri Shambu Singh. JDC (SS() 
II. Shri M. Ahmad, CMD (NSJC) 
12. Sqri Rajiv Bhatnagar , Sr. E.D. 
!3. Shri A.K. Sinha, Director 
14. Shri Sat Paul, Director 
15. Shri S. N:dk, D irec tor 
5. Representatives of ~linistry of Finance (Banking Division) 
1. Shri A .K. Jain, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.K. Tyagi, 
3. Shri R.M. Joshi, 
6. Representatives of Plannin g 
l. Shri B.D. Jcthra, 
2. Shri S.G. Raoot, 
7. Representati ves of SIDBI 
1. Shri P.B. Nimbalkar, 
2. Shri MX. !'larula, 
2. 
(Banki ng) 
Director 
General Manager, RBI 
Commission 
Adviser (I & M) 
Dy. Advise r 
Executive Director 
Assistant General Manager 
• 
3. The Committee also heard oral eviden ce of d1c representatives of Laghu Udyog 
Bharati, PHD Cha mber of Commerce and Industry and Confederation of Small Scale 
Industries Association of India. 
4. The Commiucc thereafter heard oral evidence of Secretary , Dcpanment o[ Small Scale 
Industry and Agro & Rural Industries (Ministry of Industry) alongwit h the representatives o{. 
Ministry of finance (Bank ing Division) , Planning Commission and SIDBL, on the problems 
of SSI and Mem bers sought clarifications on various p'(ints from the respective witnesses _.. 
5. 1l1c Chairman directed all the above witnesse s to consider the poinrs raised by lhe 
Members during the meeting and to send an updated note on the same at the earliest for the 
Committee's p<.'rusa!. 
A Vcrba1im reco rd of the evidence was kept. 
6. The Committee adjourned at 6.20 P . M. 
•• • Relates 10 other man~ . 
' 
I 
I 
l 
1 
I 
r 
r 
I 

v 
FIFTH ;\1EETING 
The Depan ment-Rdatc d Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
ILOO "·" · on Tuesday, the 23rd Jun e , 1998 in Room No. 139. Fir..t Floor , Parliament 
House Anncxc, New Del hi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri R~ghavj i-chairman 
R."-JY A SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
~- Shri R ~mdas Aga rwal 
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
7. Shri C.O. Poulose 
8. Shn Nagmam 
9. Shri s~npy Nirupam 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Muni L1ll 
J 1. Shri M. Srinivas 
12. Shn Ramanand Singlr 
13. Sbri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
14. Shri Jual Oram 
15. 
16. 
]7 
18 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
Shri Anand Ratoa Maurya 
Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
Shri Kallappa A wade 
Shri K.Jl . Mun iyappa 
Shri Konijcti Rosaiah 
Shri Sunil Kha11 
Sht• Sha lmni ~ury 
Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
Shri Ajya Cl!akrabo rty 
Prof. Jocendr a Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Jom t Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secr.:ta.ry 
Shri P.C . Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh . Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
L • 
2. Re pr~s>Uii v ~ of ~pa rt meD I or Bavy Indust r y at 3.00. P.M. 
1. Shri P Shankar, Secretary 
2. Shri Api Vikram Singh. AS & FA 
3. Sbri D.C. Samant . Jomt Secretar y 
4. Shri Pradeep Kumar Joint Secretary 
j5 
• 
,. 
, 

• 
• 
) Shn AJ<>Y Aciklr) u. 
o Shn Y.K. Mutreja , 
7. '>hri Amtt~bb Kuma r; 
8. Shri D.K. Jain, 
9. Shri B.K . Tripathi. 
!0. Sh~i A.K . Gupta. 
2. 
Jatnt Secrct~ry 
Director 
DirectOr·' 
Director 
Director 
Director 
3. The Committee thereafter heard oral evidence of the Secretary , Dep, trloncnt of lieav) 
lndu,rry (Ministry of Industry) Member,; sought clarifications on. the variou, J'Oint' from the 
respe ctive witnesses. 
• t' •• 
4~ ·nrc Ch:•innan directe d all the above wttnGs.'c~ 10 cothi dcr .the point ' raisccl by the 
Mcmtlcl'1i during the rnee tiog und to send un updated Jl\)lc o n the sanie at the cadic" for the 
Comm i !lee's perusaL 
A vcrl\atim re::onl O[ the CVH.knce was kept . 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.45 v.M 
• • • RektlCS to other matter. 
• 
• 
, 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Dep~rtment·Rclatcd Parliament<~ry Standing Corr.rmnee on Industry met at 
12.00 MOn on Wednesday the lsi July. 1998 in Room No. 139, First Aoor. Parliament 
House Anncxc, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shn Rlghavj.....Chainnan 
RAJY ,, SABHA 
2. Shri R:1jubhai A. Parm~r 
3. Dr Ranbir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Shri Nagmani 
6. Shri Gaya· Singh 
LOK SABEA 
7 Shri Mum Lall 
8. Shri Ramanand Singh 
9 Shri Annasaheb M.K. P:llil 
10 Shri N~dendla Bhaskar Rao 
11 Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
12. Shn Ouna Mcghe 
!3. Shrt Konijeti Rosaiah 
14. Shn Bijoy Kri~hna Handiquc 
IS. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
16. Shri Sha kuni Oloudbury 
17. Shri Malya!a Raj~iah 
18. Shri Prabhat Kuinar Sam3ntaray 
19. ProC. Jogcndra Kawade 
2. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Oc:puty Secrcwry 
Sbri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh. Comminee Officer 
3. There~ftcr. the 25th Report on Demands for Grants of Ministry of Jndustry was taken 
up for di.5cussion. There was unanimity among t.";e ::!~mbers on :~II but one point per1:tiniog 
to the qucstaon af iodised salt. Four Members ~amely Shri Koni)o:l Rc~!ah , Dr. Sh~ktcl 
Ahmad, Shri Dutta Mcghc and Prof. Jogcnclra KawMlc e)(pressed the ir dis<~greement on the 
inclusio11 of this point in the Report a~ t!le reccmmend3lior: thereof. They wanted the 
Committee to recommend to the effect th~t the sale o! iO<IIsed salt should be made 
compulsory throughout the country and 11 should be made available through Public 
Dastribution System :11 snb.sidised rate to the economically weaker secaion~ of the society. 
4. Each Report was ~doptcd by the Committee immediately after the discuss,on oo it was 
over. 
·•• • Relate:~ 10 nrhcr rn:mer 
17 
• 
,. 