PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STEEL 
(MINISTRY OF STEEL & MINES) 
(PRES,ENTED ON THE 9TH JULY, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 1998/ASADHA , 1920 (SAKA ) 
RS1478 ¥=#J. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
1. Shri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Karma Topden 
5: Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy 
10. Shri S:anjay Dalmia 
11. Slui Nagmani 
12. ,Shri Gaya Singh 
13;· Shri Bhagaban .Majhi 
14. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK ~BHf'\ 
15. Shri .Muni Lall 
16. Shri M. Srinivas 
17. Shri Vijay Shankar 
18-.' Shri Gyan Singh 
19. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
20. Shri Ramanand Singh 
21. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
22. Shri Jual Oram 
23. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
24. Sh'ri Punnulal Mohale 
25. Shr' Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
26. Shri Kallappa · Awade 
27. Shri· ·K.H. Muniyappa 
' 28. Shri' Dutta Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shrf Sunil Khan 
•33. Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. ShrP'Kirti Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. . Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Chou4hury 
38. Shri MaJyala Rajaiah 
· 39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakr~borty 
41. Shri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pratap C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom 'Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
*Nominated w.e.f. 09.06.98 •·ice Shri Moinul Ha~n 
. 

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT OF THE COMMITrEE 
I, the Chairman, Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty-third Report of the 
Committee. The Report is on the Demands for Grants for 1998-99 of the Department of 
Steel (Ministry of Steel and Mines). 
2. The Committee started examination of Department's demand s by seeking views of 
the representatives of Chambers of Commerce such asCII, FICCI and ASSOCHAM on the 
performance of the steel industry and the impact of the recent budget on the steel sector at 
its meeting held on the 16th June, 1998. The Committee also heard on the same day the 
views of representatives of Central trade unions in the same context. 
3. At its subsequent meeting held on the 23rd June, 1998, the Committee heard orul 
evidence of the Secretary, Department of Steel in connection with the Demands for Grants 
of the Department. 
4. The Committee adopted the Report at its sitting held on the 1st July, 1998. 
5. The total demand of Department as per Demand No. 78 for 1998-99 is as under:-
Plan ..._ 21.50 crore 
Non Plan 10.65 crore 
Total 32.15 crore 
6. Taking into account the documents and other materials made available to it and th~ 
oral evidence tendered before it by the representatives of Chambers of Commerce, trade 
unions and the Department of Steel, the Committee observed that the performance of steel 
industry in the recent past has not been satisfactory and that the domestic steel industry has 
been in doldrums for more than a year. 
The representatives of Chambers of Commerce like CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM and 
trade unions like CITU and INTUC apprised the Committee that the reasons for the dismal 
performance in the steel industry is due to slowdown in the economy , significant increase in 
input cost, increase in competitiveness in the global market, South-East Asian crisis, decline 
in sales-realisation, reduction of import duty on raw-materials and dumping of steel in India 
by the CIS countries. 
The development and growth of steel . sector is a pre-condition not only for "basic­
industrialisation" but indispensab le for rapid and balanced growth of industrial economy as 
whole. As a matter of fact, steel industry is the backbone of Indian economy as it not only 
provides materials for the "Super structure" in the industrial seCtor but also supplements 
tools and techniques to agriculture sector as well. 
In this background the Committee is of the opinion t!Iat Indian Steel Industry needs 
"strict introspection and prospective over-hauling." The Committee recommends that the 
Department or Steel should play a pro-active role to ensure harmonious nnd inte~r·ated gruwth 
or steel sector and act as a facilitator to remove all stumbling block coming on to tht: "a~ of 
growth of the Indian Steel Sector. 
7. During the course of oral evidence, it was brough : to the notice of the Committe~ 
that certain additional reliefs enumerated below should also be provided to steel sector so 
that recovery of the steel industry from recession becomes faster and l'asicr. 
(i) Exemption of Coking Coal (ash content less than 12 per cent), Non-Coking Coal (ash 
content less than 12 per cent), Metallurgical Coke (ash content less than 16 per cent), 
Ferro Nickel, Nickel Oxide Sinter, Charge Nickel, Moly Oxide; from the levy of 4 
per cent Special Additional Duty (SAD) since there is no indigenous availability. 
1 

(ii) The exemption of Special Additional Duty (SAD) to be extended also to DEPB 
scheme. 
(iii) Reduction of basic customs duty from 10 per cent to 5 per cent on Ferro Nickel, 
Nickel Oxide Sinter, Charge Nickel. 
(iv) Higher duty differential of minimum 10 per cent on seconds/defectives import as 
compared to that on prime grades to be made effective. 
(v) Reduction of excise duty on all iron and steel products from 15 per cent to 13 per 
cent. 
(vi) Reduction of GP/GC sheets, Excise Duty (for construction) from 15 per cent to 8 
per cent. 
(vii) Goods imported for trading purposes should not be exempted from 4 per cent SAD. 
(viii) SAD should not be applied on products for which duty is 5 per cent and below. 
(ix) MODV AT not to be restricted to 95 per cent as it penalizes honest tax payers and , 
therefore, should be credited 100 percent. 
(x) Tax holiday for seven years for new projects involving investment of Rs. 1000 crore 
and above for both public and private sectors. 
(xi) Infrastructure Bond should be made income tax free. 
(xii) Move towards VAT system. 
The Committee during the course of oral evidence of Secretary, Department of Steel, 
sought the opinion of the Department on the various suggestions mentioned above. The 
Department informed the Committee that in their pre-budget memorandum to the Ministry 
of Finance they had requested for the aforementioned concessions and have again taken up 
the matter with Finance Ministry. 
In order to help the steel sector to recover from recession the Committee, after careful 
examination of the suggestions, recommends ~at Special Additional Duty (SAD) should not be 
levied on raw-materials used for steel making and products for which duty is 5 per cent and 
below; Duty Entitlement Pass-Book (DEPB) should be exempted from SAD imposition of 4 per 
cent SAD on goods imported for trading pJJrposes; reduction of basic customs duty on Ferro 
Nickel, Nickel Oxide Sinter charge Nickel from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and suitable 
reduction in excise duty on all iron and steel products; import duty on seconds and defectives 
of Iron and Steel and waste and scrap of tinned iron and steel should be euhanced by ~ 0 per 
cent over and above the duty applicable on prime fmished steel items and MODV AT should 
not be restricted to 95 per cent and should be credited 100 per cent. . 
8. The Committee had interactions with the Department/SAIL representatives on the 
modernisation/revival schemes being undertaken in various steel plants and PSU's under its 
administrative control and found the Department wanting on several fronts . 
8.01. MODERNISATION OF STEEL PLANTS 
(A) Durgapur Steel Plant 
A Modernisation scheme to overcome the technological constraints of the plant and to 
make it economically viable was approved in principle by the Government in October, 1981. 
The Government approved the cost estimate of Rs.2667.56 crore In February, 1989 with the 
scheduled date of completion as 31st March, 1993. However, there was considerable delay in 
completing the work.. The total expenditure incurred till March 1998 is Rs. 4557.89 crore and 

work relating to OPP, Bolani is still pending. The Committee found the report of 
Comptroller anp Auditor General of India for the year ended March 1997 Union 
Government (Commercial) No. 4 of 1998 "Modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant" not only 
revealing but also distressing. 
The Committee while expressing its anguish over the undue delay in clearing the 
project, the time and cost over-run and the performance of the plant after modernisa.ion 
recommends that Department of Steel should henceforth adopt a ''time bound programme" in 
respect of any future modernisation scheme and stick to the time schedule and in case of delay 
fix the responsibility so that the public money spent on such projects do not go unaccounted 
for. The Committee also recommends that the Department should conduct an enquir y 
regarding the undesirable delay for the modernisation of Durgapur Steel Plant ~hich caused 
extra financial burden of thousands of crore of Rupees. 
(B) Rourkela Steel Plant 
Government of India sanctioned in October, 1989 the modernisation of Rourkela Steel 
Plant at an estimated cost of Rs. 2461 crore. Subsequently on 12.5.92 the Government 
further approved the revised cost estimate of Rs. 3954 crore with a completion schedule of 
December, 1995. The anticipated cost of modernisation is now estimated at Rs. 5112 crore. 
The Committee hopes that the modernisation of Rourkela Steel Plant should be as per the 
approved plan/programme. 
(C) Bokaro Steel ·Plant 
The BSL modernisation stage-! was sanctioned by Government on 23.7.1993 at a cost of 
Rs. 1625.79 crore. The Government has further sanctioned the Revised Cost of the project 
on 25.8.1994 at Rs. 1792.90 crore. The cost of the project is now being anticipated at 
Rs. 2235.45 crore . 
As the modernisation process is not yet complete in the two steel plants the Com,mittee 
was concerned for the inordinate delay resulting in cost escalation of the projects . The 
Performance Budget of the Ministry is silent about the delay aspect of the two projects. The 
Committee recommends that henceforth in such cases when there is time· and cost over-run, 
the Performance Budget should give cogent reasons for the delay in order to obviate the 
apprehensions of financial irregularity. 
Committee's observation is that the excess expenditure now being made in the case of 
modernisation of the Rourkela and Bokaro Steel Plants coqld have been utilised elsewhere 
in the steel industry more effectively; if the modernisatio~ programme could have been 
completed in time . 
(D) Bhilai Steel Plant 
Although in respect of this plant there is no modernisation programme, two major 
schemes are under execution at Bhilai Steel Plant e.g. a new Sinter Plant-Ill and Expansion 
of Oxygen Plant-H. The Committee while expressing its satisfaction over the timely 
completion of the Expansion of· Oxygen Plant-II, recommends that the other scheme i.e. 
setting of new Sinter Plant-III should be ~ompleted within the stipulated tiiue i.e. in March; 
1999, in order to avoid any further cost escalation. 

8.02. REVIVAL OF STEEL PLANTIPSUS 
(A) Indian Iron and Steel Company (liSCO) 
Resource constraint has been cited as the main reason for the Government and the 
SAIL not to take an investment decision with regard to the modernisation of the plant. The 
Committee was apprised that Government of India directed SAIL to explore the possibility 
of revivaVmodernisation of liSCO through joint venture arrangements subject to 
SAIL continuing to retain 51% share holding in the joint venture. Initially only 
Ws Tiazhpromexport (TPE) of Russia and Ws. Mitsui & Co. of Japan submitted their 
offer. Mitsui subsequently withdrew as it was not interested to participate in the equity of 
liSCO. The only offer left with SAIL is TPE's offer. TPE's offer for participati on in equity 
depends on approval of the Government of Russia for utilisation of the Rupee-Rouble Debt 
Funds in Escrow account. In the absence of inter-governmental agreements on this issue, 
this proposal is not likely to fructify. In the circumstances the only available alternative for 
revival of liSCO by SAIJ,.. is through Steel Development Fund (SDF) route in two parts 
namely write off of liSCO's accumulated loss and other liabmties and requirement of funds 
to the tune of Rs. 2107 crore. The Committee was informed that revival through the SDF 
route is under the consideration of the Government. 
The need to revive the Steel Plant was felt way back in 1994. Since then the Committee 
has been recommending for quick action on the part of the- Government in this regard and 
impressing on them that any further delay may take the plant to a point of no return . As the 
Government is not inclin ed to extend any Budgetary Support to SAIL for this purpose, the 
Committee recommends that the Government should take an early decision with regard to 
nsco and any further delay will not only cause hardship but also will have serious financial 
implications. 
(B) Rashtriya lspat N(&am Limited (RINL) 
The Committee expressed its concern over the fact that Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant 
(VSP) , the first shore based integrated steel plant set up in the country was almost at the 
door steps of BIFR and had a narrow escape because of timely intervention by Government. 
The plant has been given to submit its "turnaround strategy" within three months. The 
Committee recommends the RINL should start work in right · earnest to complete its task 
within the time frame . It should leave no stone unturned to save the steel plant from 
becoming sick. The Department of Steel should monitor the activity and should have no 
excuse if things go wrong. 
(C) Sponge Iron. India Limited (SOL) 
Sponge iron is a metallic product and contains a large percentage of metallic iron. This 
is a substitute of steel melting scrap. The indigenous availability of metal scrap is low and 
large quantity have to be imported in order to meet indigenous demands. The SilL was set 
up in 1980 for producing sponge iron from lump iron-ore and 100% non coking coal. The 
company made porfit upto 1992-93. In order to make the company viable on a sustainable 
basis , a turnaround proposal submitted by the Company is un~er consideration of 
Government. 
Keeping in view the utility of spoace iroa aad die performance record of the SilL the 
Committee recommeods that the Go•er~MMDt sboald dear tamarouod proposal submitted by 
~~~~~aad~~~~~~~~~~~~tbeMb 
1998-99. 

·, 
(D) Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL) 
Incorporated in 1964, HSCL has the expertise for undertaking complete construction of 
modern steel plant as also projects outside steel sector. The Committee was informed that 
HSCL is a chronically sick company and has been consistently making loss over the years . 
. As on 31.3.98 the accumulated loss of the comp3ny stood at about Rs. 1031.41 crore. 
Sickness of the company is attributed to presence of excessive manpower . The Performance 
Budget of the Department states that due to various historical reasons beyond the control of 
the company, the total manpower strength of the company rose from a meagre figure of 95 
numbers in 1965 to an all time high of 26,537 numbers in 1978-79. It also mentions that 
efforts made by the company from time to time over the last 20 years for transfer/absorption 
of its excess manpower in any other PSU did not materialize due to various factors beyond 
the control of the company. At the same time the Department has found the overall 
performance of HSCL encouraging despite all odds because the company has been securing 
orders from Steel Plant as well as from outside the steel sector. With this background 
COmmittee's observation about HSCL is "then whose fault is it any way?" The Committee is 
of the opinion that the Performance Budget should have given the details of the 
performance of the Company in the preceding years and the role of the management vis-a­
vis its performance . If the Department thinks that after prun ing of excessive manpower 
strength by implementation of VRS (a policy to which every Department/Ministry is taking 
recourse to as a short cut to successfully revive any sick PSU under its control) and with a 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 20.98 crore in 1998-99 coupled with the plan outlay of Rs. 5 
crore for HSCL in each fmancial year during the 9th Five Year Plan, it can make the 
Company viable, the Committee can only wish success to the Department in its endeavour. 
At the same time Committee recommends that the management of company should come out 
of slumberness aocf strive to obtain maximum work order for the company in the post 
liberalisation era when private entrepreneurs have entered steel sector and are in the process 
of establishing new plants. The rationalisation of manpower in the Company should take place 
keeping in view the work order the Company bas in band . 
(E) Bharat Refractories Limited (BRL) 
BRL was a sick company and was referred to BIFR: BIFR approved a turnaround 
package and in spite of reliefs granted by the Government the company has not been able to 
revive. The reasons for its non-revival has· been identified as reces.-;ion in steel sector, lack of 
working capital and low order situation. The Committee is of the opinion that in the event of 
steel sector emerging out of recession, if the company is able to get high supply order and 
there is positive indication to the effect that the Company can revive; it may be aiJowed to 
' operate or else the Government should have the option to order for the winding up of the 
company. The budgetary support of Rs. 8.50 crore, the Committee is of the view, should be 
the "Last-ditch-support" for survival and the approach should be "now or nevern. 
(F) ,Bird Group of Companises 
This Group comprises of eight companies of which only foUT namely Orissa Minerals 
D~velopment Co. Ltd. (OMDC), Bisra Stone Lime Co. Ltd. (BSLC), Karanpura 
Development Co. Ltd. (KDCL) and Scott & Saxby Ltd. (SSL) are operationally active. In 
the Demands for Grants (1998-99) a provision of Rs.6.00 crore (Budgetary Support Rs. 4.00 
crore and IEBR Rs. 2.00 crore) has been kept . The Commi-ttee was informed that ·out of 
these four companies OMDC has reasonable prospects of turning into a net profit making 
company. Karanpura Development Co. Ltd (KDCL) and Scott & Saxby Ltd. (SSL) cannot 
aspire to be profitable because of their accumulated losses and small scale operation. The 

Fourth company, Bisra Stone Lime Co. Ltd. (BSLC) which is engaged in mining and sale of 
limestone and dolomite can not be self sustaining on the strength of its operations. 
The Committee recommends that the Development of Steel should objectively assess the 
sustainability of these companies and at the same time explore the possibilities of NMDC 
taking over the activities of Bisra Stone Lime Co. Ltd. (BSLC). In case it finds that it is not 
economically viable to revive these companies, may initiate steps for their winding up. 
9. SETIING UP OF GALVANISING COMPLEX IN N.E. REGION 
For the development ·Of the N .E. Region and to cater to the demands of corrugated and 
plain galvanised sheets in the Region, the Committee was happy to note that Government 
has approved in January, 1997 for setting up of Galvanising Complex in Assam at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 4285 crore with a completion schedule of 24 months. The Committee 
expresses its concern for the undue delay in sanction for the setting up of the complex 
although it was agreed in principle to have a complex in Jarruary 1997. However, keeping in 
view the performance of the Department in matters of implementation and execution of 
projects and schemes, the Committee recommends that sanction for the setting up of the 
Galvanising Comple~ should be accorded and the execution should also be done within the 
schedule time frame of 24 months as originally enviSaged. 
10. After institution-wise analysis some other matter relating to this Department 
deserves mention. 
(A) Coking coal is an indispensable ingredient for Steel Industry and indigenously it is 
produced by BCCL and toal India Ltd. The Committee was informed that the requirement 
of SAIL alone for this is about 13 million tonnes and domestic supply is only about 7 to 7.5 
million tonnes. As such there is a short fall of 5.5 to 6 million tonnes of coking coal. As a 
result steel industry has to import the coal of required quality i.e. coking coal containing 
around 12 per cent ash. · 
In this background, the· Committee recommends that, in order to ensure the demand of 
requisite quality of coking coal to steel industry and to .reduce the dependence on import of 
coal, the Department of Steel in co-operation with the Mio~1ry of Coal should undertake 
Mega Projects of exploratory slid developmental nature (the total resources of Indian Coal as 
on 1.1.98 bas been assessed around 206 billion tonnes by Geological Survey of India) . 
''Massive Surveying Action Plan" for high quality coal, containing low ash contents, should be 
taken, expeditiously. More washeri~, with innovated and modernised tools and techniques, 
should be established and ~ressed into service to reduce the ash-content. 
The Committee further recommends that the Planning Commission, the Department of 
Steel and Ministry of Coal must prepare "a time-bound-programme" to start, expeditiously, 
indigenous production of coal to meet· the requirement of steel sector. 
To reduce the consumption of coking coal in production of steel to remain cost 
competitive in the liberalised scenario, the Committee was informed certain measures like, 
utilization of smaller fractions of coke; maximising the use of sinter in Blast Furnace; 
increasing hot Blast Temperature and Introduction of Coal Dust Injection respectively are 
being taken/proposed to be taken. The Committee is of the opinion that if the 
aforementioned measures can minimise the import of coking coal, the Department of Steel 
should act in this direction without further delay. -
(B) The Committee was informed besides the short fall in demand and supply the 
import of coking coal is necessitated due to the~ high ash content in indigenously available 

• coking coat Even after washing the ash content is 17 to 18 per cent . The Committee was 
also informed that there is no washery in India to make our coal below 12 per cent ash 
content . 
The development and operation of coal washeries other than those for which D epartment 
of Steel is responsible is the subject matter of concern of Ministry of Coal. The Committee 
recommend s that the Department of Steel should persistently take up the matt er with Min istry 
of Coal for the Supply of low ash content coking coal and impress upon them that coking coal 
with high a sh c ontent is injurious to the Steel plants . At the same time the Departm ent of 
Steel cannot abdicate itself from the responsibility of setting up of washeri es. The failure on 
the part of Department of Steel to set up washeries is a matter of serious concern. The 
reasons for not setting up washeries is best known to· the Department. If setting up of 
washeries can be an alterna tive to avoid import of coal anct 1n the long run beneficial to the 
steel industry , the Departmen t sbould not feel hesitated to ask for budgetary suppo rt. 
(C) Another prob lem faced b y ·the Steel industry is dumpin g o f stee l by CIS coun tries . 
Japan and Korea due to devaluat ion of their currencies are also dumping s teel all over the 
world. While expressi ng its concern over the dumping of Steel in I ndia the Committee 
recommends that the Depart ment of Steel whose one of the m ajor functions is co-ordination of 
the growth of Iron and Steel Industry both in Public and Private Sectors, should not only p lay 
an effective role as a co-ordinato r but also take up the matter with the Minist ry of Comme rce 
for anti-dumping measures . 
(D) Another point for which the Committee has serious concern is the R&D activities . 
Committee was informe d t hat the world average for R&D investment in the integrated steel 
industrie s is of the order of 2.5 per cent. While investment in R&D activity by SAIL is of 
the order of 5 per cent, the new steel plants have yet to make investment on R&D. The 
Committee , therefore, recommends that Department of Steel should lay more emphasis on 
R&D activity and such activity should be result oriented and beneficial to the Steel plants and 
funds earmarked for the purpose in 9th Plan should be utilised properly. 
11. The Committee feels that, in the light of the observation and recommendation s in this 
Report the Department of Steel should activate itself to meet the challenges ahead of it and 
also feel encouraged to approach the Ministry of Finance for additiona! duty concession and 
other finance rel ated matter . · 
NEW DELHI; 
July 1, 1998 
RAGHAVJI, 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committ ee on Industry. 

ANNEXURE 
(MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE) 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
10.00 A .M . on Tuesday , the 16th June , 1998 in Room No. 139, First Floor , Parliament 
House Annexe , New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Shri V.N. Gadgil 
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
7. Shri C.O. Poulose 
8. Shri Nagmani 
9. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
10. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
11. Shri Muni Lal 
12. Shri Ramanand Singh 
13. Sbri Annasabeb M.K. Patil 
14. Sbri Anand Ratna Maurya 
15. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
16. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Konijeti Rotaiah 
18. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
•zo. Shri Ananda Pathak 
21. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
22. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
23. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
24. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Du Gupta , Deputy Secretary 
Shri P.C . Paikray , Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives or Confederation or Indian Industry (Cm 
1. Shri K.A.P. Singh Chairman , Steel Industry 
Division Direct or 
(Commercial SAIL) 

2. Dr. S.K. Gupta, Vice-Chairman, Jindal 
Vijaynagar Steel Ltd. 
3. Shri S. Banerjee, Asstt. Gen . Manager, SAIL 
4. Shri S. Sen, Dy. Director-General 
5. Shri Dilip Chenoy, · Director 
6. Shri Tapas Datta , Dy .. r.P.irff1rr ·~1 0 . .. 
7. Shri Deepak Roy, Director 
8. Shri Rajesh Gupta , Managing Director, Lloyds Steel 
9. Shri V.S. Bapna , - Oi~eqqJ:. (spat Industries 
Representatives of Fec:teration of . 1n4.~~P , ~~am~~ ~ .~Pn.m~e·~ :8-nd Industry (FICCI) 
1. Shri Yogendra Kumar Modi, ·Chairman, Banking · and 
Finance Committee' 
2. Shri Y.P. Srivastava , Dy. Secretary-General 
Representative of the Associated Chambers of . Commerce and lndustt:Y of ~ndia 
(ASSOCHAM) 
1. Dr. T.P. Qhat, Advisor 
Representatives of Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) 
1. Dr. M.K. Pandhe , General SecreUJrY 
2. Shri W.R. Varada Rajan, Secretary · 
Representatives of Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
1. Shri Chandidas Sinha, . Secretary 
2. Shri S.L. Pas5ey, · General Secretary 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in respect of 
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines. Members 
sought clarification from the witnesses on various points. The Chairman directed the 
witnesses to consider the points raised by the Members during the meeting and send an 
updated-note on the same at the earliest for Committee's perusal. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 P.M. to meet ~g~ji(at 10.00 A .M. on Wednesd ay, 
the 17th June , 1998 at the same venue. ... 
. 1. : 

FIFTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 23rd June, 1998 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. · 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
PRESENT 
Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABIIA·· 
Shri Govindrao Adik 
Shri Maurice Kujur 
Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
Dr. Ranbir Singh 
Shri C.O. Poulose 
Shri Nagmani 
Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
LOK SABRA 
Shri Muni Lall 
Shri M. Srinivas 
Shri Ramanand Singh 
Shri Annasaheb M. K. Patil 
Shri Jual Oram 
Shri Anand Ratna Maurya. 
Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
Shri Kallappa Awade 
Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
Shri Sunil Khan 
Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
Malyala Rajaiah 
Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 

WITNESSES 
Repraeatativa of Department of Steel (Ministry of Steel aDd Mines) 
· 1. Shri Ashok Basu, 
2. Shri A .H. Jung , 
3. Shri Naresh Narad, 
4!.: Shri S. Manoharan, 
5. ~ K.S. Rajendra Kumar , 
6. Shri S.S. Saba , 
7. Shri A .K. Thakur, 
8. Shri B. Malik 
Public UaclertakiDp 
1. Shri Arvind Pande , 
2. Shri R.K. Gupta, 
3. Dr. M. Mukhopadhyay , 
4. Shri A.K . Mukherjee, 
5. Shri P.K. Gupta, 
6. Shri K.L. Luthra, 
7. Dr. B.N. Singh, 
8. Shri H.S. Chhatwal, 
9. Shri M. Usman, 
• • 
Secretary 
AS & FA 
Joint Secretary 
Joint Secretary 
Joint Secretary 
I.A. 
Director 
Director 
Otairman , SAU... 
Addl. Diro:::tor 
(Finance) SAIL 
CMD, BRL 
CMD, HSCL 
Director (Fin.) HSCL 
CMD, Bird Group 
CMD, IUNL 
DGM,RINL 
Sr. Dy. Director 
.. 
2. The Committee heard oral evidence of Secretary, Department of Steel (Ministry of 
Steel and Mines) alongwith the representatives of different PSUs in respect of Demands for 
Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Steel. During the course of oral evidence membel'$ 
sought clarifications from the witnesses on various points. 
3. • • • 
4. The Otairman directed ·all the above witnesses to consider the points raised by the 
Members during the meeting and to send an updated note on tbe same at the earliest for the 
Committee's perusal . 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept . 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.45 P.M. 
•• *Relates to other mattet. 

SIXTH MEETING 
The Departlnent-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 
12 .... noon on Wednesday, the 1st July, 1998 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavjt-CMirmmr 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Sbri Rajubhai A. 'Parniar .. 
3. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Shri Nagmani 
6. Shri Gaya Singh 
WKSABBA 
7. Sbri Muni Lall 
8. Sbri Ramanand Singh 
9. Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil 
10. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
11. Shri K.H . Muniyappa 
12. Shri Dutta · Meghe 
13. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
14. Sbri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
15. Dr. Sbakeel Ahmad 
16. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
17. . Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
18. Shri · Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
19. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Deputy Secretary 
Sbri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary . 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Committee decided to consider the draft Reports para-wise and 
first, took up the 23rd Report on the Demands for Grants of Department of Steel for 
discussion. Some suggestions/views · of the members raised during the discussion, were 
unanimously incorporated in the body of the Report. • • • 
3. • • 
4. ·Each Report was adopted by the Committee immediately after the discussion on it 
was over. 
5. The Committee then decided to present all the three Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on Wednesday, the 8th July, 1998. For this, the Chairman nominated the · 
•••Relates to.<_!ther matter . 

following Members .to present the Report as shown against their names: 
(1) Nomination of Members for the_ presentation of Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
The Chairman, Committee on Industry will present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
alongwith the following Members: , 
(i) Dr. Ranbir Singh To present 23rd Report 
(ii) Shri C.O. Poulose To. present 24th. ~~port 
(iii) Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar To present 25th R~po.rt 
(2) Nomination of Members for the presentation of Reports tb the Lok Sabha 
(i) Shri K.H . Muniyappa } To present 23rd Report 
(ii) Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
(iii) Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil } To prese·nti4th Report · 
(iv) Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
(v) Shri Konijeti Rosaiah } To prescrnt 25th ~eport 
(vi) Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. 