  
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
         RAJYA SABHA                  
                                                       
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
of 
HOTEL CORPORATION of INDIA LIMITED   
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA on 6th December, 2012) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA on 6th December, 2012) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (SAKA) 
237

  
     
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
  
  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
 
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING  
of 
HOTEL CORPORATION of INDIA LIMITED   
 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
____________________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA on 6th December, 2012) 
   (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA on 6th December, 2012) 
  
  
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI. 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………(i)  
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
 
3. R E P O R T             
 
 
 
 4.     MINUTES ………………………………………………………………………………. 
                  
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31st August , 2011) 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman 
 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3.    Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
5.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
6.   Shri Srinjoy Bose 
7.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
8.   Dr. Vijay Mallya 
9.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
10.  Shri Basawaraj Patil 
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
13. Shri Sabbam Hari 
14. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan 
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
17. Smt. Putul Kumari 
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
19. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod  
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
21. Shri Somen Mitra 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Kishn  V. Patel  
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware  
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede 
SECRETARIAT
 
1. Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 (i) 
 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Thirty –Seventh Report on the Revival an d Restructuring of Hotel Corporation of 
India Ltd. pertaining to Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
 
2. The Committee held detailed discu ssion with the Management of Hotel 
Corporation of India Ltd and received inputs for this Report.   
 
 
3. I, thank the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of Public Enterprises for 
furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 30
th August, 2012 considered and adopted 
the report. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairman                              
                          Department -related Parliamentary 
                                                                                       Standing Committee   on   Industry 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
August, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
REPORT  
 
 The hospitality sector in India of which the hotel industry is a crucial component 
is growing and expanding with the growth a nd expansion of tourism, travel industry and 
above all economy. It is in this context that the Committee as part of its exercise to study 
the MOU performance of the public sector enterprises decided to apply its mind to 
analyze the MOU performance of the Hotel Corporation of India Limited (HCIL). 
2. The narrative of the report is of course ba sed on the threadbare and deep analysis 
of the material supplied to the Committee and the interactions with the officials of the Air 
India and HCIL. But the Committee’s understa ting went beyond this academic exercise 
and actually flowed from  the first hand experience of its Members  staying in the 
Centaur Hotel, Sri Nagar, owned  by the HCIL, and understanding the problems and 
challenges which the Hotel and its management and employees confronted. 
3. The genesis of the HCIL is traced to July 8, 1971 when it was set up by the Air 
India as a public limited company under the Companies Act, 1956. The world over, the 
air lines during that time had developed the tradition and practice of entering into the 
hotel industry. It had become a dominant intern ational practice for the air lines to expand 
their frontier by stepping into the hospitali ty sector. The Air I ndia was no exception to 
that prevailing trend. Being the national carri er with monopoly in the aviation sector it 
ventured into the hotel industry with the twin objectives of promoting tourism and 
catering. The motive force was to serve the passengers by providing better products and 
services not only at the international air ports but also at other places of tourist interest. 

  
4. Accordingly two hotels bearing the co mmon brand name of Centaur and two 
Flight Kitchens bearing the brand name of Chefair were set up by the HCI. While hotels 
are located in Delhi and Sri Nagar, the Flight Kitchens are situated in Mumbai and Delhi. 
As on March 2012 the total number of employees in the rolls of the Corporation stood at 
1658 out of which 1340 fall into the permanent category and 318 belong to 
temporary/contractual/casualcategory.  
Centaur Hotel, Delhi: 
5. The establishment and functioning of the Ce ntaur Hotel, Delhi, dates back to 1982 
when the Asian Games were organised in th e city. It has got 376 rooms and is located 
close to the Indira Gandhi International Ai r Port. The Committee is given to understand 
that the Hotel could never utilise its full pot ential in spite of so many positive factors 
which include its advantageous location clos e to a major air port of our country. The 
major reason cited for the failure of the Hote l to attract business is  lack of renovation. It 
is rather sad that the capacity utilisation of the Hotel is only 64 per cent. It is worth 
reproducing from the brief submitted by the HC I to the Committee. It states "In the 
absence of proper renovation of  the guest rooms, restaurant s, kitchen and public areas, 
the Hotel could not attract business and is  presently working on approximately 64 per 
cent of its capacity." The underutilization of  the capacity is reflected in poor MOU 
performance of the HCI.  
6. One of the defining features of the hos pitality sector, part icularly the hotel 
industry is renewal and creativity on a continuous basis. Without adopting measures to  
 

  
renew and renovate any hotel in the buoyant hosp itality sector is bound to be left behind 
and might even perish. Since the organi sation of the Asian Games in 1982 and the 
liberalization of Indian economy later, the prospects of tourism and hotel industry got 
brightened and the demand pattern for hotel  rooms in all segments of hotel chain 
witnessed significant rise. It is rather sad to note that when the demand for hotels in India 
was rising the business of the Centaur Hotel in Delhi was declining due to lack of 
renovation. With its building and facilities having not undergone any serious renovation 
and upgradation, it is not surprising that th e hotel is no more in reckoning in the 
hospitality sector and, theref ore, not a preferred destina tion for the valued customers 
neither from within India nor from abroad.  It is appropriately obs erved that "ITDC and 
HCI boast of some of the major locations in major cities but are relatively under 
performers, as compared with their private sector counter parts." 
7. However, the officials of the HCI presented before the Committee  hopeful 
picture of the Hotel by referri ng to the outcome budget 2012-13 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation where Rs.11 crores has been a llocated for renovation of the hotel and 
upgradation of equipments. The brief submitted to the Committee also mentions that 
there is hope and expectation that the pa rent company the Air India would provide 
business support to the hotel. The brief supplie d to the Committee also states that the  
Centaur Hotel, Delhi, “…has also come into the expansion plan of Terminal-3” which, it 
is hoped, would benefit the Hotel. Howeve r, the Committee while taking note of such 
hopeful signs observes that no final decision has been taken in this regard.  
8. While analyzing the high expectation of the Centaur Hotel, Delhi, to get business 
from the Air India the Committee is mindful of  the fact that the parent body is itself in 

  
red and even not signing the MOU even after the direction of the Cabinet Secretary to do 
so. There is a plan being drawn up to provide  100 rooms in the Centaur Hotel, Delhi for 
use by Air India for the operation of their back offices.  The Committee was informed 
that the implementation of this plan “… will  benefit both the organi zations in terms of 
Air India acquiring space at a lower rent near the airport and the Hotel getting round the 
year business”.   
9. The Committee notes that the Government  of India has decided to pump in Rs.20, 
000 crores to revive Air India.  It generate s hope that some funds  from the corpus of 
money released by the Government for the national carrier might be allocated for the HCI 
for boosting up its financial hea lth and restoring the commerci al viability of the hotels 
which are being operated by the HCI. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends for substantial allocation of resources made available to the Air India 
for making the units working under the HCI more financially viable and sound. The 
amount so released must be in addition to Rs. 11 crore earmarked in the outcome 
budget for renovation and upgradation of the Centaur Hotel, Delhi.  
Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar: 
10. The hotel with 249 rooms commenced its operations in 1984 a nd is located not 
only in the prime land but also in the picturesque surroundings of Dal lake with majestic 
hills in the horizon providing a rare and scenic backdrop. The land and magnificent 
surroundings adds immense inta ngible value to the hotel and it would be a highly 
preferred destination for any tourist visiting Kashmir which is justly described as the 
paradise on earth. In fact, it would be a dream for any tourist to stay is such a 
surrounding. The Committee stayed in this hotel and had understood the problems not 

  
just theoretically but practically by experiencing the difficulties an d facing the odds with 
some degree of empathy and understanding.  The rooms are spacious and the gadgets 
fixed there are so archaic and faulty that  no guest would decide to spend money for 
availing of such substandard facilities. It is  evident from the average occupancy of the 
hotel which stands at 108 rooms per day.  
11. In peeping into its history the Co mmittee found that the hotel, after its 
establishment in 1984,  did not get any busine ss worth the name as the state of Jammu 
and Kashmir faced turmoil and disturbance for almost two decades arising out of 
terrorism and terrorist related violence. It was informed that no steps were taken to 
renovate the hotel due to such intractable pr oblems. In face of a hopeless situation of 
lawlessness the hotel sustained itself w ith meager business provided by certain 
Government agencies.   
12. Taking into account the low business turn out, the Government of India 
contemplated to hand over the property to the State Government. However, a final call on 
this matter is yet to be made. Notwithstanding the organizational issues, there appears to 
be a positive aspect for CLVH, Srinagar, as Kashmir valley has once again begun to 
attract tourists from across the world as tensions seems to have alleviated. Timely up-
gradation of the facilities by utilizing Rs.5crore which has b een allocated in the outcome 
budget of the Ministry for  the year 2012-13 would definitely help the hotel to cash in on 
this spurt in tourism and shore up its fortune. The Committee notes that the HCI is 
confident that the hotel would be able to manage itself financially and make profit by 
utilizing the amount earmarked in the outcome budget.  
 

  
13. However, the hopeful note of the HCI and its positive feeling of turning around 
the Centaur Hotel in Sri Nagar has to be appr eciated in the context of certain hard facts 
vis-à-vis the maintenance of the hotel rooms. The average expenditure on maintenance of 
hotel room per day is Rs53/ per day. The av erage income per room per day is Rs.2823/ 
per day. Incidentally 55 rooms are occupied by the office of the Accountant General with 
per day room rent of Rs.1200.  
 
14. During the interactions with the Memb ers of the Committee it was informed by 
the hotel officials that the average age of th e employees of the Centaur Hotel, Srinagar, 
ranges from 52 to 54 years. With such high age profile of the staff th e hotel is not in a 
position to put up a good show which can be done by a smart set of employees ready to 
put the best foot forward. The non-recruitmen t of the staff for several decades due to 
persistence of disturbance in the State has proved to be a drag on the future progress of 
the hotel. It is sad that no effort has been taken to place a proper plan  to recruit young 
people to manage the affairs of the hotel.  
 
15. The Committee reiterates that more f unds out of the corpus earmarked for 
the Air India may be used for renovation and upgradation of the facilities of the 
Centaur Hotel in Sri Nagar.  
 
16. The Committee also came to know that many of the rooms of the hotel in Sri 
Nagar have been occupied by the security forces and other officials. In the changed 
scenario marked by improved law and order si tuation and greater fl ow of tourists to 
Jammu and Kashmir, it is important to make a ll the rooms available to the tourists. In the 
peak tourist season it is almost impossible to  get a room in the Kashmir valley. It is 

  
against this backdrop that urgent measures must be taken to vacate the rooms occupied by 
the security officials so as to   make them available rising number of tourists.  
 
17. The Committee notes that on  earlier years th e money allocated to the hotels run 
by the HCI was not fully utilized. For instance out of the Rs.15 crores allocated to each of 
the hotels located in Delhi and Kashmir fo r the year 2011-11 and 2011-12 only slightly 
more than 10 per cent were utilized. It is rather shocking that money allocated are not 
being fully utilized by HCI which is defici ent in cash and because of which its hotel 
infrastructure is much below the bench mark seen in the expanding hospitality  sector.  
 
18. Earlier it has been mentioned that th e HCIL apart from operating two Centaur 
Hotels is engaged in running two flight kitchens known as Chefair each one of which is 
located in Mumbai and Delhi.     
 
19. Chefair Flight Catering Delhi: Commissi oned in 1986 its capaci ty utilization is 
only 22 per cent.  This pathetic performance of the unit is attributed to lack of renovation 
of its kitchen infrastructure.  Initially th e capacity utilization ranged from 35 to 40 per 
cent due to depreciation and normal wear an d tear of the equipments installed.  The 
Committee takes note of the fact that rupees  six crores have been allocated in the 
outcome budget 2012-13 of the Ministry for renovation and restoratio n of the facilities 
available for flight kitchen.   
 
20. Chefair Flight Catering Mumbai: The unit which started functioning in 1986 is 
able to utilize 32 per cent of its installe d capacity.  The same problem of lack of 
renovation which plagued the Centaur Hotels in the Chefair Flight Catering Delhi is 
plaguing the Chefair Flight  Catering Mumbai.  Its problems have been further 

  
compounded because of the bifurcation of the catering contract by the Air India.  As a 
result, this unit only caters to a few flight s which is far below the target.  The Committee 
was informed that the area where the Chef air unit of Mumbai was operating was taken 
away for expanding the airport.  As a result , the Chefair was shifted and relocated.  The 
Committee understood that the HCI is insisting for a fully deve loped infrastructure in the 
vicinity of the airport to run the flight kitc hen.  The Committee takes note of the fact that 
work for this purpose is in progress.  The Committee also takes note of the fact that 
rupees three crore has been allocated in the outcome Budget for the year 2012-13 of the 
Ministry for the renovation of the flight kitchen in Mumbai.  The HCI maintains that with 
the new infrastructure to be made available to the flight kitchen in Mumbai and with the 
new budgetary provision for its renovation a nd upgradation the flight  kitchen would get 
adequate business not only from Air India but also from other airlines.  The turn around 
plan proposals for the 12
th Plan period states that Chefai r Delhi and Chefair Mumbai are 
expected to commence operations of Air India lounges at Terminal 3 Delhi (both 
domestic and internatio nal) and Air India Maharaja Lounge  at Terminal 2C at Mumbai 
respectively to fulfill the requirements of Air India.   
 
21. Earlier the capacity utilizat ion of both the flight kitc hens in Delhi and Mumbai 
have been discussed.  It may be reiterated that while the Chefair Delhi is operating with 
22 per cent of the installed capacity the Chef air Mumbai is operating with only 32 per 
cent.  When the Committee wanted to know  how many meals per day are being supplied 
to Air India by Chefair of Delhi and Mumbai  it was informed that only 4300 meals are 
supplied as against the requirement of 23000 meals (13000 meals from Delhi and 10000 
meals from Mumbai per day).   
 

  
22. The Committee notes that the HCIL did not  take any measure for renovation of its 
hotel infrastructure and flight  kitchens due to paucity of funds.  Such gross neglect for 
renewal and restoration of the facilities at its disposal has caused  serious problems at a 
time when the hotel and hospitality sector is  expanding in geometric proportions.  When 
tourism sector is getting renewed attention due to its vast potential and when  the 
Government is launching a campaign called ‘Ati thi Devo Bhavah’ to attract both foreign 
and domestic tourists to visit different parts of our country, it is important for the HCIL to 
be part of this campaign and build up its cap acity by constantly renova ting its facilities.  
As stated earlier, the Committee would like to  see the Air India, the parent body of the 
HCIL, take measures so that at least some por tion of amount is released for its revival is 
utilized for HCIL. It will help the HCIL  to improve its MoU performance. The 
Committee recommends that this amount must  be at least Rs.100 crore which would be 
exclusive of Rs. 25crores already earmarked in the outcome budgets as mentioned in the 
earlier paragraphs. The involvement, dedi cation and commitment of the employees, 
management and the government are fundame ntal perquisites for the maintenance, 
revival and success of any PSE like Centaur Hotel, Srinagar.  No tangible result would be 
achieved by pumping more money unless the employees and management of the Hotel do 
not qualitatively improve their performance. In addition to the monetary or budgetary 
support there must be innovative and creative planning to revamp the infrastructure of the 
hotels and flight kitchens unde r the HCL and refurbish their image for attracting tourists 
and passengers to its quality products and services.       
  
 
  

  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-AT A 
GLANCE 
 
   The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmends for substantial allocation 
of resources made available to the Air India for making the units working under the 
HCI more financially viable and sound. The am ount so released must be in addition 
to Rs. 11 crore earmarked in the outcome budget for renovation and upgradation of 
the Centaur Hotel, Delhi.  
(Para 9) 
 The Committee reiterates that more f unds out of the corpus earmarked for 
the Air India may be used for renovation and upgradation of the facilities of the 
Centaur Hotel in Sri Nagar.  
(Para 15.) 
 
************* 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Minutes 
CONFIDENTIAL  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
XXI 
 
Twenty-first Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M on Thursday, the 30 th August, 2012 in Room 
No 120, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
  
  Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
1.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor 
2.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel  
3.  Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
4.  Shri Basawaraj Patil 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
5. Shri Sabbam Hari 
6. Smt. Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.     Smt. Putul Kumari 
9.     Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
10.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
11.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
12.   Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
13.   Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa 
14.   Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director 
 
Contd/…..2 

  
 
-2- 
 At the outset, the Chairman of the Co mmittee welcomed the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 237 th report of the 
Committee on Revival & Restruct uring of the Hotel Corporat ion of India Ltd pertaining 
to the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
 
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up th e report for consideration. After some 
discussion, certain changes were suggested for incorporation in the draft 237
th Report. At 
the end of the deliberation, the Co mmittee unanimously adopted the 237 th Draft Report 
along with the suggestions.  
 
3.        Further, in order to expedite  the action on the subject, the Committee also 
authorized the Chairman to present the 237
th report on Revival & Re structuring of the 
Hotel Corporation of India Ltd pertaining to  the Ministry of Civil Aviation to Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the inter-session.  
The meeting adjourned at 03.50 P.M 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                      Roshan Lal  
30
th August, 2012                                                                                      Deputy Director 
 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 
 
 
*************** 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 