I 
Ind. 3V)9 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
T19 RS 1'-I·A 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1999-2000) 
OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
(PRESEN'fED ON THE 23RD APRIL, 1999) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 1999/VAlSHAKHA, 1921 {SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1·. CoMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........... ........................................ (iHii) 
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEB ........ ...... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .... .... .. .. .... 1-14 
3. ANNEXURE (MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS) ........ ........ ........... ...... .. .. .... 15-27 

Cm.II'OSITIO'-: OF TilE COI\1~111TEE 
I. Sho i R:t)!l"")i - Cluumtrlll 
HA.IYA S,\1\IL\ 
' Sh11 Gm inth :w Ado~ 
:1. Shri M:tuo it:<' K11 jur 
4. Slui K:uma Tup<i~n 
5. Sho i R:ojuhl1:d A. l'arm:11 
(o. Shri Ramda' Asar" :d 
7. IJt . R:111hir S i n~h 
l\ . Sill i C. 0 . l'uultbc 
\1. Shtl I'. l'rahhabr Redd) 
10. Sh11 N:o!,:mani 
II. Sl111 llh:oJ;:oh:on ('.l:oJho 
I~ Slln S:onjay Nio ttp:om 
# 1.'1. Sluo S:mh•'h U;t):rt•~h.t 
0. 14. Shri Shihu Stt~<·n 
SIS. Slni \.:•)·' Sinl!h 
LOK S,\ HilA 
I (~, Shri l\luni I. all 
17. Shoi 1\1. Srini\'"' 
lS. Slu i Vi jay Sh:mk:tr 
I'J. Shri (~y:tu Singh 
20. Sl11 i Tao :u:haml Sahu 
21. Slll'i !{;om a n:o nd Singh 
" Shri AUil\t~ah"·h l\I.K . 
2~. Shl'i J tl :01 Or :om 
P:otil 
:?-1. Slui An:mtl R:ouw Mauoya 
25. Shri l'unnul :tl Moh:1k 
26. Slu i Na~kndla 13hl,k:~r Rao 
27. Shri K. 11. 11 luniyappa 
:!S. Shri D:olla 1\ leg he 
2'J. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Kri,hn:~ H:1ndiquc 
31. Dr. Sh:okeel Ahmad 
•Jz Shri Ananda Pathak 
33. Shri Sunil Khan 
34. Shri Kirti Yardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palanbwami 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Y:u.Jav 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
i> Nontin:u¢<1 w.e.f. 17.7.199S. 
@ Nommoocd "'·'I ~.8.1998 . 
S Nomlnaocd ,.,, .. f. 11.8.1 '1')~ . 
(J :~lum:tbad) 
• Nomin:ucd w. ~.f 9.6. 1998 vire Shri Moinul Hassan 
(i) 
779 RS F-2-A 

38. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
41. Sbri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
'"45. Sbri Anand Mohan 
SECRETARIAT 
(ii) 
Shri Satisb Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P. C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
•• Nominated w.e.f 22.2.1999 
779 RS F-2·B 

THIRTY -SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
ha.ving been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this 
Thirty-second Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Indusrry for 1999-2000. 
While examining the said Demands for Grants, the Committee also considered the 
Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Industry on its 25th Report pertaining to the Demands 
for Grants of Ministry of Industry for 1998-99. The Committee examined the relevant 
documents and papers relating to the Demands for GrantS for 1999-2000 received from the 
Ministry of Industry and beard the oral evidence of Secretaries of Ministry of Industry in this 
connection. The Committee also held discussions with the representatives of Cll, F1CCI, 
ASSOCHAM, PHD Chamber of Commerce, Laghu Udyog Bharati, Disinvestment 
Commission and SCOPE. 
The Committee adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 16th April, 1999. 
The comments and observations with suitable recommendarions of the Committee are 
given in the succeeding paragraphs: 
1. The activities of Department of Industri al Development relate to the promotion of 
industrialisation encompassing the development of medium as well as large industries in 
public and private sectors, revival, restr ucturing, research & development, grant of patents, 
registration of trade marks, designs, productivity and quality measures. A sum of Rs. 361.59 
crore (plan Rs. 342.77 crore & non-plan Rs. 18.52 crore) was allocated to it for its total 
expenditure in the budget estimate 1998-99 and it was enhanced to Rs. 443.25 crore (plan 
Rs. 420.60 & non-plan Rs. 22.65 crore) in the revised estimate. The Committee, while 
examining the Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of the Department, had the opportunity to 
have an overview of the activities undertak en by institutions under this Department. 
2. The National Productivity Council (NPC) is an autonomous organisation under the 
administrative control of this Department. It has the objectives of generating productivity 
consciousness and providing productivity services to various sectors of national economy. 
The NPC was provided Rs. 7.44 crore in the BE 1998-99 which was reduced to Rs. 2.00 
crore in RE 1998-99. The Committee was informed that the reduction at the RE stage took 
place because several plan schemes had to be substantially revised and therefore approvals 
were delayed. While two plan schemes were approved in 1997-98, only five schemes could 
be approved in 1998-99. The schemes had to be recast since technical and expert opinion 
was required and there was need to draw up detailed project implementation plans in the 
case of few schemes . The Committee expresses its concern O\'er the delay in approvals wWcb 
caused substantial reduction in tbe revised estimate for 1998-99 and hopes t.hat the schemes 
having been rescheduled, would be implemented within t.he envisaged period and t.he amount 
earmarked for the purpose in the current fiscal will be properly utilised. 
3. l11e National Institute of Design (Nto) is an autonomous institut ion for Education, 
Research and Service in Industrial and Communication Design. N!D has been recognised as 
a Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation by the Ministry of Science and Technology. 
The Institute has planned to conduct 15 to 20 training workshops and seminars for industry 
and crafts sector as part of outreach programmes in 1999-2000. Under the Publicati ons 
programme four publications which are in progress would be published and released in 1999-
2000, while five design research projects in progress would be completed. The Institute bas 
undertaken several client service projects from industry and Public Sector organisations in 

2 
the area of industr ial Design, Co mmunic~t io n Design etc·. wludt ;m· c·xp~cled 10 be 
completed in 1999-2000. Five new schemes, out of nine pbmK·d d<11 ing the \hh ]>hn1 period 
u.ndcr plan recurring progra mmes would have commencc•d hy J<J•J•J-.2fl<l•l. The ,um ":tn nark<'d 
for NJD in cu rrent fiscul ye<tr is Rs. 6.80 crore anti in ligltl uf lh<· , ,tri" '" '"'l!' 'ing <tctivitics 
of NID !.he Committee feels that the Deparlmenl shou ld "' al u:tk :tutl """'s them to ensure 
that the fund s earmarked are appropriated properly. 
4. The Quality Council of Ind ia (QC I) wa~ set up I<> ptot<llllc·. ''"'rtlin.ttc , !!llt d~ and 
implemen t a national quali ty initiativ e for building nmfidc m·c 111 l ndi:111 protl tu:ts and 
services and for improving competitiveness in l ndi~n Industry. II will ah(l raise quality 
con sciousness in the cou ntry through the conduct nf a Nat ion:tl Q u:tlity C:unp:tign. There has 
been a reduction in the outlay for the QCI fr.11n Rs. 1.<15 ~mrc in Uli l'Nl\-l)l) to Rs. 0.55 
crore in RE 1998-99. This, the Commi ttee was informed. was 011 ac<:tllllll •>f tile Pl~ n ning 
Commiss ion's instructions rece ived subsequent ly that Lite hacklt>)! of ~<l ll tr i hution of other 
Minist ries/Departments of Lite previous year., would bt: provided for in their respective 
budgets and need not be provided en tirely from the Dep"rtm en t's budgt'l. Acco rdingly, Lhe 
out lay was scaled down to Rs. 0.55 crore incorpo rat ing tloc D~p~u· t ll lCnt's share towards the 
ba lance of seed capital and for the National Qu;1lity Campa ign fm the t'urrem year and some 
balance of the previous yea rs. 
The Committee fails to understand why there was a hucklog in the contl'ibution of other 
Ministries/Departm ents? The Committee recommends tlutl lwnccforth it should be ensured 
thai contribution of othe r Departm ent/Ministry toward s the seed capital is made timely so 
that lbcre is no hindrance to the Nation al Quality Campaign on account of financial crunch. 
5. The Automotiv e Research Associat ion of lnclia (AHA!) h;>lds the k<:)' in the fi t~l<l of 
cooperative industrial resear ch of automobi le industry. It entails '11 R & D in autom otive 
engi neering for industr ial product design 3nd deve lopment , evalua tion of automo tive 
equipment & ancillaries and execution of adv anced cour~es on the apphration of mod ern 
technology etc. ARAl is also offering COnsultancy to indus try in autOJH<ltivc research ;rnd 
deve lopment. The Committ ee was infonn ed that there has been no variation in requireme nt 
for fund s in the budge t estimate 1999-2000 (plan: Rs. 2.75 crore) since ARAI has dec ided 
to tak e up only ten on-going proj ects. There are some new projects under plan and cess fund 
which are awaiting approval for execut ion. The Committee seeks to ensure thai ARAI is not 
sta rved of grant s from Governmen t i n orde r to carry out its ongoing project s as well as 
execution of new projects, whenever due approval is accorded to them in future. 
The ARAI is working on the ut ilisation of the CNG in ·au tomotive vehicles. They have 
develo ped CNG kits for the three wheelers. This technology is being offere d to the 
automotiv e industr y i n terms of reducing pollution . Hence, this tech nology is the major 
achievemen t. The Committee feels that the Department should take necessary steps to make 
nation-w ide availability of CNG kits to automotive vehicles as commercially viable. The use of 
LPG in automobiles should be legalised as well. Moreover, for full proof use, I be ARAI 
should examine the safely aspcsct of LPG's use in automotive vehicles. 
6. The Office of the Controller Gemir ~ l of Pate nts, Designs and Trade Marks is a 
subordinate Office under the D epa rtme nt of I ndustrial Develop men t and is concerned wilh 
the adminis tra tion of Lhe Laws relat ing to Industr ial Property . The Con troller General of 
Patents, Designs & Trade Marks has the following orgunisat ions und er its jurisd iction and 
supervision: -
(a) The Paten! Office 
(b) Trade Mark Registry 
(c) Patent Information System 
.. -. 

'~ I 
3 
The (>atent Office perform~ the 'tatu10ry duties in connection with the grant of patent> 
for new invention> and rcgistr01tion or indu>trial designs. The Head Office or Patents is at 
C:•kutt:• :md br,.nches are :1t Mumbai, Chcnnai and Delhi. The branches deal with the 
;~pplk:•tiom. for patents originating within their respective territorial jurisdiction. ll1c matters 
rclatn1g to the registration of designs <~re dealt with by the Patent Office, C;llcutta. The 
Governmen t intends to ratiorwlise, strc: 11nline and modernise the functioning of Patent Office 
so tll:ll patent related services could be provided in an cfficiclll Jll:lllner. The Comm ittee was 
inft>nned th<lt the Government has approved a project for modernisation and strengthe ning of 
P:ttcnt Off ices. The estimated cost or the project is Rs . 75.59 cro re. The sanction for the 
Project was conv eyed on 11th December, 1998. In BE 1998·99, a sum of 
Rs. 20.00 crore was provided for tuking up activities r<!l<uing to modernisation of Patent 
Offices. These activities included acquisition or land for setting up a National P:llcnt Office in 
New Delhi, to improve the library f:•cilities, taking up of awareness activities and a project for 
clcar:mce of backlog of p:•tcnt :•pplic:uions. While steps were initiated for taking up these 
activitic> and ;~ddition.•l posts were :~lso got sanctioned, a case was filed in High Court ar 
C:llcutta requesting, imer-nlin. for an 111junct10n for restraining the Central Government from 
wking any ~teps to shift the P;uent Office from Calcutta to Delhi. The Hon'ble Court also 
ISMiecl an injunction re>training the Central Government [rom taking any .,~tep to shift the said 
office from the s:1id premi•es wherein it i' still going on and carries functions thereof until 
dispos:•l or the <lpplication. In view or this position. the proposed activities were not taken up 
in tl1.: n:n111ining part of the finuneiul year and hence the plan fund allocation was reduced 
uccorclingly to Rs. 5.00 crorc in RE 1998·99. The Committee was also informed that necessary 
steps an~ being taken to approach the Hon'ble High Court from vacation of the orders. 
In the budget estimate of 1999-2000, a plan fund of Rs. 20.00 crore has been allocated for 
activitie s concerned with the modernisation or Patent Offices . The Committee notes the 
as~urance given by the Department thnt necessary steps are being taken to approach the 
llon'ble High Court nt Calculla for 1•acation of injunction and recommends lhal pending Lbe 
final decision in the maller of settin~; 111> of the headquarter of Patent Office at New Delhi, the 
Department should endeavour to implement the modernisation work in r espesct of r egional 
branches of Patent Office. The Committee also hopes that this amouiH will be utilised without 
under~;oing nny reduction as \\as done during the RE stage in 1998-99. 
There are several pending cases concerned with patenting. Apart from this, the Patent 
Office has to disseminate information regarding inventions patented in this country as well as 
in countries outside India. Thus the Committee feels that the pending cases in Patent Oflices 
should be disposed of expeditiously. 
Keeping in mind, the clu1nging scenario of patent ing in abroad, the Committee observes 
thnt there is need to lake lni!intive for globalisalion or our Patent Clfliccs as well. 
7. Having had an account of the activities of Department or Indu str ial Development, the 
Committee once again comes to the point as to what is the necessity for having this 
Department? The Commiuee wonders why should there be two separate Departments one for 
Industrial Development and the other for industrial Promotion. 1l1is question wa~ raised in 
Committee's 25th Report as well and the Committee had recommended that the Department 
of Industrial Development should either be dispensed with or merged with the Department of 
Industrial Policy & Promotion. The Ministry in its reply regretted for not having 
communicated the recommendation to the Cabinet Secretariat for necessary oction. 
In view or the abo,•e, the Committee once ng:•in reiterates its recommendation as contain~d 
719 RS I'-3·A 

4 
in its 25th Report regarding the merger of Department of Jndustri11l Development with the 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion and hopes that at least, this time the 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion will not be found wanting in pursing this 
matter seriously. 
8. The Parliamentary Standing Commiuee on Industry had, in its 25th Report on the 
Dema nds for Grants of Ministry of Ind ustry, Depa rtment of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
for 1998-99, expressed its concern over the wide gap between the approval and the actual 
inllow of foreign direct investment in India. To get over this situation, the Committee had 
felt the need for having a proper monitor ing mechanism to see and ensure that the actual 
inllow of foreign direct investment is not left behind the approva ls. The Committee 
expresses its pleasure over the fact that its concern in this mauer eventually Jed to the 
constit ution of the "Foreign Investment Implementation Authority", albeit in principle. The 
Committee was informed that detai led deliberations are on with the State Governments and 
other Adm inistrative Ministries of Governme nt of India to give a concrete shape to the 
proposal of having the said authority in place. The Committee apprecia tes the efforts of 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion and hopes that very soon the author ity will be 
a reality. 
Alongside this, the Committee has also taken a note of the fact that the gnp between 
actua l inflow and the approvals has considerably b ridged in 1998 as comp~red to the year 
before. In 1997, there was a yawning gap of 75 per cent between the actual inflow and the 
approvals with only 25 per cent of the approvals materialising into actual inllow. This figure 
of actual inllow ballooned up to 4&.10 per cent of the approva ls in 1998. This is a welcome 
achievement but needs to be taken with a pinch of caution that it does not lead to any 
complace ncy on this front. Rather, the tempo sho uld be maintained in order to ensure 
higher inflows as a lot more is needed to be done on this front. 
Keeping t his view in mind, the Committee recommends that no time should be lost to 
constitute the "Foreign Investment Implement ation Authority" . It should not fall prey to 
bureaucratic apathy and administrative rcdtapism. For this, the onus lies on the Department 
of Industr ial ' Policy & Promotion. In other words, the proposal for the setting up of the 
authority should not be allowed to become a shuttle cock between the Department of 
Industrial Policy & Promotion, various State Governments and other Administrat ive 
Ministries of Government of India. Any delay would not only damage the image of Ind ia as a 
potential destination for investment among the foreign investors but would also lead to a 
decline in the FDI inOows in the times to come. 
9. Ever since the Tariff Commissio n came into existence, the Committee fails to 
comprehend as to what purpose has it served. Last year, when this Commiuee was 
exam ining the Demands for Grants of the Department of IQdustrial Policy & Pro motion for 
1998-99, it was informed that the terms of reference of the Commission were being rev ised. 
Later on it became a headless institution and cont inues to be so in the absence of the 
appointment of a new Chairman. Similarly, it was also submi tted by the then Secre tary of 
the Department of Industrial Policy & PrOf!JOtion while making a presentation before tbc 
Committee in connection with the Demands for Grants for 1998-99, that the Bureau of 
Indus trial Cost and Prices will be merged with the newly consti tuted Tar iff Commission . The 
rational e being, the same natur e of work of both organisations. This year, the Committee 
was informed that the Cabinet, has already considered the merger of the two and the final 
view in the matter is due to be announced anytime. 
However, what baflles this Committee is the manner in which the whole exercise has 
been conducted over the last one year. It smacks of an appare nt effort to delay the merger 

II 
5 
on the pnrt of the Governm ent. If the Tariff Commission is aimed at discharging the same 
duties as the Boreau of Industrial Cost and Prices then what was the necessity of creating 
one more organisation of the same nature. And, if it was found fea~ i ble to merge DICP with 
Tariff Commission, then why the Government is taking too long a time to decide on this 
issue? 
In this backdrop, the Committee recommends that the Government should make lis stand 
clenr vis-a-vis the Bureau of Industrial Cost & Prices and the Tariff Commission. If It wants 
the former to merge with the latter, il should waste no time in giving a nod to the merger 
proposal. The apparent dlllydallying is not going to lead both organisations anywhere. 
10. Since the inception of Growth Centre Scheme in 1988, tbe Government of India has 
approved the development of 71 growth centres spread a~ ross the country till date. Out of 
these 71 such centres, 67 are at various stages of development whereas remaining 4 are yet 
to take off. This scheme is aimed at creating basic infrastructural facilities like power, water, 
telecommunication and banking, etc. in order to facilitate industrial and economic growth of 
the backward areas. The import of this scheme is such that it needs to be given utmost 
emphasis not only by the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion but also by the 
concerned State Governments. As per the requirements of the scheme, the Government of 
India chips in Rs. 10 crore in the total cost of Rs. 25-30 crore of a growth centre. 
Accordingly, for the implementation of this scheme, Rs. 25 crorc arc earmarked in the BE 
for 1999-2000. This amoun t is far below the expectations of the Department, the Committee 
was told. As against the demand for Rs. 50 crore for this scheme, the Ministry of Finance 
and Planning Commission allocated only half of the demand i.e. Rs. 25 crore. 
In the opinion of the Committ ee, a scheme of such an import which entails the 
industrialisation of some identified rel:ttively backward areas, should not be allowed to lose 
its momentum for want of adequate allocation of funds. What is more interesting to keep in 
mind is the fact that a major chunk of the funds for this scheme are to be provided by the 
concerned State Governments. The contribution of Government of India is limited to the 
provision of only Rs. 10 crore per growth centre. U the Union Governm ent with its larger 
financial resources than the State Governments, fails to fulfil its commitment s towards a 
centrally sponsored scheme, what can be expected of the fund-starved State Governments. 
Therefore, the Commltlee has come to the conclusion that Growth Centre Scheme should 
be vigorously Implemented. Any kl.lld of financial constraints should not be allowed to come in 
its way. Hence, higher budgetary allocation for it. This apart, the Commitlel also 
recommends the selling up of an effective monitoring mechanism to oversee the proper 
implementation of the scheme. It is also recommended that the Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion should have a thorough survey conducted to gauge the socio-economic 
impact of this scheme. 
ll. To promote industrialisation in the North-Eastern region of the country, the 
transport subsidy scheme is in operation for the benefit of the industrial units located in the 
region. The scheme, ns such, acts as an incentive to the entrepreneurs to engage in the 
industrial activity under the not-so conducive atmosphere in the region. Accordingly, Rs. 85 
crore is set aside for the implementation of this scheme. This provision is less than the actual 
requirement for the year, the Committee was informed. The original projection of 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion' for this scheme for 1999-2000 was Rs. 125 
crore which was reduced to Rs. 85 crore by the Ministry of Finance and Plann ing 
Commi ssion. According to the Secretary, Departm ent of Industri al Policy & Promotion, the 
higher allocat ion for this scheme was required to clear the backlog of dues on this account. 
The Committee expresses ils concurrence for the requir ed allocation of funds and 

6 
recommends the same as ll considers this scheme very crucial for the industrial development 
of the NorU1-East. 
12. During the course of oral evidence, the Secretary, Departm en t of Indu strial Policy 
and Promotion was asked to furnish notes on certain points on which information wu~ not 
readily available with him. The Secretary promised to supply tbc same by Monday, the 12th 
April, 1999. However the requisite information was not made available to the Committee 
witbin the stipulated time. The Committee is unhappy about this and considers it as lapse on 
the part of the Department. The Committee hopes thnt in future the Department should be 
more careful and should fulfil the assurance siven to a Parliamentnry Committee within the 
stipulated time. 
13. The small paper mills have been going throu&h a difficult period because of a 
number of factors. One such factor is the withdrawal of the levy of So/o concessional duty for 
units using not less than 75 per cent NCRM upto the production limit of 1501XI tonnes. 
The Committee has tnken a sympathetic view of this and feels thnt the levy of S p~r cent 
concessionnl duty be restored in order to protect the small paper mills. 
14. A lot of trouble is being caused to the domestic newsprint industry by the unethical 
trade practice of dumping of cheaper newsprint into the country by the foreign newsprint 
manufacturers. This needs to be stopped if the domestic newsprint industry has to survive. 
The remedy lies in the imposition of anti-dumping duty on the imported new~print. The 
Ministry of Commerce has also recommended the imposition of anti-dumping duty. 
The Committee also expresses it.s total support to the cause of the d~Jmestic n~wsprint 
industry and accordingly, recommends the imposition of the anti-dumping duty on the 
imported newsprint at the earliest. 
15. In May, 1997 the Government had decided that all the future Disinvestment by the 
Government for PSE will be done only after obtaining the recommendation or the 
Disinvestment Commission. Now the Government has established the core group of 
Secretaries headed by the Cabinet Secretary to oversee the implementation of Government 
decision on Disinvestment. The implementation of Government decision on offer of sulc 'in 
PSU's such as CONCOR, MTNL and VSNL huve been handled by the Departm ent ot 
Economic Affairs and the imlllcmentntion of Government decision in regard to the strategic 
sale have been left to the concerned administrative Ministries. The Committee hns viewed it 
seriously that this dispersed implementation of Government decision on strategic sale has 
resulted in considerable delay and the process is nlso not conducive. This bas resulted in 
under-ocbi evement of disinvestment target during the last two yean. This yeor too there may 
be shortfall in the achievement in the target due to tardy implementation of the Disinvestment 
Commission's recommendation by the administrutlve ministries. 
The Committee had recommended in its 25th Report for setting up of a central 
implementation mechanism to monitor the implementation of Disinvestment for which the 
Disinvestment Commission hns also been repeatedly emphasising that a full-time 
implementation agency should be set up in the Ministry of Finance for implementing of all 
Government decisions of Disinvestmen t. The' Committee came to know that this uspect or the 
recommendation is under consideration of the Government. The Committee reiterates that the 
decision in the matter may please be expedited by the Government. 
16. On 12th January, 1998 the Government have drastically altered the term of 
reference by a resolution restricting the role of Disinvestment Commission to an advisory 
one and consequently its supervisory and monitoring role has been withdrawn. The 
individual Ministry have at times sought second opinion from any agency outside the 

7 
Government on the recommendation made by the Commission in respect of PSUs under 
their control which is against the credibility of the Commission. The Committee is of the view 
that monitoring role or the Disinvestment Commission should be restored In the Interest or 
effective coordination and speedy implementation of Government decision. The administrative 
ministries should obtain the second opinion from the Government agency instead or outside 
agency to maintain the credibility of the Commission. 
17. A number of Public Sector Undertakings under the administrative jurisdiction of 
Department of Heavy industry like Richardson & Cruddas Ltd., Hindustan Photo Films 
Ltd., Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd., Bharat Heavy Plate & Vessels Ltd., etc. are in the 
urgent need of being provided with sufficient funds for the implementation of the planned 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme in order to rationalise their excessive manpower. Although, 
their is a provision of Rs. 77.43 crore for PSUs of Department of Heavy industry for this 
purpose under the new grants-in-aid scheme to be implemented in 1999-2000, the details of 
the scheme are yet to be worked out. Further, the PSUs which are going to be provided 
with funds out of this allocation , are also not identified. This ambiguity vis-a-vis this scheme 
leaves much scope for maneuvering, the Committee wonders. Ideally, before making 
budgetary provision for a scheme, the Ministry of Fmance, Department of Industrial 
Development and Department of Heavy Industry should have done their homework. In the 
absence of any such exercise, what happens is that a lot of time is consumed in finalizing the 
nitty-grilly of the scheme and thereafter, by the time the scheme sees the daylight, it 
becomes too late to extract any meaningful benefit out of it. 
With this view in mind, the Committee recommends that Department or Heavy Industry 
should, first, identify the PSUs which are going to be the beneficiaries of this scheme and then 
pursue the matter of the finalisntioo of the details of the scheme In order to ensure that no 
time is lost in the implementation or the VRS in its PSUs within the financial year 1999-2000. 
18. NEPA Ltd. is one of the Public Sector Undertakings engaged in the manufacture of 
paper of different varieties. Due to a combination of factors, this PSU has been passing 
through a very critical phase. The Committee was informed that, of late, this public 
enterprise has developed a new technique to make a unique variety of paper, which hitherto 
was not being manufactured in India. This paper can be a substitute to the paper of same 
quality being imported from fore1gn countries. Developments like this are very heartening 
and encou .raging especially for a sick company like NEPA Ltd. The Committee, fe~ls that 
given the right kind of support. NEPA Ltd., has the potential to bounce back to regain its 
lost health. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of Heavy Industry should 
spare no stone unturned to revive this potentially viable public sector company. 
19. A large number of PSUs of the Department of Heavy Industry are either chronically 
sick or are on the verge of sickness. As a result, a majority of them are in the danger of 
being closed down. Although, the Department has identified 23 odd PSUs for converting 
them into joint ventures, the fate of most of them continue to hang in balance in the absence 
of a clear-cut policy vis-a-vis sick PSUs. 
The Committee has come to the conclusion that whatever decision the Department or for 
that matter the Government has to take in this regard, it should take without losing anytime. 
Any further delay is not going to help either the workers of these PSUs or the Governmmt. 
20. There are a number of public sector undertakings which have been incurring losses 
year after year and some of them since their inception. All efforts p1ade for their revival 
• 119 RS F-4·A 

8 
have already failed. Titere is no economic basis for their continuation. Under the amended 
SICA Act, it is mandatory on the part of the Management to refer a sick unit to BIFR. l1 
has been the experi ence that reference to BIFR has not led to any meaningful result, in such 
cases . In the meantime, the Government continues to provide non-plan assistance to meet 
the cash losses of the sick companies. 
In the circumstances, the Committee is of the view that such sick and unviable units may 
be closed down within a stipulated lime frame and If the need be necessary am~ndment in the 
relevant Act/Rules may also be made. 
21. The Department of SSI and A&RI deals with the formulation of policies concerning 
the development of Small Scale Industries. It also pr<Wides techno-economic as well as 
managerial consultancy to SSI units. The activities of this Department also involve the work 
related to technology upgradation, modernisation, quality improvement and augmentation of 
infrastructure facilities in Small Scale Sector. There are various schemes, the implementation 
of which are also undertaken by the Department of SSI and A & R I. The contribution of 
SSI sector i11 the industrial development of the nation is significant. 
• Under the Department of SSI and A & R I, the total fund allocation is of Rs. 992.58 
crore (plan Rs. 627.25 crore & non-plan Rs. 365.33 crore) in BE 1999-2000 against 
Rs. 1016.25 (plan Rs. 653.00. crore & non-plan Rs. 363.25 crore) and Rs. 964.19 crore (plan 
Rs. 596.08 crore & non-plan Rs. 368.11 crore) for budget and revised estimate 1998-99 
respectively. 
The Committee in its 25th Report had urged upon the Ministry of finance and Planning 
Commission to reconsider the requirements of Small Scale Sector so that a more realistic 
approach is adopted to meet them thro4ghout the ent ire 9th plan period. In response to it, 
the Comm ittee came to understand from the Department of SSI and A&Rl that the 
Pla11ning Commission has made an allocation of Rs. 4085 crore for the ninth five year plan 
as against Rs. 2212 crore during the eighth plan. The budgetary allocations for this 
Department during 1998-99 was maintained at the previous year's level i.e. Rs. 653 crore. 
After assuming that this Department would get Rs. 4085 crore during the ninth plan as 
indicated by the Planning Commission. the average annual budgetary allocations for the 
remaining 3 years of the ninth plan should be Rs. 928 crore. Actually the Department had 
made a demand for R~. 1038 crore as the budgetary support for the year 1999-2000 based on 
the original budgetarv II<Xation of R>. 4085 crorc for the 9th plan. The Committee was 
apprised that due to re~ource aunch, the budgetary allocation for this Department for the 
ninth phtn period hus bt:en slashed from Rs. 4085 crore to Rs. 3786 crore and accordingly 
the plan fund allocation for the year 1999-2000 is to the tune of Rs. 627.25 crore only. The 
small scale industries requite proper :v ~ntin:~ and v!•ualisL-:g their immense contribution to 
the lndi~n econom~ the Cornmillee strongly recommends that the budgetary allocation to 
this Department nt-eds to be enhanced and at least the total allocation of the ninth five year 
plan i.e. Rs. 4085 crore should be provided by the terminal yeur of the ninth plan. 
Further during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (1999-2000) the 
Committee had the occasion to probe into the activity undertaken by the various institutions 
of the Department. 
22. 11\e National Small Industries Corporat ron Limited is a public sector undertaking 
under the aegis of Department of SSI and A&RI . Its objectives arc to promote, aid and 
foster, the growth of small scale industry in the country. The NS!C continues to remain at 
the forefront of Industrial development throughout the country with its various programmes 
and projects to assist the small seale sector in the country. It acts as a catalyst in bringing 
forth a large number of viable small industries all over the country. with emphasis on the 

9 
development of industries in backward areas, identified as prior ity areas from time to time. 
Its work involve the supply of machinery on hire-purchase, market promotion arrangement 
of both indigenous and imported now materials, developmen t of project etc. There was 
reduction of plan fund for NSIC to Rs. 8.80 crore in the revised estimate 1998·99. The 
Committee came to know that certain proposals relating to new technical centres which were 
in the pipeline, could not be finalised due to lack of commitment from the State 
Governments, SSI Associations etc. Hence the fund allocation was reduced in RE 1998-99. 
The Committee is not sntisfied with the explanation for which the proposalg relating to new 
technicnl centres under NSIC could not be finalised. The-Committee feels that there was lapse 
on the pnrt of NSIC and it can not shift the onus to the State Governmen ts and SSI 
Associatio ns etc. The Committee therefore recommends that in future NSIC should be caref ul 
while drawing up nny proposal and also ensure that the same is implemented well in lime. 
NSIC has made a request for reappropriating a part of the amount provided for New 
Technical Cen tres towards the Marketing expenditure than the amount provided in RE 1998· 
99. The reappropriation proposal of NSIC is under examination in consultation with the 
Internal Finance. The Committee expresses its displeosure over the financia l mismanagement 
ns to why and how NS1C hns incurred the higher expenditure towards Marketing Assistance 
Scheme than the amount provided for tbe purpose in the revised estimate for the year 
1998-99. 
23. The Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana was launched on 2nd October, 1993 which aims 
at providing self employment to educated youth betweeo the age group of 18 to 35 years 
with annual family income of Rs. 24000 or less by setting up 7 Jakh micro enterprises for the 
eighth five year pl<tn. The PMR Y is continuing in the ninth five year plan as well and the 
target is 10.20 lakh. The plan fund a llocation has been enhanced to Rs. 173 crore "in BE 
1999-2000 in comparison to Rs. 110 crore and Rs. 135.50 crore in BE and RE 1998·99, 
respectively. 
ln the first year of ninth plan i.e. 1997-98, against a target of 2.20 lakh beneficiaries as 
many as 2.61 lakh cases were sanctioned and 1.57 lakh cases disbursed as per the latest 
report from the RSL The disbursements for the sanctioned cases of 1997·98 are continuing 
and there would be further progress in disbursements. The target envisaged for 1998·99 is 
2.20 lakh beneficiMies. Against this target 57,527 cases have been sanctioned and 27,533 
cases disbursed as reported by the RBI upto the month ending October, 1998. The sanctions 
and disbursement s during 1998·99 would further increase with sponsoring of more 
applicat ions to the banks. The Committee observes that there is o gap between the target 
fixed for PMRY cases and corresponding number of the disbursed cases and recommends that 
the Dcpartn1~nt should mnke efforts to overcome this gap in this fiscal and by that way the 
objective of the scheme will be fulfilled in real sense. 
Out of the total fund allocation for I'MRY during 1998·99, tho allocation of funds under 
the subhead of entrepreneurship development had been maintained at Rs. 16.00 crore whidi 
is mainly provided to the States/Union Territories for training, contingencies, operative 
expenses etc. The increase in the revised estimate to Rs, 135.50 ~rore during last fiscal has 
been on account of the enhanced allocation from Rs. 94.00 crore to Rs. 119.50 crore for the 
capital subsidy. In the budget estimate for 1999-2000, the provision for entrepreneurship 
development is again kept at Rs. 16.00 crore as in the previous year. The subsidy 
requirement is, however raised to Rs. l57.00 crore. The enhancement has been done on 
account of increased amount of subs idy as well as demands of the previous years, which arc 
likely to be raised during this fiscal year. The Comminee is of the view that wore emphasis 
is needed for training programmes for industry/service/business sectors. ~ the .success of 
the en trepreneurs is linked with the training programmes, the Committee f«ls that the 

lu 
training modules need to be improved, both in content and dur ation, so us to nuoke it more 
purposeful. 
One of the eligibility criteria for PMRY beneficiary is that the family income of the 
beneficiary should not exceed Rs. 24,0001- per annum. The applicant's family income has 
been enhanced from Rs. 24,0001- to Rs. 40,0001-p.a. for North -Eastern St:llcs. The 
Committee Is of the view that the present income ceiling of the family of Rs. 24,000/- p.a. is 
low particularly in view or devaluation of money etc. and thus needs to be enhanced 
accordingly. 
24. The Khadi and Village lndustries Commission (KVIC) is required to plan. organise 
and implement programmes for development of Khadi and Village Industries and thu> plays 
a pivotal role in strengthening of rural economy. The Khadi und Village Industry occupies 
an important place in the Indian economy in generating income and employment for the 
rural labour force particularly for those living below poverty line. The main objcctov,•s of the 
KVlC include skill improvement, employment generation in rural area.~. tran,fl'r of 
technology, rural industrialisation through KVl programmes and promotion of self rcli:mce 
among the people to build up a strong rural community base. ln fact the b:osic appwach in 
the KVI sector is utilisation of locally available nwnpower with o view tu ioo.:rc:osc 
employment potential. The High Power Committee recommended for gencr:oti•>oo 111 two 
million additional employment opportunities by the tem1in:1l year of the Sth Five h·:or l'l:on. 
which could not be achieved due to luck of inadcqu:ue infra~tructure fat:ilitic, . K Vll' h:c. 
identified certain potential industries for launching ~pccial projects viL. handm~dc p:opcr. 
leather and beekeeping etc. During the current financiul year it has been dcdtku tu wu obinc 
the projects for which financial sanc tion will be made separately fur the cffin~:ut 
implementation of these programmes. KVlC also er.tcnd.!d its infrastructural facilitocs in the 
form of training of artisans, marketing and publicity. In this perspective. K VI(.' c•ulvnl 
Rural Employment Generation Programme whic)] consists of District Special Emphl) oncut 
Programme, 125 Block Development Programme and National Programme of Sd~:ctcd 
Industries, Thrust Area Programme and strengthening of Khadi und Village ln(h"trics 
activities, etc. Under the Rural Employment Generation Programme a sum of Rs. 1-10.00 
crore and Rs. 46.65 crore was provided in BE and RE 1998-99 respectively . The Committee 
came to know that in several identified/selected places, the REGP is still to take orr and the 
funds earmarked against it remain unutilised. The Committee expresses its grave concern 
over the reduction in the allocation of the plan fund to Rs. 46.65 crore for REGP in the 
revised eslimate for the year 1998-99, though a sum of Rs. 140.00 crore was provided in the 
budget estimate and Ibis happened because •'-~ approval to continue the REGP could not be 
obtained from CCEA. 
Thr Committee observes that the redul1ion in the allocation of plnn fund could ha,·t bern 
avoided. The Committee Is of the \lew that the proper assessment and projection 
requirements of funds were not done. The Department should undcrstnnd thnt the bud~etary 
estimates should be prep3red keeping in view all the relevant aspects so thnt the surrende r of 
funds is avoided to the best possible extent. 
Tht Committee also noles the .information ulendrd by the Department that they are 
proposing to achieve the target of generating two million additi onal jobs by the ye:or 2002 
A.D. and hopes that there will be proper monitoring by the Department concerning the 
implementation of REGP and effort should be made to achieve the target of generating two 
million jobs by the year 2002 A. D. 
25. Coir Industry is one of the important traditional cottage industries which is widely 

11 
spreau over Western and E;•stern Coasts of India. Associated with it is Coir Board, which 
dea ls in promot ion of the overall development of Coir Industry including the export of coir 
products from India. The plan fu nd allocation for Coir Industry was reduced in the revised 
estimate of 1998-99 to Rs. 10.76 crore against the provision of Rs . 13.00 crore in the 
correspond ing budget estimate. The Commillee was informed that the reduction in the 
budget estimate was due to short fall in actual expenditure under the Scheme of 
Cooperativisation. r'\s ugainst the budget provision of Rs. 5.00 crore during the year 1998-99, 
an amount of only Rs. 87.86 lakh was released to Government of Tamil Nadu. No other 
State Government sent any proposal for release of funds during this period for the said 
scheme . The Committee is strongly of the view that to avoid the shortfall in actual 
expenditure under the Scheme of Cooperativisalion, the D~;partment ought to have made 
concerted efforts. 
The plan fund ;~!locatio n for Coir Industry of Rs. 20.00 crore in budget estimate 
1999-2000 is lll't in conformity with the demand of Coir Board. The Committe was given to 
und.erstnod that if the rebat e is to be given during this fiscal year, then the expe nditure to be 
incurred on it, will come around Rs. 5.00 crore and as a result the Coir Board will be left 
with around Ks. 15.00 crore to c;ury rest of its activities. The Dep~lrtment informed that the 
allocat ion of Rs. 20 cro•·c to Coir Board was made keeping in view the overall reduction in 
the budgetary allocation to the Department. The Commillee feels that with' less budgetary 
allocation, the activities like modernisation, R & D efforts, product diversification, product 
development and employment priority etc. will be affected. B<lSCd on these, the objective of 
providing 300 days of work to a worker i.n a year will also not be fulfl:lled. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the plan fund allocation for Coir Industry ·needs to be enhanced 
snhstant ially. 
26. The Committee came to underswnd that the scheme of International Cooperation 
under this Department was reduced to Rs . 20.00 lakh in the revised estimate for the year 
1998-99 against the budget provision,of Rs. 2.00 crore. The reilson fot this has been stated 
that this scheme was under considerat ion for rationalisation for which the proposa ls received 
under the scheme could not be cleared. 
Again, many of the proposals received under the Surveys and Studies Scheme were 
not found appropriate and hence were nor cleared. Thus the provision in the revised 
estimate for the year 1998-99 was reduced to Rs. 20.00 lakh against the budget provision of 
Rs. 2.00 crore. 
Further , the provision under two other schemes viz. National Entrepreneurship 
Development Board (NEBD) and Trade Related Entrepre neurship Assista nce and 
Development (TREAD) were reduced because of the non-receipt of adequate viable 
proposals from Ins.titution&NGO, 
The Committee observes that the Department ought to have endeavoured to avoid the 
surrende r of funds. It is the res1>onsibility of the Deportment to ensure that funds are utilised 
in the best possible manner. Efforts should also be made to improve the budget management. 
27. The Committee recommended in its 25th Report that a Cabine t Committee or 
High Power Committee or Commission with wide terms of reference should be set up to 
look into the problems of SS1 sector. ln response to this the Committee was informed that 
'the SS! Board headed by the [ndustry Ministry is the highest body set up by Government to 
advise on a ll policy and other issues for growth and development of the SSJ sector. No 
useful purpose is likely to be served by setting up a Cabinet Committee or a High Power 
Comittcc for the. purpose. r'\ decision on this will, however, be take n shortly'. 
The Committee was also given to understand that the most important issue for the SSI 
ln779 

r 
12 
sector is that of availability of adequate credit. This Department has set up a C~mmittce 
headed by Secretary, SSI and A & Rl, for monitoring credit flow to the SSI Sector. 
However, this Committee is not in a position to function e(fectively given the diversity of 
issues involved. Therefore, this Department, in its note on credit related issues relevant to 
the SSI Sector submitted to Committee of Secretaries (COS) has proposed for setting up of 
a Steering Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary for the purpose of providing high 
level coordination among concerned Government Departments, RBI and others for 
facilitating timely policy decisions and their effective implementation. The matter is likely to 
be discussed by the COS shortly. The Committee Is constrained to observe that no serious 
action bas been taken on the part of Department of SSI and A & RI as the Committee Is yet 
to come across the progress on the issue. Henceforth the Committee reiterates that a full time 
statutory board may be set up to look into the problemS of sickness in SSI sector under the 
control of Ministries of Industry and Finance without any further delay. 
28. The scheme of infrastructure development was launched in 1994 for SSI to facilitate 
the location of industries in rural and backward areas to promote stronger linkage between 
agriculture and industries and also to generate employment. The estimated cost to setup an 
liD centre is Rs. 5.00 crorc which is shared between the Government of India und Small 
Industries Development Bank of India in the ratio of 2:3. The cost in excess of Rs. 5.00 
crore will be borne by the respective States. Till December, 1998 only 46 liD projects have 
been sanctioned by H.P.C. Under the union budget 1999-2000 a sum of Rs. 15.00 crore has 
only been earmarked for liD which is not in conformity with requirement of liD as a sum of 
Rs. 24.00 crore was allocated in BE 1998-99. The Committee feels that the budget allocation 
for liD in BE 1999-2000 should be enhanced. 
29. The Committee recommended in its 25th Report to scrap the policy of levying excise 
duty on MRP in order to benefit SSI units. The Committee came to know that the 
Department of SSI and A & RI took up this matter with the Department of Revenue and it 
was stated that under Sec. 4A, specified excisable goods are subject to excise duty on the 
uassessable value" arrived at after deducting an abatement from the retail sale prices (MRP). 
The abatement is prescribed taking into account the duty to excise, sales tax and other taxes, 
payable on such goods and reasonable trade margins. In the case of units availing small scale 
exemption · scheme and producing goods notified under the MRP base excise levy, it has 
been provided that the value •of clearnnc~.<s will be computed on the basis of the value as 
determined under Sec. 4A. However, it may be noted that while prescribing the abatement, 
the normal excise duty rate has been taken into account and not the concessional rate under 
the SSI exemption. Th.is provides an inbuilt advantage to the small scale units as they will be 
paying duty at consessional rates while enjoying abatement on the basis of normal excise 
duty rate. lt may also be stated that there cannot be two methods of valuation, one for units 
availing SSI exemption and another non·SSI unit as it would be administratively difficult to 
implement dual methods of valuation. 
The Committee is astonished to learn the version of the Government that "MRP based 
excise levy has been widely welcomed by the industry and also by consumer welfare 
associations and there is a demand to extend this scheme of levy to all consumer goods". 
During the discussion with the Committee, all the representatives of SS!s have opposed the 
present system of levy of excise duty on MRP basis, particularly the system of ascerwining 
the percentage of abatement. Small Scale Industries Sector is the part and parcel of the 
"Industry". It plays very important role in tbe economic development of the country. It 
seems that the Government has not made any dialogue on this issue with SSl sector. 
SSI representatives also attacked vehemently the MRP base for levy of excise duty when 

13 
the ~ales tax, <X'Iroi and other loc:tl Htxes differ from Stme to Stat.:. The Comnullcc is also 
un:tblc to apprec iate the Covel nment's sta nd tha t " there can not be two JIICihods of 
v:du:llion , one for unit s uvailing S~l exemption and ano ther for non·SS I unit as it would he 
administrali,•cl) ' difficult 10 implement dual method• of valualion". There is b:t,ic and 
fund:uucnwl difference l>etwct·n C<)II:Jge Indust ry, SSI and nOJI·SSI Indu,try. The problem' 
of :11l the>c f;u.:tors arc also diffc1 cnt in numy respects :1nd thai is why I here arc differe nl 
dcp:•nmcnts in the Industry :>. lini,try. 
The Com miucc was g•wn to undcl"stnnd l•'<llll rcprcscmut ivcs of SSitlllits tltat with n:gurd 
to MRP, SSt organis:ttions are opposed toll. In this year's budget 27 ltlllrc items lwve been 
added in the li~t of MRI' The provision of MRP will prove f:u:tl'fur SSI unit especially tiny 
sector. This provision will enh:uwc more harassment and will boo sl co.rup uon . "I he bas1s of 
MRP will lead 10 more unhealt hy lrade practices ~nd help gcncr:llion of black money in the 
marker. In ;~dditJon 11 will c;n"c haro~>sment from votuous Government bodies & 
demoralisation f,,,. husmc"n1en as well. T he Commillei!, therefore, reiterat es its earlier 
recommendation r,·;;ardinr,: not levying excise duty on SSI units on the hi1sis of MRI' and 
furth er recomm ends thai the Co••ernmenl ' hould reconsider il'> stan d and problems arising to 
Small Scale lnduslril'S due lo abo•e polic) h• <nrlctl out "ilh the rc11re~entati•c~ of SS!s. 
30. TI1e SSI units arc not geuing tbe sufficient working cap11al credit and due 10 that the 
growl~ of SSI sector i~ being affcch !<l ad"crsely. At present the working capital credit is only 
about 7.5% of the total amount of s:lle of the manuf;•cturcd goods of SSis. For 111e healthy 
growth of SSI sector. it is being suggested from different quanerv'fora representing SSI 
sector that it ~hould go up and become around 20 per cent to arrive at :1 satbfactory level. 
The SSl units' 101:~1 production is of Rs. 4671)()(} crorc. If the 2(~% of this amount is provtded 
as lo:.ns to SSI sc ~· t ors then it works out ill Rs. 92,000 crore. Whereas SSI sector has 
received credit worth Rs. 30,000 crore only as workin!; capiwl loan form banks. In additions 
the procedure of gelling loans from bank\ is highly cumbersome. The Commillte feels that 
the bnnks shou ld sanction more lo:ms for working catlital nncl the rro c~dure of pro••iding 
loans by SSI units should be s implified. 
B~nk s alwuys swre that priority sector loans lwvc bee n cxh:•usted and ulso allege that 
there are heavy NPAs with bank. It is never clar ified by them th:~t wh:ot percentage o£ SSI 
loans has exclu~ivcll( become NI>A bccuase NPA figures with pnority secto rs always include 
SSl, PMRY and A&RI. The Commillee feels that there shoul d be compnrl ment alisalion of 
priority sector loans and separat e tnrgeb should be earmarked . Loan advanced to SSI sector 
may be delinked from other poverty alle••intion and employment generation schemes. 
31. The Committee in its 25tll Report had recommended 10 revoke lhe dereservation of 
the m:mufacturing of ;~griC~Jitural implements reserved for cxcluMvc m;mufature in SSI 
sector. The Cornm iuce c:une 10 know th:~t out of these 10 items of agricultural implemenl>, 
there ure 4 ite ms which ltave strong smal l scale angle <llld tlo not requir e exclusion from lhc 
reserved list. The Advisory Commiuec on SSI Reservation of the Ministry of Industry 
accordingly recommended dereservation of only 6 11cms viz. Crow bars. Levellers, Mowers, 
Re<lpcrs·upto 5 HP Motive Power, Seecl Drills·upto 5 llP Mot ive Power and other 
Agricullur;ll Macllim:ry upto 5 HP Motive Power respectively of agricullural implements. 
I 

14 
The Commiuee thinks that SSI Sector is capable enough to take care or all the above 
said six items or agricultural implements. The Commillee, tbererore, recommends that 
Government should reconsider its decision or d ereserving the above mentioned six items and 
bring back these items in the r e~~rved category. 
NEw D ELHt; 
April 16, 1999 
RAGHAVJ 1 
Chainnon 
Department related Parliomemary 
Standing Commiuee on Industry 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------~ 
Ai'\NcXURE 
~111'\UTES OF TilE 1\II~ETII\CS Of Til£ C0111illlTTEE 
IX 
1'\li'\TII ~IEiniNG 
The C(lmmi llcc met at 1:!.00 Non" \lit tltc 21ml !ll;trclJ, 1999 iu K.oom No. 63, 
Fir't Ho<lr, Parliament lin n ~.:. 1-'.:w Ddh i. 
l. Slu i Ragha\'ji - Clllllmllllt 
"IEMIIF.ItS 
ltA.IYA S.\1111,\ 
2. Sh11 Govindrn Adik 
:1. Shtl J\l;turicc KuJur 
I. n, Ranb i1 Sin!;lt 
~ Shri N;~gmani 
(,, Shti S:.nll>sh B:tgrmli., 
7. 
~. 
<), 
Ill. 
11 
12 
I~ 
1·1 
IS 
l. 
2. . -·· 
~. 
5 
6. 
7. 
8. 
I.OK .SA 1111,\ 
Slui f\.luni La II 
Shri T:u·:tdJ:tntl S:tllU 
Sltri lbman:md Singh 
Shri l'uunulal !lluh:tle 
Slu i N:t<kmll:t Bhaskar Rao 
Shri Konijcti Ro,aiah 
Shri Sunil Kh:m 
Slu i Surenll• ~~ Pta~ad Yadav (J ah:uw had) 
Shri Sh:okum Choudhury 
SEC HETAftl,\ T 
Slu i S:1tbh Kumar, Joi nt Scncta ry 
Sh ri T:opas D:os Gup t:o, [)irccl<>t' 
Shri P.C. l'aikray, Uuder Secretary 
Shti !11om l<:tj Singh. C<Hllmillcc O ffkcr 
WITNESSES 
Slui 
Slui 
Rel>res(•ntath·es of Confeder:ttion of Indian lnclu str~ tCII 1 
Snjit Gupta. Rc,id.:nt Du·echu. Taw lmhl\tri, ., 
Su,him 13:mcrjcc. A"ll. Gcn,·ral !ll:m;~ger. St\IL 
Shri 
Slni 
Shri 
Shn 
Shri 
Sh ri 
N. C . 1\lathur. Chtcf [xccuti\c. Jindal Strips Ltd. 
Dccp:ok Singh. Chainnan. Public l'<•licy Cummillce 
Dil ip Chenoy . Scuior Director 
D~cpak Roy , Advisor 
Tapa~ Dalla, Deputy Director 
N.l3. M:nhur, Deput y Director 
15 

J(\ 
Represenlalives of f!CCI 
l. Shri Onkar S. Kanwar, Exccu1ivc Commiucc Member and Vice-Chairman, Apollo 
Tyres Lid . 
2. Shri Y.K. Modi, Chairm:m. Finance Commiuee 
3. Dr. Amil Milra, Scl·rewry-Gcneral 
Reprewnlalives of ASSOCHAI\f 
1. Stui N. Balasubram;mian. Chief Residenl Execu1ive, Forbes Gokak Lid. 
2. Shri Anjun Roy, Deputy Sccre l:,ry-Gencral 
2. Welcoming 1he deleg;ues of Confederation of lndi;m Industry, lhe Chairman called 
upon them 10 make a presenlation before the Commillee regarding lhe impacl of Union 
Budge1 1999-2000 on 1he lnduslnal, S1cel and Mines sectors of the economy. 
J. Speaking on behnlf of Cll, Shri Sujit Gupta described 1he bud&ct as balanced but s1ill 
felt that industry needs some priontisauon for achieving beuer induMrial growth. Anolhcr 
speaker, Shri Decpuk Singh 10uchcd upon a number of issues lh<~t ~re needed to be targeted 
in order to slimulate the induslrial growlh in particular and economic growlh in general. He 
spoke at length on issues like lhe da nger of the country fulling inro the debt trap, need to 
arrest fiscal defici1, phaoing out of subsidies. privatisalion of PSUs, reduc1ion of revenue 
expenditure, downsizing the Oovcrnmenl, improvement in infrustructure, more incentives to 
!lousing Sector, further cut in in1cres1 r:lles 10 fac.ililate easier and cheaper availability of 
funds, scrapping of zero import duty regime, dereservation of small sc<~le sec1or especially 
the export oriented items in order 10 give a filip to exports seclor, a thorough review of lhe 
existing anti-dumping mechanism. etc. 
4. Af1er the presenlation of lhe delegates was over, the Members present asked 
questions on the issues covered in the presentation and sought clarificat ions from the 
delegates. 
5. Before winding up the discussion the Cha irman lhanked the delcga1es and requested 
them to send deWiled notes on the issues that cropped up during the course of the meeting. 
The Committee then adjourned for lunch break to reassemble again at 3.00 J'.M. lo 
hear the oral evidence of delegates of FICCI and ASSOCHAM. 
6. Rcs~1ming the discussio n m 3.00 r.M., Chairman welcomed the delegates of FICC! 
and requested them to enlighten the Committee on the relevanl issues falling within the 
jurisdiction of the Committee and on Which the Union Budge! had a direct bearing. The 
delegates dwelt upon the issues like amalgamution of companies, sluggish growth of exports, 
high cost of borrowings and power tariff, simplificat ion of excise norms. etc. 
7. Participating in lhe discussion, the Members presenl put a number of queries to the 
deleg:ues. The Chairm:ln requested the delegates to send tlcluiled notes on the issues 
discussed in the meeting. 
8. Thereafter, the delegates of ASSOCHAM made a brief prcsentalion before the 
Commillee on a couple of issues . They were also requested by 1he Chairman to send 
detailed notes on the issues raised by them in the meeting. 
A verbalim of the proceedings was kept. 
9. The Committee them adjouned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again af 11.()0 1\.M. on Tuesday, 
lhe 23rd March, 1999. 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Commin cc met at ll.OO A.M . on Tue sd~1y. the 23rd March. 1999 in Room No. 63, 
First Aoor, Parli ament House, New Delhi. 
PR ESE:-IT 
1. Shri RaghaVJI - Clwirmtlfl 
l\IE:\tUERS 
RAJY A SAfJIIA 
2. Shn Maurice Kujur 
3. Dr. Ranbir Stngh 
4. Shr i C.O. Poulose 
5. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
LOK SAIJIIA 
6. Shn Muni Lall 
7. Shri T<trach<~nd $;Jhu 
8. Shri Ram:llland Singh 
9. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappn 
11. Shri Sunil Khan 
12. Shri Shak uni Choud hury 
13. Shri Malysb Rajaiah 
14. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
15. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
16. Shn S.S . Palanimanickam 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shr i P.C. Paikray, Unde r Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Comminee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representati ves of PliO Chamber of Commer ce 
l. Shri Sudar~han Sareen , Chairman 
2. Dr. Shyam Sunder Agarwal, Sr. Vice Presiden t 
3. Shri Gopal Krishan, Resident President, Delhi State Federation of SSI 
4. Shri K.C. Malhotra, Central Executive Secre tary • 
17 

IS 
Rcprcscntath ·es or La;.:hu Ullyog llhnrnti 
I. Shri Sudarsh:m Sarccn. National President 
2. Shri Vishw:o l\!iura Dahl, former Nmional President 
3. Shri K.C . M:tlhmra. Ccmra l Excclt!ivc Secretary 
R~presentatil·es or Disitnestment Commission 
I. Shri Dip:onkar Dasu, l\lcmbcr 
2. Shri G. Ganc~h. Mcml>er Secretary 
2. Welcoming the delegates of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Lughu Udhog Dharati. 
the Chairman called upon them to make a prescnt:ttion hdorc the Committee regarding the 
impact of Union Dudgct-1999-2000 on the lndus tri:tl, Steel and Mines sector.. or the 
economy. 
3. Speaking on behalf of Laghu Udyog 13harati, Shri Sudarshan Saree n, praised the 
Government's policy ;tncl pluns with regard to Sm:•ll Scale l ntlu,lry but expressed his concern 
over delay in their it•lplementation. He suggc>ted th:tt Government should h:tve mechani,m 
for immediate implementation or budget proposal. aml take decisions on the 
recommendations or v:trious Commiuees appointed for Small S<:ale Sector. He raised the 
issues of lack of working c:tpital, continuation of Inspector Raj and har:t!>:>ment caused to 
entrepreneurs of Snt:1ll Scale Industry and del:ty in lowering of investment limit of SSI and 
consequent continuation of rcgi,trati,)n or big comp:tn ic> in the c:ttcgory of Small Sc"lc 
Industry. Highli gh ting the problems or sick units or Snwll Scale Indu stry, he 'uggcsted for 
the need to have ~ bo:trd for rcstruclllri ng of sick units for their immcdiute revival. He also 
rcq\tcsted for raising the limit or Ce ntral Excise on SSl Units from the prcv:tiling R>. 50 l:tkh 
to Rs. 1 crore. 
4. Speaking on behalf of PHD Chamber of Commerce, Dr. Shy:un Sunder Agarwal 
requested the CommiHce to recommend to the Government for issu:tnce of necessnry 
direction to SIDDI for c:t>y disbursement of money to Small Scale Industries and adequate 
reforms in labour laws for the beuerment of Small Scale Industry. 
5. After the presentation of the delegates was over, the Members presen t asked 
questions on the issues covered in the presentation and sought clarific.ttions from the 
delegates . 
6. Before winding up the discussion the Chairman thanked the delegates and requested 
them to send detailed notes on the is.~ues that cropped up during the course of the meeting. 
The Commiucc then adjourned for lunch break to reassemble again at 3.00 P.M . 10 
he~r the oral evidence of delegates of Disinvesunent Commission. Resuming the discussion 
at 3.00 P.M. the Ch:tim1an welcomed the delegates of Disinvestment Commi55ion and 
requested them to express views on budget proposals. 
7. Speaking on behalf or Disinvestment Commissio n , Shri Dip<tnk:tr Basu gave the 
b:tckg round of setting up of the Com mission and its jur isdiction. He -suggested for a full time 
implementat ion machinery under the Ministry of Finunce for timely implementat ion of all 
Government's decisions and wanted an amendment in the Disinvestment Commission's term 
of reference for restoring its monitoring and supervisory role. 
8. Participating in the di~cussion. the Members present put a number of queries to the 
delegates. The Chainnan rcqu~-sted !he delegates to ~end notes on the issues discussed in !he 
meeting. 

l<J 
A verbatim of the prcx:ecoinp '"" k.:pt 
9. The Com mille<! then ;~ojuurncd at ·1.~0 p " · to meet again at lUX) 11 " on 
Wcdnc,Jay, the Jht March. 1\I'N. 
.. 

XII 
TWELFTII IIIEETING 
The Department re lated l'arli:omcntury Swnd ing Com mitt ee on Ind ustry met at 
11.00 A.M. on T hursday, the 1st Apri l, 1999 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Par liament House, 
New Delhi. 
PRESEi'<T 
1. Shri Raghavji Clrairma11 
RAJYA SAllliA 
2. Shri Raju bh(li A. Purmar 
3. Shri Ramd as Agarwal 
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
5. Sh ri C. 0 . Poulose 
6. Shri N;1gmuni 
7. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
8. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SAllHA 
9. Shri Muni Lnll 
10. Shri Gyan Si ngh 
11. Shri Jual Oram 
12. Shri Punnul al Mohale 
13. Shri Nadendla Bhas ku Rao 
14. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
15. Shri D atta Meghe 
16. Shri Kon ijeti Rosaiah 
17. Shri Bijoy Kri shna Handique 
18. SIJri Sunil Khan 
19. Shri Malynln Ruj:1ioh 
20. Shri Ajay Chakrabor ty 
21. Shri S. S. Palanim anicknm 
SECRETARIA T 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P. C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Depa rtment of SSI and A&Rl 
l. Shri C. T. Benjamin, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh. AS & FA 
3. Shri K. V. Irmraya, AS & DC (SSI) 
~- Shri Brahm Duu , Joint Secretary, SSI and A&Rl 
5. Shri R. K. 13hargava, Chief Executive Officer, K . V.I.C. 
6. Shri C. Fernandez, Chairman, Coir Board 
1. Shri C. S. Pr:1sad, Additional Development Commissione r, 0/o DC(SSI) 
8. Shri K. S. Ludu, ADC (PLG) , 0/o DC (SSI) 
20 
) 

--------------~~~--------------------------------------
21 
9. Shri S. Nayak, Director, SSI :111<1 A&Rl 
10. Shri Sa t I':d, Di rector, SSI un\1 A&R l 
ll. Shri Arun Kumar, Joint Dcvdopm..:nt Commissioner, 0/o DC (SSI) 
12. Shri Sh:uul.>hu Singh, Joint Development Commi.,,ioncr, 0/o DC (SSL) 
13. Smt. Padma Swmninathan. F. A .. K VIC 
1-1. Shri P. Dhau, Director, KVIC 
15. Shri D. L. lllalholr:t, Execuuve Dircc1or. NSIC 
Hi. Cdr. l.P.S. Auror;1, Executive Directo r, NSIC 
17. Miss N iti Sethi , Compa nr Sccrcwry, NS IC 
18. Shr i Ravindcr N:uh, DGI\1 (Fin:utcc). NSIC 
19. Slu i A.K. Sin lw, Director. If' Wing 
II. Representati•e~ of Department of lndustri:1l llc•dnpnwnt 
I. Shri S. Nar:1yan, Secretary 
2. Shri A.V. Sint;h, AS & FA 
3. Slui Po:.hpcndra R;~i, J.S. 
4. Slui S.S. Slwrnw. DG, N:Hional l'roducti,ity Council 
5. Shri C. R:1jkumar, DG. NCCU;\l 
6. Shri 13. 13hanot, DOG 
7. Shri Y.K. Mc\lir:uta, SG. QCI 
S. Shri Yik:1s Sat\\'alcbr. Ex. Ducctor. NID 
9 Shri Solwn L:d, Dia·cwr 
HI. SIJri S.R. l'ur:,nik. Di ,cctor, ARA I 
11. S l ~ri V.K. Gocl, TA 13l>ik" 
12. Shri H.D . Thakur. CG. 0/u CGPDT1\I 
13. Shri R.ll. 13hch,br. Jt. CCE, Olo CCE 
Ill. Representath c' uf lkpartuwnt uf Public Entrrpri<t\ 
l. Shri S. Talwar , JS (F) 
2. Dr. S. 13:~nl'rji, JA (F) 
3. Dr. Ani~h ~l:tdan, JA (F) 
4 Shn A. Luikh:un, Director (MGT.) 
5 Shri B.D. Virdi. Director (MOU) 
IV. Rrpres~ntatives of SCOPE 
I. Dr. Udes lt Kohl i, Chainn:tn, SCOPE & CMD, PFC 
2. Shri B.Y.K.K. R<~o. Senior M:1n:tger (F&A), SCOPE 
3. Shri K.N Dh:twan. Senior Munagcr (PR&P). SCOPE 
2. Initi ating the discu~sion. the Ch:tirman, welcomed the Secretary ;mtl other officials 
of Ministry of lnd11'try , Department of SSI and ARI :~nd requested the Secretary to 
make a l.>ricl prc,cntation in rc~pcct of Demand:. for Grant:. (1999-2000) of hi' 
Department. 
There~ftcr. the Secretary elaborated the details of fund allocations in thb fiscal year 
,.;_,-:r-vis achic\'ememvfailures etc of various schcmc:;/pl:ms in last fi:.cal year falling 
under the m:mdate of the Dcp:trtmcnt of SSL & A & Rl. The Chairnmn and Members 
sought clarifications from the Secretary on various issues arising out of the discussion. 
I i 

.. 
22 
The Chairman asked the Secretary to furnish '~ the earlie>t notes on issues whkh 
were wised and could not be replied in detail. 
3. The Comminec then adjourned for lunch to reassemble at 3.00 l'.M. to hear other 
invitees. 
4. Resuming the discussion at 3.00 P.M. the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other 
officials of Ministry of Industry, Departments of Industrial Development and Public 
Enterprises and requested the Secretary to make a brief presenwtion in respect of the 
Demands for Grunts (1999·2000) of his Departments. 
In his presentation the Secretary, briefly nurrated the various activities undertaken by 
the organ isation under its administrative control and tbe progress and achievement of 
various schemes/programmes. 
Chairman and Members sought clarifications from the Secretary on various points 
which came up for discussion before the Committee. Then the chairman asked the Secretary 
to furnish at the earliest notes on issues which could not be replied in detail. 
5. There after, the delegates of SCOPE made a brief presentation before the Comm ittee 
regarding disinves tment of PSEs nnd on a couple of other issues. They were also requested 
by the Chairman to send a dewilcd note on the issues raised by them during the course of 
the meeting. 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.05 P.M. to meet again on Friday, the 9th April, 
1999. 

XIII 
THIRTEENT H !11EETING 
Tht! Comm iuc·c m~t at li. Ol) ,,,M, on the 9th April , 1999 in r oom No . li3, First Floor, 
!':~Jiiarncnt !l ou"~, New Delhi . 
PRE SENT 
')hri Raghavji - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
> Shri Rajubhai A . Parmar 
3. Dr. R;lltbir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Sh ri Nagmani 
6. Shri Sanws h B:tgrodia 
LOK SABIIA 
7. Shri Aml:lsahcb M. K. l'atil 
8. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
'!. Shri Nadcndl:l Bhaskar Rao 
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
11. Shri Datta Meghe 
12. Dr. Shake cl Alunad 
13. Shri Sunil Khan 
14. Sh ri Shakuni Choud hury 
15. Shri Mal yala R ajaiah 
16. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samant:tray 
17. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
18. Shri S.S . Palanimani cka m 
SECRETAR IAT 
Shri Satish Kum ar, Joint Secre tary 
Shri Tapas D<ts Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under s ~crctary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Offi cer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion ) 
1. Shri Ajit Kum ar, Secretary 
2. Shri A.V. Singh, AS & FA 
3. Mrs. Pratibha Karan, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Shrawan Nigam, Econom ic Advisor 
6. Shri C.R . Sundaramurty, C.C.A. 
7. Shri R. Prakash, Salt Commissioner 
23 

24 
8. Sbri S. Sundarc;han, Dy. Sal! Commissmner 
9. Shri Am:1rcndra Sinha, N.P. Manager, NLDP 
10. Shri M. Snhu, Director 
11. Shri V.K . Yad av, Direc tor 
12. Shri A.C. Duggal, Di rector 
13. Smt. C.L. Malviyu , Dire~tor 
14. Shri I. Srinivas, Director 
15. Shri 0. Ravi , Director 
16. Shri A.K. Sinha, Direc10r 
17. Shri K.M. Sh:1hid, Dy. Sccrewry 
18. Shri Om Prakash, Dy. Secretary 
19. Shri C.B . S i n~;h, Dy. E.A . 
20. Brig. S.R. Puranik, Director 
Miuistry of Industry (Department of Heavy Industry) 
1. Shri P. Shankar, Sccrcwry 
2. Shri Ajay Vikr:un Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shri D.C . S~nwnt, Joint Secrcra •·y 
4. Shri l'radcep Kum:•r. Jomt Sl.'cretary 
5. Shri Ajoy Acll:•rya, Joint Secr~lllry 
6. Shri V.K. Mutreja, Dtrector 
2. We lcoming the offici:ds of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, the 
Chairman requested the Secrc lar y of the Department to give a brief ovc1view of the 
activities of his Department nnd tlte budgetary provisions thereon as contained in the 
Demands for Grants for 1999-2000. 
3. Speaking on behalf of his Department, the Secretary touched upon i~5uc~ like 
revision of Budgctnry Estimates for 1998-99 due to non-utilbation of funds earmarked for 
Investment Subsidy Scheme, speedy clearance of FDI proposals under :IUtomutic approva l 
mecha nism, etc. Participating in the discussion, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor of 
the Department spoke on the Growth Centre Scheme and Transport Subsidy Scheme. The 
Joint Secre wry of the Dep artm ent touched upon the Growth Centres of North-Eastern 
region and the new industrial policy for the North-East. 
4. P<Jrticipating in the discussion, the Chairman und the Members present asked 
questiom on a number of iS\ue' like Growth Centre Scheme, self reliance of rcseurch 
instllutes, Salt Act and tile plight llf salt workers cess on Cl'ment industry, target of FDI 
inflows, merger of Burc;m of Industrial Co>t and Price> with Turiff Commission, etc. 
5. The Sccret:try, Dep:utment of lndm.trial Policy and Promotion replied to the 
quc,tions raised by the Chairman :1ntl the Members and assured the Comm iuee to send 
detailed note' on the i.;sues on which infomlation was not readily a\ailable before the 
finalisation of the Repnrt. 
The Committee then adjourned for lunch to reassemble at 3.00 1'.~1. tn hear the ora l 
evidence of the Sccretttry, Dcpartmenl of Hc:tvy Industry. 
6. Initialing the discussion, the Chntrm:ul asked the Secretary, Dcputmc.:nl of Heavy 
Industry to make a brief presentation on the Demands for Grant~ of ht~ Department for 
1999-2000. 
7. The Secretary, in his presentation, spoke about the issues like the possible revival or 

25 
Praga Tools Ltd., Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. and Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd., 
status of joint venture proposals, VRS under the new grants-in-aid scheme, selling up of an 
expert panel t o look into t he revival of eight sick PSUs, etc. 
8. The Chairman and the Members present, asked questions on the issues covered in 
the presentation of the Secretary. 
9. The Secretary replied to the quer ies and assured the Committee to send writte n 
comments on the issues on which informa tion was not read ily a vailable. 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept. 
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 v.M. 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETI~G 
The Dcpunment related Parliamcnwry Standing Conun1Uc~ nn ln<IU >try met at 
3.00 ''·" · on Friday. the 16th April, 1999 in Room No. (>3. FiN Floor. P:11li:uncnt I lnusc. 
New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
J. Shri R;1ghuvji-C/tnimta11 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Karma Topdcn 
3. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
4. Shri C.O. Poulose 
5. Shri S:lnjay Nirupam 
6. Shri Santosh Dagrodia 
LOK SADflA 
7. Shri Annasabib M.K. P:1til 
8. Shri Konijcti RO>awh 
9. Shri Kirti Vardh:an Singh 
10. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
ll. Shri Surendr; , Pras:1d Yad:1v (Juhanabud) 
12. Sbri Malyala Rajui;~h 
13. Shri Ajay Ch:•krabony 
14. Shri Zora Singh 
15. Shri S.S. Palanimunickam 
16. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARlAT 
Shri Sutish Kunmr, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupw, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singlt, Committee Officer 
2. • • • 
3 . Then, the Commitce took up for discussion the draft Thirty-Second Report on the 
Demands for Grants (Jl)99-2000) of Mini>try of lndu:,lry. Suggestions/view; given by the 
Members were unanimously incorpo rmed in the body of the Report. 
4. • • • 
5. After the incorporat ion of tile suggest ions/views given by the Clwirman lind the 
Members, all the three Reports were un~nimously adopted by the CommiUee. 
• • •Rctalcs lo other matter. 
• 26 

6. The Committee then decided to prescnl/lay ollthe three Reports to the both !louses 
of Parliament on Tuesday, the 20th Apri l, 1999. It was ulso decided that: 
(u) The Ch:lirnwn and in his absem:c Shri S:tntosh Uagrodi:t will present the Reports to 
the Rajya Sabha. 
(b) Shri Ann:N•heb M.K. P:ttil und in his ahscnt·c ProF. Jogendra Kawade win l:1y the 
Repor ts on the Table t)f the Lok S:tbha. ' 
7. The Committee then :tdjourncd ill 4.15 P.M. 
27 
. . 