 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) 
THE MINISTRY OF 
          (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
(LAID ON THE TA 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT Y EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2015 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  5TH  AUGUST, 2015 
LAID ON THE TA BLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5 TH  AUGUST, 2015 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
268  
Y EIGHTH REPORT  
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES    
AUGUST, 2015 ) 
AUGUST, 2015 )  

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
          
(LAID ON THE TA 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXT Y EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
          (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5 TH  AUGUST, 2015 
LAID ON THE TA BLE OF LOK SABHA ON 5 TH  AUGUST, 2015 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
Y EIGHTH REPORT  
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT 
THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES   
AUGUST, 2015 ) 
AUGUST, 2015 )  

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
                                                                                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  ( i ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………   (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………1-17    
 
4. MINUTES………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
5. ANNEXURE ----------------------------------------- MSMED (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THECOMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED  W.E.F.  1 ST   SEPTEMBER,  2014) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
1. Shri K.C. Tyagi  _   Chairman  
2. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
3. Shri Vivek Gupta  
4. Shri Bhupinder Yadav 
5. Shri T. K. Rangarajan 
6. Shri Narendra Budania 
7. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
8. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
9. Shri Shamsher Singh Manhas 
10. Dr. Chanderpal  Singh Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
12. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
13. Shri Birendra Kumar Chaudhary 
14. Shri Mohammad Asrarul Haque 
15. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
16. Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena 
17. Smt. Poonamben Maadam 

 
 
18. Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
19. Shri S. P. Muddahanumegowda 
20. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
21. Shri M. Srinivasa Rao 
22. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
23. Shri Konda Veshweshwar Reddy 
24. Shri Y. V. Subba Reddy 
25. Shri Rajkumar Saini 
26. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
27. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
28. Shri Rameshwar Teli 
29. Smt. Savitri Thakur 
30. Smt. Dev Varma (Moon Moon Sen) 
31. Shri Rajan Vichare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
 Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
 Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
 Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 (i) 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamen tary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Sixty Eighth Report on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 pertaining to the Ministry o f Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises.   
2. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Developm ent (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 20 
th  April, 2015 and referred to the Committee on 
21 st  May, 2015 for examination and report.  
3.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises, Ministry of Law and Justice (De partments of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department), Ministry of Panchayati Raj  and received valuable inputs on the 
issue.   
4.  The Committee in its meeting held on 30 
th  July, 2015 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
 
K.C.TYAGI 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi,  
July, 2015 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
Report 
 
The MSME Development (Amendment) Bill, 2015 (Annexure)  was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 20 th  April 2015 and has been referred to this 
Committee on 21 st  May 2015 for examination and Report within 3 months.   
2. The Bill has two substantive clauses seeking to amend Sections 7 (1) 
and 7 (9) of the Act.  The Bill also proposes to in troduce a new clause as 
Section 7 (1 A) in the parent Act.  By amending Sec tion 7 of the Act, this 
Bill seeks to increase the investment limits for Mi cro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises in view of inflation and evolving market dynamics.  Through the 
proposed new Clause i.e., Section 7(1A), the Bill s eeks to empower the 
Government to further enhance investment limits in future through 
notification.   
3. The proposed Amendment in Section 7 (9) of the A ct defines the 
criterion of higher investment for small and medium  enterprises and will  
enable the Government to classify Village Enterpris es as Medium 
Enterprises which were earlier classified as small enterprises. 
4. A consequential amendment to Section 29 (3) is a lso proposed in 
order to give power to Government to frame Rules as per the amendments in 
Section 7(1), (1A) and (9). 
5. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill  states : 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development  (MSMED) 
Act, 2006 was enacted to address policy issues affe cting MSMEs as 
well as to classify the enterprises as micro, small  or medium based on 
their investment in plant and machinery/equipments.   The existing 
limits under the MSMED Act  were fixed in 2006.  Si nce then, there 
has been a significant increase in the price index and cost of inputs.  
There has also been a change in the business enviro nment with many 
MSMEs becoming part of the domestic and global valu e chains.  
Hence, it is proposed to amend the MSMED Act to enh ance the 
existing limit for investment in plant and machiner y considering 

 
 
changes in price index and cost of inputs consistent with the emerging 
role of the MSMEs in various global value chains. 
2. The MSMED Act, at present, states that the Centr al 
Government may, while classifying any class or clas ses or 
enterprises, vary, from time to time, the criterion  of investment and 
also consider criteria or standards in respect of e mployment or 
turnover of the enterprises.  These provisions enab le the Central 
Government to classify micro tiny enterprises or th e village 
enterprises as part of small enterprises.  The curr ent proposal is to 
enable Central Government to classify micro or tiny enterprises or the 
village enterprises not only as small enterprises b ut also as medium 
enterprises.  This may also be based on criteria of  higher investment 
and also on consideration of criteria or standard i n respect of 
employment or turnover of the enterprises.  It will  open the doors of 
growth to MSMEs and will enable them to go to next level of value 
chain. 
3. Since the MSMEs are defined in the Act, any vari ation could be 
done only by way of an amendment.  Considering the inflation and 
dynamic market situation, there is a need to period ically revise the 
criterion of investment.  Revising the investment l imits by way of 
notification will facilitate timely action.  Hence,  it is proposed to 
amend the MSMED Act to empower Central Government t o vary by 
way of a notification, the investment limits, which  shall not exceed 
thrice the limits, specified in clauses (a) and (b)  of sub-section (1) of 
section 7 for the purposes of development of micro, small and medium 
enterprises. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.” 
6. In his presentation before the Committee, the Se cretary, M/o MSME 
explained the objectives of the Bill and submitted as under : 
“Let me submit before the Chairman and the hon. Memb ers of the 
Committee that this is one of the smallest amendmen ts possible 
because you must have, as law makers, come across v arious types of 

 
 
bills which suggest amendment.  Very rarely an amendment is brought 
in where the amendment is only for two sections of that. In Section 7, 
the amendment that is being proposed is actually on  the monetary 
limits.  That means we are not touching the heart b y the amendment.  
We are touching some outer things. Why? Because a certain monetary 
limit, which was prescribed several years ago, may not be valid today.  
In fact, the correct procedure would have been, at that point of time, 
to suggest or plead before the Parliament saying th is monetary limit 
must be something which should be left to the infla tionary tendencies 
and a periodic adjustment should be possible. That way, a short 
request has been made that we may also be permitted  to enhance this 
limit or vary this limit but there is an upper limit placed not exceeding 
three times.  So, one is in Section 7 and the other is in Section  9.  In 
Section 9, Sir, because it is a smaller issue, let me plead that first.  All 
that has been done is that to permit the Government of India that such 
of the village industries which were earlier being classified as small 
enterprises can also be classified as medium enterp rises It is not 
changing the whole scenario. It is only expanding where we are trying 
to have a play.  ” 
7. The Secretary, Ministry of MSME further elaborat ed on the rationale 
of the proposed amendments in context of the dynami c market conditions in 
his submission before the Committee on 17 th  June, 2015: 
“the MSMEs are characterised by very low levels of t echnology.  In 
the MSME Development Act itself, as well as from th e industry 
perspective, there have been demands for enabling s mall enterprises 
to improve their technology.  When we improve the t echnology, which 
is in the context of MSME, it is not necessarily do ne by internal 
innovation but by bringing in better machinery for purposes of 
production or service delivery.  Then, that machine ry has to be 
purchased at the current cost and in doing so, many  of the MSMEs 
would cease to be MSMEs.  The micro would become sm all, small 
would become medium and medium would  cease to be in that domain.  
That was the second consideration. 
The third consideration was the emergence of value chains in global 
economy.  In a given value chain you have the Origi nal Equipment 

 
 
Manufacturer, Tier-1, 2, 3 and below the suppliers,  who support that 
value chain.  These value chains have to be globall y competitive if we 
have to stand anywhere in the global market.  The c ompetitiveness of 
the value chain would depend on each of the element s, not only the 
OEM being competitive, but     even Tier-1, 2, 3 an d all other 
ancillary and service providers to that value chain  being competitive.  
Therefore, there is a need to improve the productiv ity of the value 
chain in which the MSMEs constitute a big part and also with 
productivity, the competitiveness vis a vis other countries.   
The bigger part of the value chain, the top-most la yers like Tier-1 and 
mostly the Tier-2 suppliers are already outside the  domain of the 
MSMEs.  In some cases, Tier-3 is within the MSME se gment but 
MSMEs are actually falling even below the Tier-3 le vel .  As a result, 
what has happened is that, many of the Tier-3 or Ti er-2 suppliers are 
actually engaging the so-called MSMEs as a kind of outsourced 
agencies to fulfil certain jobs which are required in the manufacturing 
process.  There is another difficulty in the outsou rcing part which is 
imposition of the Service Tax.  If a job connected with the 
manufacture of a particular product is outsourced, then, that entity to 
which it is being outsourced will have to pay the S ervice Tax also.  
The Service Tax is  levied on it.   So the integration of the MSMEs in 
the value chain has been a problem and it is import ant that in the 
given value chains, at least the MSMEs come to occu py the level of 
Tier-3 and Tier-2.” 
8. He further stressed: 
“Now, if the whole nature of the manufacturing is ac tually turning 
from manufacture of individual components to sub-as semblies and 
system integration by the OEMs, in that context, it  becomes important 
in our opinion to at least keep pace with the techn ology and to enable 
the MSMEs to access technologies through developmen t programmes 
of the Government, whether it is at the State level  or at the Central 
level, Sir.”  
 Committee’s earlier discussion on the issue : Empha sis on 
delivering Government Schemes to Micro sector  

 
 
9. The Committee had in its 245 th  Report  has extensively examined the 
implementation of the MSMED Act, 2006 and had given  recommendations 
pertaining Chapters IV and V of the parent Act.  Th e Committee had 
generally agreed to enhance the investment limits f or the classification of 
MSME sector in view of inflation. It had observed : 
“Considering  the inflation and dynamic market situation, the Committee 
feels that definition of MSMEs as provided in the A ct may be revised 
every five years.” 
 
10.  Subsequently, the Committee in its 264 
th  Report on the Demands for 
Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of MSME, took a more nuanced position as 
it enquired about the accessibility of the Governme nt’s schemes to the 
unregistered and unorganized sector mainly consisti ng of micro enterprises. 
The Committee observed: 
 
“On being asked whether the Ministry’s schemes were reaching to 
remaining unregistered and unorganized sector, the Committee was 
informed in a written reply that the Ministry has n ot done any survey 
whether its Schemes are reaching to unorganized sec tor nor has it taken 
steps so far to facilitate doing business for the unorganized sector.” 
 
11. The Committee had also raised the issue of inac cessibility of 
Government schemes for the unorganized sector and r ecommended as    
under  – 
 
“…. Considering the Ministry’s admission that its s chemes are mostly 
targeted to Registered Units, and that only a miniscule minority of MSMEs 
is registered, the Committee finds the situation un acceptable. The 
MSMED Act, 2006 does not make it obligatory upon mi cro enterprises to 
register. In excluding unorganized sector, the Mini stry has gone against 
the statuary provisions of the Act in respect of re gistration. Unorganised 
sector is at the margins of even marginalized MSME sector. The Ministry 
should do a comprehensive survey if its Schemes are  reaching to 
unregistered micro enterprises who essentially seek ease of doing business. 
The Ministry has highlighted involvement of multipl e Ministries and State 
Governments for facilitating conducive business env ironment. The 
Ministry has conveniently confined itself to the role of advocacy. However, 
the MSMED Act provides for National MSME Board with  representation 
from all the relevant Ministries and the State Gove rnments. The Ministry 

 
 
has not informed that this issue was ever discussed  or likely to be 
discussed in future, in the National Board so that a comprehensive 
actionable national policy on “Ease of Doing Busine ss” particularly for 
the unorganized unregistered sector, could be evolved. ” 
 
12. The Committee was of the view that the benefits  of Ministry’s 
Schemes had not reached unorganized sectors and any  further increase in 
limits of investment, may further marginalise the u norganized units with 
micro investment. It had recommended: 
 
“The Committee therefore recommends that the Minist ry must survey that 
its Schemes must reach the largely unorganized micr o sector even as it 
proposes to increase the investment limit.” 
 
The Bill 
 
 
13. The Committee held three meeting on the Bill, w ith the 
representatives of M/o MSME and the Legislative Dep artment and 
Department of Legal Affairs ( M/o Law and Justice) and M/o Panchayati 
Raj.  
 
 
Need for greater inclusion of Micro Sector 
 
 
14. As the Committee awaited the Action taken note on its 
recommendations/observations contained in its 264 
th  Report, the 
Government brought the new MSME Development (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
in Lok Sabha which was referred to the Committee for examination. 
 
15. In his remarks the Chairman of the Committee  o bserved : 
 
“While Ministry has chosen to act upon Committee’s recommendation 
selectively, it has not followed-up  with the Commi ttee’s observations 
contained in its recent report on Demands for Grant s (2015-16) for the 
Ministry.  The Committee had asked the Ministry if it had conducted any 
survey to ensure whether its scheme reached the uno rganized unregistered 
micro sector.  In its reply, the Ministry had infor med that no such survey 
was done nor had it taken any steps to facilitate s uch micro units in doing 
business.  In his presentation before the Committee , the Secretary defended 
the exemption given to micro units from registratio n as it may bring them 

 
 
into the ambit of multiple inspections.  The Commit tee noted that while 
exemption from registration was given to facilitate  the micro unit in doing 
their business, however, without registration these units remained effectively 
excluded from the Government’s schemes.  The Committee in its Report had 
observed that the exclusion of micro units from Gov ernment’s Schemes was 
contrary to statuary position as prescribed in the Act.”  
 
 16. The Committee was inclined to recommend making  registration 
mandatory and convenient even for micro units based  on PAN or ADHAR 
numbers.  Specific provision may be incorporated to  exempt micro units 
from any inspections.  If registration is necessary  to avail the Government’s 
Scheme then it should be made easier and least intrusive. 
 
17. In this regard the Secretary, M/o MSME submitte d before the 
Committee: 
 
” If we submitted before you that mandatory registrat ion  will send a 
wrong signal, please emphasise the word "mandatory" .  If you 
mandate anything, then, the next step is the follow  up  and regulation.  
Then, what will happen?  If registration becomes ma ndatory, my 
officers will go and check.  If we do not go and ch eck, we will be 
asked questions by you, and three Organisations lik e CVC, C&AG 
and CBI…”  
 
18. He further informed the Committee: 
 
” After the K.V. Kamath Committee -- Mr K.V. Kamath  was formerly 
Chairman of the ICICI Bank and now going as the Cha irman of the 
BRICS Bank -- has made a suggestion that can there be an Adhaar  
sort of registration. And one-page registration for mat has been 
developed, it is on our website. We have written to  all the State 
Governments in this regard. After the advise by the  Standing 
Committee on this point, we have reminded them. I w ill take up with 
various State Governments to get their feeling, and  registration is 
somehow going on. “ 
 
19. In absence of any survey as recommended in the Report, the 
Committee apprehends marginalization of micro sector. 
 

 
 
20.  In this regard, the Committee during its study vis it in June 2015 
took note of PM’s MUDRA Yojna, announced in the Bud get speech 
2015-16, to meet the credit requirements for the Mi cro sector.  During 
its study visit the Committee interacted with the C MD of SIDBI, which 
is the nodal agency to implement the MUDRA Scheme a nd the select 
Public sector Banks regarding the Yojna. The Commit tee found that 
MUDRA Yojna launched in April, 2015 is designed to cater to the credit 
requirements of micro sector through a network of m icro finance 
institutions.  Same time benefits of other Governme nt schemes need to 
be delivered to the micro sector.   
 
 
Need for an Amendment Bill 
 
 
21.  The Committee considered whether there was need to bring the 
present Amendment Bill.  When Section 7 (1) of the parent Act 
empowers the Government to classify any class of En terprises through 
Notification after having the recommendations of Ad visory Committee 
and the National MSME Board.  The Government could have revised 
the classification only through the notification in stead of bringing an 
Amendment.   
 
22. On this issue, the representative of the Legisl ative Department 
informed in his submission before the Committee on 17 
th  June, 2015: 
 
“regarding the first point about classification of industries by 
notification, initially they proposed only by notif ication, they want to 
amend the Act. But the Department of Legal Affairs objected to this 
point. The Department of Legal Affairs observed tha t if some 
maximum monetary limit is specified in the Act, wit hin that limit, a 
notification can be issued. That is the observation  of the Department 
of Legal Affairs. So, accordingly, the Bill was dra fted and thrice the 
existing limit was specified in the Bill.” .  
23. In its written opinion, the Department of Legal  Affairs too underlined 
the need for an Amendment Bill to change the existi ng investment limit in 
plant and machinery as no specific power was confer red under the existing 
provisions of Section 7(1) of the parent Act. 
 

 
 
 Need to bring Village Industry under the ambit of A ct in supersession 
of the KVIC Act  
 
24. The Committee sought to know the substantive ob jective of 
Amendment proposed in Section 7 (9) to classify vil lage industries under 
Medium Enterprise, when the village industries are being governed under 
the KVIC Act which is being administered by the same Ministry.   
 
25. The Ministry in their written submission stated  as under: 
 
“Since Government has had no intention to include v illage industries 
as medium industries, this issue was not placed bef ore the National 
MSME Board or the National KVI Board.”   
 
26. The Committee in its 259 
th  Report on KVIC Act too had appreciated 
the need to enhance the investment limit in case of  KVIC Act.  Then what 
was the need to bring Village industry under MSMED Act just to classify 
them as Medium Industry.  Whether the Ministry has intention to subsume 
the Village Industry into MSMEs, then what was the relevance and need to 
retain KVIC Act? The Committee sought to know why s hould the Village 
Enterprises be administered under two Acts of the same Ministry? 
27. The Ministry stated: 
“The Ministry of MSME has no intention either to sub sume the village 
industries under the MSMEs nor, the KVIC Act under the MSMED 
Act. Village industries would continue to be admini stered under the 
KVIC Act and not under the MSMED Act.  In view of t he aforesaid 
position, Government is separately considering cert ain amendments 
in the KVIC Act, 1956.  One of the amendments relat es to change in 
definition of “Village Industry”. The amendment in the definition of 
“Village industry” has been proposed primarily for making changes 
into the fixed capital investment per head of an ar tisan or a worker 
taking into account inflation and also to widen the  reach of the 
existing schemes for providing necessary capital to  raise employment 
levels.”  
28. In this regard, the Ministry in its written rep ly also stated: 
 

 
 
‘Village Industries would continue to be classified as village industry 
as per the definition given under Section (2) (h) o f the KVIC Act, 
1956. The existing provision in Section 7(9) empowe rs the Central 
Government to classify village industries as part o f small enterprises 
only to cover the process of natural growth of a vi llage industry 
graduating to the level of small enterprises. Since  such an eventuality 
may also include the level of medium enterprises, t he words “medium 
enterprises” are proposed to be inserted.’ 
 
29. In the Committee’s meeting on 24 th  July, 2015, the Secretary read out 
the definition of Village Industry in the KVIC Act to elaborated on the issue 
further: 
“I am reading it from the KVIC Act, 1956.  It says,  ‘any 
industry located in a rural area’.  So the first co ndition is, it 
must be located in a rural area.  It further says, ‘which 
produces any goods or renders any service’.  That m eans there 
is no restriction as to what you are going to produ ce or what 
you are going to do.  There is no restriction over services.  It 
further says, ‘with or without the use of power’.  Again, there is 
no restriction, whether you are using power or not.   So the only 
condition is the rural area.  It further says, ‘in which the fixed 
capital investment per head of an artisan or a work er does not 
exceed rupees one lakh’.  So, there are two essential conditions.  
The second condition is whether it is in a rural area or not.  If it 
is not in a rural area, it is not a village industr y.  Even if it is in 
rural area and the investment per artisan is more t han rupees 
one lakh, it is out of it.  If it is less than rupe es one lakh, it is 
possible. “  
 
30. He reaffirmed before the Committee that the cha racter of Village 
Industry will not be changed : 
 
“The other point, which the hon. Member mentioned, i s that 
even a village industry, today, can be declared as a 'small 
enterprise'.  The character of the 'village industr y' will not go.  

 
 
It will be both -- a village industry under the KVI C Act and a 
small enterprise under the MSME Act.  All we are tr ying to say 
is that give us the permission to declare the villa ge industries 
without cutting the roots of village industries.  E arlier, we 
could only call that 'also a small enterprise'. Now , we are 
seeking permission to call it, if possible, 'also a small' or 'also a 
medium'.  “ 
  
31. The Committee sought to assess the proposed ame ndment in Section 
7(9) in a context. In absence of any survey on stat us of village small units, 
the Committee felt that the “Ministry has created a  hypothetical scenario for 
organic growth of village industry into a Medium en terprise. The Census 
figures recently released, pointed out that only 1. 6% of rural household are 
engaged in non-farming enterprises. 50% of the rura l households depend on 
contractual labour. ... Rural sector is under sever e distress. In such abysmal 
situation, does the Ministry realistically envisage a village enterprise of Rs 5 
crores and above?” The Committee sought to know if the provisions of the 
Act are limited only to the village industries list ed in Schedule of the KVIC 
Act?   
 
 
32. The Ministry replied: 
The MSMED Act does not define a ‘village industry”.   An industry 
located in a village and engaged in production or m anufacture of an 
item or the activity mentioned in the Schedule to t he KVIC Act is 
classified as ‘village industry’ in terms of the de finition given in 
Section 2 (h) of the KVIC Act for the purposes of the KVIC Act only. 
 
33. The issue of including village industries under  the ambit of 
MSMED Act also pertained to definition of ‘village industry’.  Under 
the MSMED Act, the classification is done on the ba sis of investment in 
‘plant and machinery’ whereas under the KVIC Act, a  village industry 
is defined in terms of investment which includes la nd and building. The 
KVIC Act also defines the ‘Rural area’ where the Vi llage industries are 
supposed to be located.  The Committee wondered if extending the 
MSMED Act to the village industry, not bring the is sue of conflicting 
definitions? And in absence of any definition of Vi llage Industry and 

 
 
Rural Area in the MSMED Act, such provisions will b e prone to 
conflicting interpretations.  
 
 
34. Regarding possible conflict in definition of Vi llage Industry, the 
Ministry in its written reply tried to justify such difference in definition: 
 
“According to the KVIC Act, 1956, a village industry  is defined in 
terms of the amount of the fixed capital investment  including 
investment in plant and machinery and land and buil ding (Section (2) 
(cc) &(h)). Since the village industries have been traditionally based 
on skills and craft of artisan with little investme nt in equipment, the 
cost of land and building is taken into consideration for the purpose of 
their categorisation. In the event, such a village industry grows in 
terms of increased business and turnover and wishes  to graduate to 
the higher scale with induction of new technologies  and equipment, it 
should be allowed to come under the umbrella of the  MSMED Act 
through the proposed amendment to the Act, instead of the KVIC Act. 
As such, there is apparently no conflict in the respective definitions .” 
 
35. During the meeting on 24 
th  July, 2015, the Secretary, M/o MSME 
conceded that there was no consultation in respect of Village Industries 
being classified as Medium Industries. He reaffirme d that the proposed 
amendment will not change the character of village industries. The Secretary 
also informed the Committee that Government will br ing a comprehensive 
Bill to amend the KVIC Act, 1956 including the defi nitions of Village 
industries to enhance the investment limit per worker/artisan. 
 
36. The Committee noted that only 4 States and 3 UTs re sponded to 
the Amendments sought in the Bill.  The Committee e xpressed concern 
whether the views of only 4 States and 3 UTs could be taken as 
representatives of remaining States.  The Committee  is of view that 
comments of remaining States may also be obtained a nd taken into 
consideration. 
 
37. The Secretary, in his submission informed the C ommittee about the 
consultative process followed before bringing the Bill: 

 
 
“We have the MSME Development Board, in which this issue was 
actually raised by the State Governments, and by th e industry 
associations. Then, we put this proposal on our web site for comment 
by anybody, including the associations, etc. Then, we requested the 
States...” 
38. He informed the Committee that he himself had w ritten letters to the 
Chief Secretaries of the States, soliciting their c omments and inputs on the 
Bill. 
39. However, the Committee has doubt whether the is sue of increasing 
the investment limit was ever conclusively discusse d in details in the 
National MSME Board. The issue was raised by two in dustry organizations 
and only one State Government of MP, who later did not even respond to the 
provisions of Amendment Bill. One industry organiza tion opposed the 
proposal. However, nothing was decided conclusively  in the Board. The 
Committee is not aware if the issue pertaining Sect ion 7(9) of the Act 
regarding Village Industries too was ever discussed  in the National MSME 
Board or the KVIC. The Committee wondered that apar t from its own 
recommendations, if adequate consultations have bee n done in the 
Government and among States on the issue. 
40. The Secretary, M/o MSME pleaded: 
“There is one question that you have raised also tha t "Did you 
consult?" The answer is yes. There was consultation  in various fora. 
The only thing is that during consultation there was unanimity, but did 
not get recorded in the shape of a conclusion, or, in the shape of a 
resolution.  But even today there is almost unanimi ty. In the last few 
days some people from the Industry Association came  and met me. 
Their view is that if you do not amend that effecti vely, quite a few 
people would be shut out of the MSMED Act.”  
 
41. However, in the meeting held on 24 
th  July, 2015, the Secretary, M/o 
MSME informed that as per the Committee’s observati ons, a meeting of 
National MSME Board was convened and that there was  general consensus 
over the issue of raising investment limit in plant  and machinery in respect 
of MSMEs.  
 
“, Sir, after the last meeting and before today’s m eeting, a meeting of 
the National Board was convened and in the meeting of the National 

 
 
Board, we, specifically, raised this point and we a lso listed out who 
the speakers are who are speaking in favour.  It is  my pleasure to 
inform you that we got almost complete support on t hat.  Some 
speakers did not mention this issue. “  
 
42. The Committee express its appreciation that the Na tional MSME 
Board considered the issue and that there was general agreement. 
 
 
Limited Amendment: Status of Committee’s earlier re commendations 
on the MSMED Act, 2006  
 
43. In addition to the proposed amendments, the Committ ee in its 
245 
th  Report had  made comprehensive recommendations per taining 
National MSME Board, for making Industrial Facilita tion Council 
more effective tool for timely recovery of dues to the MSE suppliers, 
inclusion of autonomous bodies and State Government s in the purchase 
preference policy for MSEs, protection of unorganis ed micro sector in 
wake of FDI policy and credit related issues. It wa s expected that those 
recommendations will be reflected in the Amendment Bill. However, the 
Bill is being brought only for a very limited purpo se to increase the 
investment limits. 
 
44. Regarding other steps taken by the Government, in conformity with 
the provisions of the Act, the Secretary, informed the Committee : 
 
“Sir, I would also like to point out in this contex t the other enabling 
provisions in the MSME Development Act.  There are a number of 
provisions under which Facilitation Council has bee n set up, under 
which the Ministry and the Government are empowered  to issue 
notifications for the development of MSMEs and also  for issues 
connected with the credit inflow to the MSME sector .  We have so far 
brought about two important notifications.  One is relating to the 
procurement from the micro and small enterprises.  Very recently 
another notification has been issued dealing with t he issue of relief 
and rehabilitation of the MSMEs and to address the problem of  
 

 
 
incipient sickness, its early identification and ad dressing it through a 
mechanism which has been prescribed in a notificati on in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India. “   
 
45. The Ministry in its written reply further submi tted: 
 
“This Ministry has proposed to amend the MSMED Act w ith the 
limited purpose to raise the investment ceiling as early as possible so 
that the coverage of benefits available to micro an d small enterprises 
is widened under the revised ceilings.  The  compre hensive review of 
the MSMED Act in the light of the recommendations o f the Hon’ble 
Committee as well as other relevant factors may be taken up after the 
detailed examination of the issues involved.”  
46. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendatio ns contained 
in its 245 
th  Report and is of the view after reading the written comments 
of the Ministry that adequate consultation has to b e done on the need to 
bring amendments in the existing parent Act.  
 
Committee’s observations  
 
47. After a detailed examination of the Bill and di scussions with the 
concerned Ministries/Departments, in addition to de tailed discussion and 
observations on above issues, the Committee also dr aws following 
conclusions: 
48. The Committee in its 259 
th  Report on KVIC Act had 
recommended amendments in the definition regarding investment limit 
for Village Industry and Rural Areas. The Committee  wonders that 
despite such recommendation the Ministry chose not to enhance 
investment limit under KVIC Act and has instead pro posed to bring 
Village Industries under the enlarged ambit of MSMED Act. In absence 
of any empirical study on the coverage of Governmen t schemes of small 
village industries and in view of recent  census fi gures reflecting severe 
economic distress in rural areas, the Committee cautions that classifying 
Village Industries as Medium Industry may not achie ve the stated 
objectives and even lead to conflicting interpretat ions of definitions 
under two Acts. The Committee is of the view that G overnment may 

 
 
consider including the definition of Village Indust ry as given in the 
KVIC Act with commensurate modifications, in the MSMED Act. 
49. The Committee reiterates its concern regarding non -accessibility 
of Government schemes to largely unregistered micro  sector and 
reaffirms its recommendation in 264 th  Report in this respect. The 
Committee acknowledges that recent PM’s MUDRA Yojna  may meet 
the credit requirements of micro sector, however, o ther Government 
schemes too should reach the micro sector.  
50. The Committee also appreciates the initiatives taken by the 
Ministry to encourage the micro units to register o n the basis of 
ADHAR or PAN with a one page form. The Committee re cognizes that 
micro units are usually apprehensive that registrat ion may lead to 
intrusive inspections. The Committee therefore reco mmends that if 
registration is essential for availing Govt. scheme s then it should be 
made convenient and non intrusive. 
51. The Committee reiterates its recommendations in 24 5 
th  Report 
and feels that proposed amendments are only partial . The 245 th  report 
was the outcome of Committee’s detailed examination of actual working 
of various provisions of the parent MSME Developmen t Act, 2006, over 
last decade. The Committee had identified certain i ssues and had made 
recommendations. The Committee believes that its re commendations 
should have been incorporated in this Amendment Bil l and it feels that 
its recommendations will be a useful reference for future comprehensive 
amendment of the parent Act.  
  

 
 
Adoption of the Bill  
 
On the 24 th  July, 2015, the Committee had clause by clause dis cussion 
and adopted the Bill as under:- 
(1) Short  title and  Commencement  
 
(1)  This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Me dium Enterprises 
Development (Amendment) Act, 2015.       
 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the C entral Government 
may, by notification   in the Official Gazette, app oint. 
  
(2) Amendment of Section 7  
 
  In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Develo pment Act, 2006 
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) in Section 7-  
     
(a) In sub-section (1),- 
 
(i) In clause (a)  
 
(A) In sub-clause (i)  for the words "twenty-five lakh rupees", the words  
"fifty lakh rupees" shall be substituted. 
 
(B) for sub-clauses (ii)  and (iii),  the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, namely: 
 

 
 
(ii)   a small enterprise, where the investment in plant  and machinery is 
more than fifty lakh rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees. 
 
(iii)  a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant  and machinery is 
more than ten crore rupees but does not exceed thirty  crore rupees," 
 
  (ii)  in clause (b)  - 
 
(A)in sub-clause  (i)  for the words "ten lakh rupees" , the words "twent y 
lakh rupees" shall be substituted; 
 
(B) for sub-clauses (ii)  and (iii),  the following sub-clauses shall be 
substituted, namely :- 
 
"(ii)   a small enterprise, where the investment in equip ment is more 
than twenty lakh  rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees. 
 
(iii)   a medium enterprise, where the investment in equi pment is more 
than five crores rupees but does not exceed fifteen crore rupees." 
 (b )  after sub-section (1),  the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely  :- 
(1A)   The Central Government may, by notification, vary  the 
investment limits, which shall not exceed thrice th e limits, specified in 
clauses (a)  and (b)  of sub-section (1)  for the purposes of development of 
micro, small and medium enterprises." 
 
  (c ) in sub-section (9)  - 
 

 
 
(i) for the words "criterion of investment", the words "criterion of higher 
investment"  shall be substituted; 
 
(ii) for the words "as part of small enterprises", the w ords "as part of 
small and medium  enterprises" shall be substituted. 
 
(3)     Amendment of Section 29.  
 
  2.  In the principal Act, in Section 29, in sub-s ection (3),  for the words 
and figure "under section 9" the words, brackets, f igures and letter "under sub-
section (1A)  of Section 7, section 9" shall be substituted. 
The Committee adopted the Amendment Bill without any change.  
 
 
 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 