143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
 
           PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE  HUNDRED  FORTY - THIRD  REPORT
ON
Level playing field for the indian capital
Goods industry
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23rd DECEMBER, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 23rd DECEMBER, 2003)
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DECEMBER, 2003/PAUSA, 1925 (SAKA)
E.mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website:http//parliamentofindia.nic.in
 
 
CONTENTS
                                                                                               
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
5. MINUTES
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution --- 1st January, 2003)
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander     ____     Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     4.   Dr. M.N. Das
     5.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     6.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     7.   Shri Lajpat Rai
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.   Shri K. Chandran Pillai
           LOK SABHA
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
   17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   20.   Shri K. Francis George
   21.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   22.   Md. Anwarul Haque
   23.   Shri A. C. Jose
   24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   25.   Shri Mansoor Ali Khan
   26.   Shri Sunil Khan
   27.   Shri Deepak Kumar
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.   Shri A. Narendra
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
   34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   35.   Shri P. Rajendran
   36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   38.   Shri Ramanand Singh
   39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   40.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   41.   Shri V. Vetriselvan
   42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   43.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh
   44.   Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by the
Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Forty-third Report on Level Playing Field for the Indian Capital Goods Industry.
2.      The Committee at its meeting held on 18th December, 2003 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 18, 2003
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
LEVEL  PLAYING  FIELD  FOR
THE  INDIAN  CAPITAL  GOODS  INDUSTRY
 
CHAPTER - I
IMPACT  OF  FISCAL  POLICY  AND  EXIM POLICY  ON  CAPITAL  GOODS  INDUSTRIES
        In early eighties, when India's economy was on an uptrend, there was need for investment in the infrastructure sector.
Investment from within India was not forthcoming mainly because of higher rate of interest and private sector risk aversions.
Investment during those years was mainly from multilateral/bilateral funding agencies. For judicious usage of these funds, the
projects were established under International Competitive Bidding procedures. Indian companies were also eligible to participate
in the bidding procedure. Overseas suppliers could enjoy soft export financing from their exim banking and other export benefits
prevailing in those countries. The Indian companies were also extended the duty free raw material imports and refund of excise
duty on their finished goods to have a level playing field. Supplies to such projects were termed as Deemed Exports.
        As a part of the commitment given to WTO, the peak rate of customs duty was to be brought down to a level agreed with
WTO in a time bound matter and accordingly the rate of customs duty for the project was also reduced gradually. Project import

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
duty for the power projects was settled at 20% + Nil CVD since 1992-93.
        Since the import tariffs were coming down, the domestic industry was facing tough competition from the foreign suppliers.
Till the time the customs duty was 20% with nil CVD, the domestic industry was getting the refund of Terminal Excise Duty as
most of the projects were multilateral/bilateral funded projects. Later, as the economic conditions improved, the investment started
coming from within the country as well. Recognizing the importance of infrastructure projects in area of power and refinery
sector, DGFT announced that the supplies to such projects will be treated as deemed exports, even if these were not funded by
multilateral/bilateral agencies. Therefore all the supplies to power projects were treated as deemed exports w.e.f. 31.3.97. in the
absence of CVD on the direct import under Project Imports, there was no level playing field for the domestic industry, as there
supplies were subjected to Excise Duty. Therefore, domestic industry represented to the Government for refund of TED, which
was permitted by DGFT from 18.10.96.
1.3   After 18.10.1996, there were equal opportunities for the foreign suppliers and the domestic suppliers as the imports were
subjected to customs duty @ 22% with Nil CVD and domestic supplier was getting the refund of TED. This position remained
unchanged till 28.02.99.
1.4   During the period 1996-99, power projects attracted basic customs duty of 20% with Nil CVD. The terminal excise duty paid
by Indian manufacturers was refunded by the office of DGFT. This provided protection of 20% to indigenous industry against the
disadvantages suffered on account of sales tax and other local levies on inputs/final product, higher cost of finance, infrastructure
inadequacies etc.
1.5   During the budget of 1999-2000, the customs duty was reduced to 5.5% from 22% but CVD was imposed @16%. The
overall impact on the imported goods was 22.38%. Therefore this change in the duty structure had not impacted much on the
imports. Domestic suppliers continued to get the refund of TED in spite of imposition of CVD @ 16%. But DGFT while
announcing the Exim Policy effective from the year 2000, discontinued the refund of TED to the domestic suppliers. Although the
domestic suppliers were permitted duty free imports, the earlier gap between the foreign supplier and domestic supplier, which
was 2.38% reduced to 8.03% [22.38% - 16% + 1.65% (5.5% of the import content of 30%)]. This gap has been further reduced to
7.45%, since the surcharge of customs duty is withdrawn [21.8% - 16% + 1.65% (5% of import content of 30%)]. This has put the
domestic suppliers in a disadvantageous position.
1.6   It is pertinent to note that prior to 31.3.2000 i.e. date when refund of terminal excise duty was withdrawn, domestic
manufacturers have secured orders under international competitive bidding by passing on to the customer the benefit of refund of
TED as applicable in the extant Exim Policy. In case of power and fertilizer projects, where the cycle time for competition is
normally 3-4 years, the schedule for supply of capital goods is invariably 3 years.
1.7   In all such contracts, excise duty is charged extra over and above the basic price of the equipment. Since excise duty was
refundable to the manufacturer, it was not included in the price settled with customers. With the withdrawal of this refund, the
16% excise duty being quite substantial has to be borne by the manufacturer. In all such contracts where customers are neither
agreeable to renegotiate the prices to compensate the manufacturers nor are they ready to pay the applicable excise duty, the
domestic suppliers are adversely affected resulting in heavy financial loss.
1.8   In this regard the Committee notes that the objective of the Exim Policy has been outlined in the Exim Policy at para 1.4,
which is reproduced below :
(a)  To facilitate sustained growth in exports to attain a share of at least 1% of global merchandise trade.
(b)  To stimulate sustained economic growth by providing access to essential raw materials, intermediates, components,
consumables and capital goods required for augmenting production and providing services.
(c)  To enhance the technological strength and efficiency of Indian agriculture, industry and services, thereby improving their
competitive strength while generating new employment opportunities, and to encourage the attainment of internationally
accepted standards of equality.
(d)  To provide consumers with good quality goods and services at internationally competitive prices while at the same time
creating a level playing field for the domestic producers.
         As state at (d) above, the Central Government provides a level playing field for the domestic producers and therefore,
wherever, the domestic producer secure orders even from within India, such supplies are treated as Deemed Exports. Provided,
that such orders are obtained by the domestic producers against International Competitive Bidding Procedures. Deemed Exports
are eligible for any/all benefits in respects of manufacture and supply of goods.
1.9   Following different types of Power Projects are installed in India : 
(a)  power projects financed by multilateral or bilateral agencies/funds
(b)  power projects with domestic funding
(c)  mega power projects
(d)  nuclear power projects
(e)  captive power plants
1.10So far as the power projects covered under (a), (c) and (d) above, all the benefits viz.
(i)   Advance license and Deemed Exports
(ii)  Deemed Exports drawback; and

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
(iii)  Refund of TED
are available to the domestic suppliers, but regarding power projects under (b) above, only two benefits namely Advance License
for deemed exports and deemed exports drawback are available.
        In this category of projects, the domestic industry has been requesting the Central Government for refund of TED, which was
withdrawn on the supplies made from 1.4.2000. It was mentioned that the domestic industry is suffering from cost disadvantages
like inadequate and high cost of infrastructure, higher cost of financing, sales tax, octroi and other taxes etc., which are of the tune
of 14% to 23% depending upon the location of the project and the supplier. The customs duty should be pegged at 20%. In the
light of budget speech given by Finance Minister who stated in his budget speech that by the year 2004-05, there would be two
basic rates of customs duties namely, 10% covering generally raw materials, intermediates and components and 20% covering
generally final products.
 
CHAPTER - II
IMPLEMENTATION  OF  36
TH, 45TH AND  59TH  REPORTS
2.0   India is still a developing country and the domestic industry continues to suffer cost disadvantages such as sales tax, octroi,
higher cost of finances and infrastructure, bottlenecks to the extent of 14% to 23% while competing with foreign companies. The
domestic industry therefore should be compensated in one way or the other.
2.1   The Industrial Policy of 1991 started the process of de-licensing. The process of de-regulation was aimed at enlarging
competition and allowing new firms to enter the markets. The market was opened up to domestic entrepreneurs/industrialists,
which was reserved for public sector undertakings, and foreign capital was provided free entry up to 51% equity in high
technology areas. With the advent of globalisation, when World Bank-aided projects started to come to country, the lifting of
import control and drastic reduction of import duties, competition from overseas posed a problem to the domestic capital goods
industry. It has become difficult to stay in the race for this industry in the face of stiff competition from the multinational giants.
2.2   Despite the tremendous odds even on date, there are examples of various domestic Indian companies in sectors like
automobiles, steel, engineering, etc. in both public and private sectors that have successfully withstood the changes brought about
by the liberalization of Indian economy, for example Maruti and Tata cars are being exported. TISCO has been recognized as one
of the least cost steel producers in the world and companies like IRCON, BHEL and L&T have been successfully executing
contracts abroad. These companies have managed to meet the stiff competition from foreign giants but the absence of a level
playing field put increasing pressures on their competitiveness and profitability.
2.3   The committee deliberated upon the matter and in its 36th Report observed as under :
"One such company (BHEL) which has successfully withstood the changes brought about by the liberalization of Indian
economy. The impressive track record of it calls for a special mention of its achievements. As a matter of fact, BHEL is a
role model for other PSUs of Ministry of Heavy Industry. For it has managed to stay in the race despite the odds faced by
it as a result of stiff competition unleashed by the multinational giants operating in its field of specialization namely,
manufacture of power plants. Though BHEL has managed to sustain its viability yet it is facing some unfair challenges.
The absence of a level playing field vis-a-vis its multinational competitors has been posing stiff challenges to the
company. This is leading to an ever-increasing pressure on its profitability. Despite this, the company has been constantly
upgrading its technology and has also been successful in acquiring state of the art technology used in HVDC power
projects. This reflects the commitments of the company as a whole to serve the nation even when the odds are stacked
against it. Therefore, what this company requires is a little help from the Government in the form of suitable policy
measures. In this regard, the sub-committee draws the attention of the Government to the issues of price and purchase
preference to BHEL, and import duty concessions to the foreign companies. Though in some cases price and purchase
preference is granted to the PSUs, the positive results of this measure are negated by the import duty concessions
extended to the foreign companies by the Government. These concessions and exemptions are precisely the reasons for
the playing field not being level for domestic companies or for that matter PSUs as the bids offered by foreign players are
much lower in comparison to the ones offered by PSUs. In other words, the competition is killed well before it begins.
The committee believes that the need of the hour is not to go back to the days of protectionism rather to provide a level
playing field to all the players for the sake of healthy competition.
Committee's Recommedations
2.4   In view of the above, the committee has come to the conclusion that the Government should take necessary policy measures
to extend 15% price and purchase preference to BHEL vis-a-vis its bids for domestic power projects. It also recommends that the
Government should review its policy of giving duty concessions to the foreign companies in as much as it leads to disadvantages
to the domestic companies especially the PSUs. It is the considered view of the committee that foreign companies should not be
shown favour at the expense of domestic companies.
2.5   Comments from Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises are as under :
"The Ministry has taken up the following issues with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce, the issue
relating to restoration of refund of terminal excise duty as available to domestic bidders in the Exim Policy 1999-2000.
2.6   Ministry of Commerce declined the proposal of this ministry to restore refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED) in EXIM
Policy 1999-2000, as these benefits are directly related to the incidence of Customs Duty (CD) and Counter Veiling Duty (CVD)
on the imports for the project, i.e. whenever the imports are exempted from the incidence of CVD, the domestic supplier is given
the benefit of refund of TED. In the budget 2000-2001, in respect of power projects other than mega-power projects, fertilizer
projects and refineries, CVD has been increased to 16% and therefore the benefits of refund of TED is withdrawn from such
projects.

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
2.7   A meeting was held by the Finance Secretary on 26.7.2000 to discuss the issue regarding the competitiveness of domestic
industries. As a follow up of this meeting, a note highlighting the following three issues which are adversely affecting the
domestic industries was circulated to the concerned Ministries/Departments by the Department of Revenue:
l   Restoration of refund of TED in Exim Policy 2000-01
l   Applicability of withdrawal of refund of TED for contracts finalized before 31.03.2000.
2.8   After analyzing the views expressed by the various concerned Departments, Department of Revenue summarized the position
and recommended to this Ministry to take up the issue with TRU and DGFT.
2.9   Accordingly, the issue regarding restoration of TED for contracts finalized before 31.3.2000 was taken up with DGFT.
DGFT have since replied that the changes effected in the policy will be applicable in respect of supplies affected from 1.4.2000
irrespective of whether LOI was opened prior to 31.3.2000 or after 31.03.2000.
2.10The committee again considered the matter and in its 45th Report and observed as under:
"The Committee now recommends that DGFT should consider, as special case, to issue notification for refund of terminal
excise duty for projects ordered/bids under International Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000."
2.11The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises has replied as under:
        DGFT have been apprised of the observations of the Committee that they should consider, as a special case, to issue
notification for refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED) for purchase order/bids under international competitive bidding prior to
1.4.2000 and have been requested to reconsider the issue and convey their decision to this Department.
        After re-examination of the matter, DGFT have now sent their response in which they have reiterated the stand taken by them
earlier. They have stated that the issue regarding withdrawal of refund of Terminal Excise Duty is linked to the increase in the
CVD to 16% announced in the budget in February, 2000. As any import, which would have taken place after 1.4.2000 would have
been subject to the imposition of CVD, all the supplies affected from this date will not be entitled to refund of TED.
        Further, on this issue, DGFT are contesting a court case against M/S Malana Power Company in which the latter as well as
BHEL have filed affidavits against Union of India. The matter is therefore sub-judice.                                                                 
2.12The Committee further considered the matter and in its 59th Report recommends as under:
DGFT should also issue notification for refund of terminal excise duty for projects ordered/bid under International
Competitive Bidding prior to 1.4.2000 when such a refund was allowed under the extant EXIM Policy but withdrawn
subsequently. With the withdrawal of this refund, the 16% ED being quite substantial cannot be expected to be
absorbed by the manufacturer. Further, since the customers have frozen their project cost and the financial structure
based on the settled price and obtained approvals of competent/statutory authorities, they are also not prepared to re-
open their books and accept this additional duty burden. In such a situation, where customers are neither agreeable to
re-negotiate the prices to compensate the manufacturers, nor are they ready to pay the applicable excise duty, the
refund of terminal excise duty for at least these projects which were ordered/LOI placed before 1.4.2000 under ICB
must be allowed under a special notification.
2.13Since the persuasive efforts of Department of Heavy Industry were not bearing much fruit, the Sub-Committee-III for
Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises under the convenorship of Dr. B.B. Ramaiah, MP (Lok Sabha), observed that
these issues needed to be approached through a coordinated effort. The Committee also felt that there was a lack of appreciation
of expression of concerns expressed by the DHI in respect of the said issues by the other Ministries. The Committee therefore
decided to hear both public and private sectors engaged in the capital goods sector. In this context, the Committee was apprised
that CII in its pre-budget memorandum (2002-03) had stated as under:
2.14Export-import policy announced on 31st March, 2000 has withdrawn the refund of Terminal Excise duty in case of fertilizer
and power projects. This has created a situation where indigenous manufacturers have been put to cost disadvantage compared to
foreign suppliers. Domestic manufacturers suffer inherent cost disadvantages to the extent of 18% to 28% of the equipment price
on account of sales tax and other local levies on inputs/final product, higher cost of finance, infrastructure inadequacies etc.
Indigenous manufacturer is allowed to import its inputs at zero duty under deemed export scheme instead of 5% applicable for
direct imports by the project authorities. Assuming an import content of 40% this given an advantage of only 2%. After taking
into account 4% (effective 4.64%) Central Sales Tax applicable on indigenous supplies and exemption of SAD on direct imports,
there is negative protection of 2.64% on account of customs duties alone.
2.15The Committee decided to discuss the issue with the representatives of Department of Heavy Industry, Department of
Revenue, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Power, Director General of Foreign Trade and representatives of BHEL
and CII.
CHAPTER - III
REPRESENTATION  RECEIVED  FROM  INDIAN  ELECTRICAL  AND
ELECTRONICS  MANUFACTURERS'  ASSOCIATION
3.0   The Indian Electrical and Electronics Manufacturers' Association vide this letter dated 19.8.2002 stated as follows:-
"The subject matter has arisen because of the changes made in the EXIM Policy during the Transition Period of infrastructure
projects, including Power Projects. Power Projects have long gestation period and hence protracted delivery schedules. Such
mid-term policy changes result in either the manufacturer/supplier absorbing substantial loss or project cost going
substantially up, if at all the project authority allows to provide for the withdrawn benefits to the supplier.
3.1   We are enclosing herewith a copy of our representation to DGFT requesting for issuance of a notification to take care of

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
complications arising out of such changes on long gestation period like Power Projects (Annexure-I). We feel issuance of such a
notification by the DGFT, with retrospective effect,  would provide a solution to this issue pending before the Hon'ble
Committee."
3.2   In this regard Directorate General of Foreign Trade vide this letter dated 13.8.02 stated as follows :-
"The issue of refund of Terminal Excise Duty in respect of supplies effected to Power Projects, other than Mega Power
Projects, where contract was entered into prior to 1.4.2000 but supplies have been effected after 1.4.2000, has been raised
before the Sub-Committee-III for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises. Factual position on this issue is given
as follows:-
3.3   Deemed export benefits to be granted to the domestic manufacturer are dependant upon the incidence of Basic Custom Duty
and Addl. Customs Duty on the import of such products. In case imports are exempted from Basic Duty, then domestic
suppliers are entitled for deemed export benefit of 8.3(a) (Advance License for deemed exports and 8.3 (b) (Duty Drawback).
In case imports are exempted from Addl. Customs Duty then domestic suppliers are entitled for the benefit of 8.3 (c) (Refund
of Terminal Excise Duty).
3.4   In the budget announced in February, 2000 CVD for Power Projects other than Mega Power Projects was increased to 16%.
Since, CVD has been imposed on the imports, the benefit of refund of TED for the domestic manufacturer was withdrawn.
Changes effected in the EXIM Policy comes into effect immediately. Hence, all the supplies effected from 1.4.2000 are not
entitled for the benefit of refund of TED. This issue was discussed specifically with DOR at the time of the formulation of
EXIM Policy, (Revised Edition: 2000) and it was decided that all the supplies effected from 1.4.2000 will not be entitled for
refund of TED. This is also because of the fact that any import which would have taken place after 1.4.2000, would have
been subjected to the imposition of CVD.
3.5   This issue was raised before Ministry of Finance and a meeting was taken by FS and RS on 26.7.2000. This issue was
referred by them to DGFT for taking a view in respect of contracts entered prior to 1.4.2000. This issue was examined by
DGFT and a communication was sent to JS(DBK), JS (DEA) and JS (Deptt. of Heavy Industry) clarifying that any supplies
effected from 1.4.2000 will not be entitled for refund of TED, irrespective of when the contract was entered into. Hence even
if the contract was entered into prior to 1.4.2000, but if the supplies are effected after 1.4.2000, Policy as prevalent on
1.4.2000 will be applicable and accordingly such supplies will not be entitled for refund of Terminal Excise Duty.
3.6    It may also be emphasized that on this issue we are also contesting a Court case from M/s. Malana Power Company in which
this company as well as BHEL have filed affidavit against Union of India. This matter is sub-judice  and we have taken the
stand as explained above.
3.7    During deliberations before the Sub-Committee, the issue of making transitional arrangement also came up. In this context,
it is clarified that the transitional arrangement as given in paragraph 1.3 of the Exim Policy provide that in case an export or
import that is permitted freely under this Policy is subsequently subjected to any restriction or regulation then the shipment of the
export or import which is made within the original validity of the irrevocable letter of credit established before the date of
imposition of such restriction shall be ordinarily permitted. Accordingly, this transitional arrangement provides protection only
where a free item is subjected to import or export restrictions subsequently. Exim Policy does not envisage any transitional
arrangement consequent to change in duty structure. Since refund of TED has been withdrawn consequent to imposition of 16%
CVD, no transitional arrangement is possible.
3.8    In view of the above stated facts, it will not be possible to extend the benefit of TED for the supplies effected after 1.4.2000
to Power Projects other than Mega Power Projects even if project has placed orders prior to 1.4.2000. In respect of future supplies
also so long as import is subjected to CVD, it will not be possible to restore the benefit of refund of TED.
3.9    It may also be pointed out that 45th report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry had
also made a recommendation to PGFT for providing refund of TED in respect of contract entered into prior to 1.4.2000. This issue
was examined in detail. With the approval of Hon'ble Commerce & Industry Minister it was communicated to Department of
Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises vide our letter No. 01/92/180/0007/AM01/PC-II dated 23
rd August, 2001 that it will not be
possible to extend the benefit of Terminal Excise Duty for supplies effected after 1.4.2000 to Power Projects other than Mega
Power Projects even if Project Authorities have placed orders prior to 1.4.2000."
         The Dept. of Heavy Industries has given their comments on IEEMA's representation which are as under:-
         "The representation of IEEMA has been examined in the Department of Heavy Industry and the comments are as below:-
3.10  It may be mentioned that prior to the announcement of EXIM policy on 31.03.2000, the power projects were eligible to get
the deemed export benefit of refund of terminal excise duty, this benefit was withdrawn with effect from 01.04.2000. As a result,
the contracts that were finalized before 01.04.2000 (where LOI was issued) but supplies were not made prior to this date were not
getting the refund of terminal excise duty.
3.11  Based on representation received from BHEL, we had taken up the matter with DGFT who did not consider it favourably.
As per DGFT, the refund of terminal excise duty is directly linked to CVD on the imports for the project. As CVD has been
increased to 16% in respect of power projects, refund of terminal excise duty has been withdrawn. This position has also been
conveyed to the Department related Parliamentary Sub-Committee on Industry from time to time.
3.12  Recently, Power Ministry have made a suggestion to the Finance Ministry for reducing CVD in respect of the power projects
to enable all benefits under para 10.3 of EXIM Policy are extended, including refund of TED. The Department of Heavy Industry
supports this view of the Power Ministry.
3.13  Further, the Department is of the view that refund of TED is also to be allowed in respect of those projects whose contracts
have been finalized before 01.04.2000 and LOI issued. For any policy change of this nature, it would be desirable to have an
arrangement for the transitional period, so that the contractual obligations are not affected."

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
3.14  The Ministry of Power has given this comment as follows:-
".....The EXIM Policy, prior to 1.4.2002, allowed refund of Terminal Excise Duty along with other benefits associated with
Deemed Exports, for supply of goods to all Power Projects on the same lines as those projects financed by multilateral or
bilateral agencies/funds as notified by Department of Economic Affairs under ICB. This benefit is also available to mega
power projects.
3.15  However, with effect from 1.4.2002, this benefit has been withdrawn, thereby depriving the benefit to the indigenous
suppliers, who get the contracts for the power projects under the ICB. Also, on account of this, the cost of the projects
increase thereby enhancing the tariff. On account of the withdrawal of refund of terminal excise duty, it has been worked out
that the cost of generation increases by 12 paise/kwh. Similar cost escalation is anticipated in other projects too.
3.16  We have requested Secretary (Revenue) to have the matter looked into considering the merits in taking steps for reduction of
cost of inputs for Power Projects with an objective of providing affordable power. Moreover, such a step would go long way
in removing the disparity that the indigenous power goods suppliers face with those of projects not funded under
multilateral/bilateral agencies/funds." A copy of letter written by Secretary (Power) to Secretary (Revenue) on 11.12.2002 on
this issue and detailed note on monthly excise duty are placed at Annexures II and III.
 
CHAPTER - IV
INTERACTION WITH MINISTRIES, PSUs AND INDUSTRY BODIES
Meeting held on 5th August, 2003
        The DGFT informed the Committee that the Government in consultation with the Department of Economic Affairs and the
Department of Revenue took the decision regarding imposition of CVD. The basic concept  of deemed export was to provide a
level playing field between domestic and foreign players. The scope of deemed export had been increased. Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) had set up a Committee under Shri B.K. Chaturvedi to consider as to what was to be 
considered deemed export. On the basis of its recommendations, an export policy was formulated and the consensus emerged as
reflected in the present EXIM policy. The protection of BHEL was over and above 5% basic customs duty. So, they already had a
built in exemption of 5% and they got deemed export exemption. Now there was CVD and TED was not being refunded to them.
If TED was refunded it may amount to subsidies to the extent of 16 per cent. So the whole issue was that a balance was to be
brought so that they get a reasonable level of protection because this was an era of competition . There were certain inefficiencies
and bottlenecks in the system eg. the system had stated salses tax, entry tax and so on. Then there were some legacies of the past
in the form of townships etc. which were social obligations. These disadvantages were not being neutralized. Now a new plan had
been brought because of subsidies, efficiency and competitiveness was not going to increase. At the same time, all these things
were to be taken into account and it was to be seen how they could be helped.
4.1   CMD, BHEL, informed the Committee that prior to 1.3.99 there was customs duty of 22 per cent. From 1st March it was
reduced to 5 per cent. A surcharge of 5 per cent was, however, there. However, the refund of TED, which was also there, was
available even in 1999, this was neutralized. The Chaturvedi Committee had gone into it and said that wherever the CVD was
imposed it was not to be refunded. There were deficiencies like transport, road and financial disadvantages. The business in
capital goods industry involved very long work cycle. They had to stock material for months according to their production
requirements. So the requirement of working capital was very large. They attracted a higher rate of interest in this sector. The
competition was not from the domestic industry; it was from overseas industry. Earlier 16% excise duty refund was available to
them. That used to give them an advantage of 10-11 per cent. The excise duty was attracting 2/3 per cent of the project cost and
was neutralizing the advantages that were there. They had competition cost also. It was poor infrastructure in the country and
higher cost of business etc. which was being taken care of. On 1.4.2000 EXIM policy was revised. Earlier they used to import raw
material, which was duty free. Later, the refund of TED was withdrawn so the protection available was gone. Now there was only
protection of 5% in the customs duty. The customers in the power sector did not get MODVAT benefit. When supplier's cost went
up they became a costlier supplier. So in terms of competitiveness they were affected. In order to make domestic manufacturer
competitive, the refund of TED should be given with retrospective affect and customs duty should be raised from 5 to 15%.
4.2   There were two agencies involved: (i) Department of Revenue they have their concerns for revenue. In order to be
competitive the domestic capital goods industry did not need protection. There was poor fiscal infrastructure and poor financial
infrastructure. The domestic capital goods industry should be allowed a level playing field. There must be a level of protection,
which was not available to domestic capital. (ii) the power sector wanted to cut down the power costs. That is why CVD should be
removed. If it was done then the 16% burden of import and duty would come down. WTO bound rate for import capital
equipment was 25%. They should still be working at that rate.
4.3   CMD. NTPC, informed the Committee that he supported the M/o Heavy Industry and BHEL. He said that something should
be worked out because that would give them an advantage when refund of TED would take place. Another issue related with this
was what happened every year when policy changes took place. There were a lot of contractual issues. Their request was that
whatever changes were made they should be made from prospective targets. If a contract had been worked earlier and policy
change in the middle, the whole contracts remained in dispute, deeming a project very difficult.
4.4   The Convenor thereupon observed that Secretary, Industry, Secretary, Power and DGFT should work out something because
this kind of exercise had been done earlier also. Revenue Secretary thereupon stated that they would look into how the problem
can be resolved to refund the TED by abolishing the CVD. If the customs duty was increased the difference was more or less
covered. Earlier CVD was 16%, customs duty was 5.5%. but this was still to be approved by the Finance Ministry. The excise
duty would be increased to 20% and CVD would be totally abolished so that  industry can avail the TED. But the only problem
was that it would be done prospectively. Since it is to be done by the Finance Act, a look from legal angle was to be taken.
4.5   Secretary, DGFT informed that they were in the process of providing level playing field. It was immaterial whether there

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
were foreign players or Indian players. When the negotiations were on with the World Bank, sometimes when they were nearing
conclusion of negotiations in order that the project was not delayed, a notification regarding deemed export was issued saying that
the project was required to deem export benefits. Subsequently, if the negotiations failed, the credit was suspended.
4.6   He said a meeting can be held and issues could be discussed. Secretary, Heavy Industry stated that he would look into the
suggestion made by the Secretary, Revenue. Thereupon, the Convenor suggested that a Committee of Secretaries may be
constituted and consensus view may be taken.
Meeting held on 4th September, 2003
4.7   The Committee was informed that the Committee of Secretaries had held two meetings on the issue-one at the level of the
Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries, Power and Revenue, and another at the level of Joint Secretaries. Secretary, Heavy
Industries and the Secretary, Revenue had reached a conclusion but Secretary Power had certain reservations about it. Secretary,
Power stated that in the present scenario with duty of 5% and countervailing duty of 16%, the domestic bidder got an advantage of
about 5%. However, the new proposal i.e. countervailing duty zero and duty of 21%, advantage to domestic bidder would go to
17%. The new proposal, if implemented, would lead to higher capital cost which would further lead to higher cost of power. The
Convenor desired that a final decision should be arrived at the Secretary level and a single note be submitted to the Committee. In
this regard, it was decided that the Committee of Secretaries would hold another meeting and work out a proposal.
4.8   Revenue, Secretary informed the Committee that in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries, they had two options. One, at
the time of Budget, there was a General Budget exercise. Then a look at the sector as a whole can be had because the issue raised
was that they were not getting refund of terminal excise duty by the DGFT. The option was to remove the CVD. The Power
Secretary raised a point that this was likely to lead to a problem. Revenue Joint Secretary, Mr. Gautam Ray, also held a meeting
with the concerned Joint Secretaries. It was reported to him there would be an increase in the power tariff or in the cost of project
if this arrangement was arrived at and they also sent these minutes. In the evening the Power Secretary told her that he had sent his
opinion on this. However, his office did not receive it till the previous day though she was in the office till 8 P.M. Secretary,
Industry did receive it.
4.9    Joint Secretary, Department of Revenue informed that the basic premise on which this Committee had been working was
that the present duty structure on non-mega power projects did not give sufficient protection to BHEL. The reason was that the
total duty was about 22% and the domestic manufacturers were paying 16% excise duty. So effectively the protection was about
5%. The point that was being made before the Committee was that the domestic manufacturers suffered a lot of disadvantages like
higher electricity cost, higher infrastructure cost, etc. they think 5-16% reduction was necessary. Under the present duty structure,
excise refund was not given because Government changed the customs duty structure in 1999. Earlier, it was 22 and nil CVD. At
that time Government had been giving a refund of 15%. The protection was quite substantial. After the change in the duty
structure, that was 5-16%, the excise refund was not given. So the protection came to 4%.
4.10  If something had to be done within the parameters of the Import Policy, then the total import duty would have to be kept
constant, It was 20-21 per cent. In effect, the BHEL would get a lot of refund and a lot of protection. There was no objection to
this modality. But the point which the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power, made was based on the assumption that if the BHEL got
this extra relief the importers might not be bidding. The BHEL,  had got a huge margin within the present duty structure. The
BHEL was very competitive. Therefore, there was no need for giving any relief. That was the mandate of the question as to how
they could give better relief to the BHEL on excise duty. Committee of Secretaries had done that. Whether it was better and
competitive, was not the issue before them.
4.11  Secretary, DGFD informed the Committee that as far as they were concerned, what they had been clarifying to the
Committee was that the whole provision relating to deemed export was providing a level playing field to the domestic supplier. So
there were two contending pictures. The BHEL  and the Department of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises wanted both
protection in the form of present duty structure and the benefit of deemed exports. He was not going into the merits. They had
their own case. What the Ministry of Power was saying was that if Government would give both the protection as well as the
benefit of deemed exports, the Power cost would go up because that much more margin would be available to the BHEL. As far as
they were concerned, the limited issue was this:  if  the protection level remained they would not become eligible for refund of
TED. That was the policy of the Government. If DGFD  could not allow the refund of TED and if the duty level was not brought
down, as in the case of nuclear power projects, as the Committee was well aware, the Government could give special
dispensation.
4.12  CMD, BHEL, informed the Committee that the Committee of Secretaries invited her also to the meeting that was taken by
the Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries. Various issues were discussed there. A point of view was also made that a change
over to the higher CVD Basic Customs Duty and simultaneous withdrawal of CVD would had the tendency of increasing the
project cost, etc. Mainly, the issues discussed related to BHEL. The BHEL was part of capital cost industries as such. There were
also issues which should not be seen in the narrow light of BHEL versus others. As result of the change over, the Committee had
come to the conclusion that the advisable thing would be to do away with the CVD. The only way was to raise the BCD and
remove the CVD as such. At that time, a point was made by the Joint Secretary, Ministry  of Power, that this could have a
tendency of increasing the project cost. He had made a further point that in public sector projects the public sector bidders would
have purchase preference also. He said that this would have no effect on the project cost for the reason that the purchase
preference did not had the capability to add to the project cost. Then it was decided at the meeting that the Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Power, along with the joint Secretary, Revenue, and the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries, should have a
meeting with the CMD, BHEL . Unfortunately, on that day when the meeting was held he was tied up elsewhere and could not be
present at the meeting. The discussions took place and the decisions taken were placed before the Committee by Shri Gautami
Ray. They had come to the conclusion that there was no possibility of increasing the project cost as such. Today, he came to know
that the Department of Heavy Industries had received some papers from the Ministry of Power and the competition, level, how
much the project would go up, what should be the level of protection to the domestic industry, etc. could be examined. As he
apprised the Committee at the previous meeting, in all these things what was seen was the fiscal balance. But there were certain
disadvantages. The domestic manufacturers were subjected to many State level levies like octroi, entry tax, turnover tax, etc.

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
which were not taken into account. There were various things which the States apply. In addition to that, there were fiscal
infrastructure deficiencies. In respect of import of material and transfer of shipments to customers, etc. it had imposed a burden on
the domestic industry. CII had sensitized the Government of  India on these infrastructure deficiencies. This had not been
addressed in this fiscal balance. He had submitted at a previous meeting that this point should be taken into account. Taking this
into account he was of the opinion that the change over which had been finalized by the Committee of Secretaries, would not lead
to any increase in the project cost.
4.13  The Convenor then requested Shri Shahi to touch upon these points. One was regarding the interest of the domestic parties,
compared to the foreign parties. Another was regarding the local taxes which the Indian party had to pay. Whether these things
had been taken into consideration when he was making his point.
4.14  Shri R.V.  Shahi informed that his Ministry did a comprehensive analysis in the present scenario, including tax, to what
taxes an outsider would be subjected and to what taxes an insider would be subjected. As Shri Gautam Ray had said, at present,
there was a protection of the order of 4-5 per cent. They had to merge or abolish the CVD and make it part of the basic customs
duty. As he had mentioned in his earlier submission, even today there was a protection of the order of 4.39-4.95 per cent. This
type of margin did not exist in today’s competition. Even if somebody got 16-17 per cent protection compared to 5 per cent, yet,
there would be competing, agencies. He had a table with him. As regards the package for the main plant of Rihand, 16 parties had
purchased the papers. What he was trying to tell was about the constraints of competition. Only one party bid and the cost was
higher than the estimate. Wherever this type of things did not exist, in domestic competition, if they had a large number of parties
participating, they would have would have highly competitive rate. Compared to the estimate, they would get a high level rate.
There were a number of instances where competition had played a role in reducing the cost of the package or the cost of the
product. Now, so far as taxes, etc. were concerned, they had been duly taken into account, and at least in respect of the interest
regime, the interest regime in India today had also become very favourable. If the foreign exchange fluctuations on a long term
basis and the interest regime were taken into account, the industry was facing an interest rate of 14-17 per cent just two or three
years ago. Today, they were, in fact, motivating and asking the NTPC and other organisations to get it at something like 7-8 per
cent, in the larger interests of the consumers. So the cost had reduced and they were able to get at 7 per cent or sometimes less
than 7 per cent. Also, the foreign exchange situation was very good as of today, and these companies were able to get foreign
exchange fluctuation on a long-term basis. So the foreign exchange phenomenon plus the interest rate within India as well as
outside presented a very good situation today. CMD, NTPC stated that when they compared these two situations, as was pointed
out by the Secretary, Power, even in the present dispensation, the advantage to the domestic bidder was 4.4 per cent. Now with
what was being proposed, this benefit went to around 17 per cent. Their experience was that when bid was invited and the gap,
which was available, if the advantage which was available to the domestic bidder, was high, there was a tendency  by the foreign
bidders to stay away from that competition, and that reduced the competition. That was the fact of life, and the competition did get
reduced. Now, this reduction in competition naturally would mean that whenever there was less competition, it had an impact on
the costs. Now, what factually happened was difficult to be told. But, generally, there was a tendency that when the competition
was less,  the prices tend to go high.
4.15  The Convenor observed that the Committee was interested in  two things. One was, the Committee wanted to make power
available at reasonable prices or whatever best was possible. This was the point on which the Committee had not got any
comment. Secondly, the Indian capital goods industry should not suffer. The Committee did not want to compromise on these two
things. That was why the Revenue Secretary had also come. The Committee wanted her to see how the balancing had to be done.
That was why the Committee had asked the Secretaries, to come out with a proposal. Now, the Committee got their proposal, and
the Revenue Secretary also had come out with some modifications. How did Government want to go about it?
4.16  Revenue Secretary informed that so far as the BHEL was concerned, with what they had suggested, their problem would be
solved. Now, the whole issue of competitiveness, and the issue of curbing international competition, would become a part of the
Budget exercise . Actually, a Committee on power had been set up on the issue of power reforms, and all these issues would be
discussed there. But, then, this would necessarily become a Budget exercise. Government cannot make any such major changes by
taking the BHEL as a point. Any concession given to the BHEL was a sort of a narrow-sighted approach. Government could agree
on the formulation that had been suggested, say, of increasing the customs duty and abolishing the CVD. At the time of the
Budget, Government would look at other issues, because presently, Government can only see to it that the status quo continued,
because the Revenue Department had no other option. As for what the CII had submitted, last time, when they met them, this was
not agreed to for various reasons. Again, yesterday, Mr. Anand Mahindra met them, and he did not mention this point. Anyway,
they had a structured meeting scheduled for the first week of October. If this point was raised there, they would consider it while
doing our Budget exercise. But, just taking the capital per se and reducing the customs duty would be difficult before the Budget.
4.17The Convenor observed that the Committee were looking for both the sides. One was the customer side and the other was in
the industry side. Now the CII was supposed to look after the interests of the whole industry of this country, and the Secretaries
were supposed to balance things and see to it that in the present globalisation phenomenon. The Committee would like to
safeguard the interests of the country. The industries should not be allowed to suffer in the globalisation process. The Committee
was not against globalisation. At the same time, it should also be seen that reasonable protection was given to the  domestic
industry. Now the Committee have two interests in mind. One was that the power costs should not go up keeping in mind the
larger interests of the consumers. It should also be seen that the capital goods industry was protected. These were the two things
on which the Committee wants companies to put all their acts together, so that this Committee could put forth their
recommendations before the Government through Parliament.
4.18Power Secretary informed that for the present, the status quo can continue, that it was providing protection of the order of
four-and-a-half per cent. They were not convinced that the protection should be of the order of 17 per cent. They were submitting
through the Committee that this would pose a tendency to push up the cost of power. It was, therefore, inadvisable. He felt that the
status quo should remain till they had addressed this issue. As the Revenue Secretary had mentioned, there was a Committee
under the chairmanship of the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. This Committee was considering all those factors. He
himself was personally dealing with distribution of power vis-à-vis the industry.
4.19The associations of industry were very concerned about the very high tariff which they had to pay. As a result of that, neither

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
were they competitive here nor were they competitive in the export market. Almost every week, their Minister received such
applications and requests and he was requested to look into those. Therefore, according to him, as suggested, for the present, they
may continue with the status quo.
4.20The Convenor asked what was the conclusion? Did they want to have another meeting so that they came to some solution?
4.21Secretary, Heavy Industries, informed the Committee that as yet the Indian capital goods industry would have a benefit of 17
per cent. Secondly, he had yet to see the letter that had received from the Power Secretary. His Joint Secretary had received that
letter. Hence, he had not applied his mind on that. He had to look into and then come to any response.
4.22The Convenor observed that he was initially very happy to see the report of the joint meeting. Then, he came across Note of
Power Secretary suggesting for another meeting. He thought all this exercise done by Committee of Secretaries was probably not
going to give correct solution.
4.23Secretary, Heavy Industry, stated that living with the present situation, he did not think that was a solution they were looking
forward to because the Committee, and all of them had worked on this very subject for a long time. If they go back on stationary
march, he did not think they were doing justice to the subject.
4.24Power Secretary stated that if the purchase order had already been placed, then the policy available at that time should be
applicable, rather than the policy, which was revised later. The revised Policy should be applied to such cases where orders were
placed after the policy was revised.
4.25Secretary, DGFT stated that they had received the letter of Secretary, Power. They would take it up. There were precedents.
The basic thing was, when the bid had been finalised on a particular regime, that protection should had been given. They would
had to take it up with the Department of Economic Affairs for their concurrence. The moment that came, they would be able to
sort it out.
4.26Revenue Secretary informed that the capital goods industry was a major source of their revenue. That also had to be kept in
mind. They had a huge fiscal deficit and because of these concessions, there was a declining trend in the excise “and custom duty
collections. That would also necessarily be kept in mind. This would be a part of Budget exercise. So far as the power sector was
concerned, yes the Government thought that our cost of power was very high and They would had to take a larger view on it. A
Committee had been set up in this regard. It would come up with its recommendations by December when the Budget exercise
starts.
4.27The convenor asked BHEL as to what was his point, whether there should be 17 per cent protection or 4.4 per cent protection.
What were the real facts?
4.28CMD, BHEL, informed that it was not clear as to how it would go from 20 to 21 per cent and as to how it would go from 4
per cent to 17 per cent. They would had to see the calculations made by the Ministry of Power.
4.29Revenue Secretary informed that so far as BHEL was concerned, they had reached a solution, which was satisfactory to
everyone. Now, to take that such a decision for the entire power sector on that premise, would be very difficult. Hypothetically,
there was a chance of international competitive bidding getting curbed. So, prices were likely to go up. It would be a major
exercise. They did not have the mandate to do that before the Budget.
4.30She did not think that the Finance Minister or the Ministry would agree reduce customs duty. Any amendment to whatever
decision had been taken on the Budget and to make any announcement of this nature before the whole Budget exercise for the
power sector may not be possible. For the BHEL. They had found out a solution, which was acceptable to all. There would be a
lot of repercussion to it. This was totally a different dimension. But their domestic industry was not very strong and it sought
protection for various components that go into all industries.
4.31The Convenor observed that what the Committee was looking at was the interest of the entire country. The Committee were
looking at the method by which they could achieve and that was why the Committee was asking them to work together and give
some suggestion so that the Committee was able to take up the matter at whatever level it was required to be taken up. The
Committee’s aim was only to protect the interests of the country. That was why the hon. Member was saying that each Ministry
had got its own interests. But the Committee had to find a way to protect the industry. There should be a give and take attitude. He
was happy to see the report given by the Power Secretary.
4.32Secretary, DGFT, stated that they represented the competitiveness of the Indian industry. They were not representing a
particular interest of any industry, etc. the Committee should keep that premise in mind whether the industry were exporting or
not. The bottom line of the Indian industry must be competitive from that point of view. Their power tariff on an average was
three times more than what was there in China, which was India’s main competitor. In all competitive countries, the basic custom
duty on capital goods imports was either zero or four per cent. They had  been taking up this issue every year with the Department
of Revenue that the customs duty on capital goods industries must come down in order to make domestic industry competitive.
4.33Therefore the Government should not do anything that would reduce the competitiveness of the Indian industry. BHEL must
be protected, it must be done so, but it should not be at the cost of raising, the power tariff. In India, the power tariff was very
high, and that energy was going into everything. It was already reducing our competitiveness.
4.34In the meeting held on 14
th October, Special Secretary, Power informed that some new issues with macro economic
implications have come up and these require discussion with revenue secretary.
4.35The Revenue Secretary informed that they would be bringing down the customs duty so as to facilitate the BHEL to avail the

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
refund of TED. Joint Secretary, Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises informed that they have received a detailed note from
Ministry of Power and the proposal therein has got revenue implications. In order to take a decision on the said proposal of
Ministry of Power, some more time was required. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of BHEL and CII. It
was decided that the Committee of Secretaries would held another meeting so as to arrive at some concrete decision. The
Convenor emphasized that the next meeting on this issue should be the final meeting.
4.36The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises vide  their OM dated 7
th November 2003 have forwarded minutes of
the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held on 4 th November 2003 on the said disuse of refund of TED. After deliberations,
it was decided to agree to the proposal of the Revenue Secretary who opined to carry on with the present duty structure until the
current fiscal year and to examine the whole issue of Basic Customs Duty (BCD), Counter Veiling Duty (CVD) and refund of
Terminal Excise Duty (TED) during the budgetary exercise which is already under progress.
Meeting held on 14th November 2003
4.37Secretary, Heavy Industry, informed that after they met last here in the Committee, they had long discussions, some formal
meetings and some informal meetings to arrive at some conclusions. Despite the fact that their views did not coincide with each
other yet they had come to some conclusion. The second thing was, they were left with only three months. So, whatever advantage
they had got or not got would be limited to the remaining three months of this fiscal year. The Budget exercises had already been
started. They were sending their proposals to the Department of Revenue. The Ministry of Power would send in their proposals to
the Department of Revenue. After reconciling all the views, they would formulate the final proposals, since the exercise of the
Budget proposals had been launched, it may not be possible for the Department of Revenue to give any concession at this stage.
4.38In view of the circumstances, they felt that they would go to the Department of Revenue agitated and highlight the issues
which were bothering them, and they hoped that they would get considerable relief from them in days to come. That was the
present stage.
4.39Revenue Secretary informed the Committee that the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises had already
mentioned that they had wide ranging discussions relating to tariff concessions etc. which were envisaged. They discussed this in
view of the working of the task force, which comprehensively wanted to look at the reforms and give an input to that sector but
not at the cost of anything else. Also to reconcile it, they talked to the Finance Minister. He also felt that keeping in view this fact,
it would not be possible to did anything ahead of the Budget, which would had comprehensive implications.
4.40Also, there were many other sectors, which were pressing for concessions ahead of the Budget. They had not come before any
other Committee. The Finance Minister had said that doing it in a piecemeal manner would not be possible. They wrote to the
Ministries and requested them to-send their views by 21
st of November. They would try to pre-pone the entire Budget exercise
and sort it out, but, of course, the announcement would be a part of the Budget if during that exercise anything can be done ahead
of the Budget for all these sectors.
4.41Steel sector had also come out with the similar requests. They also felt that the indigenous small manufacturers were at a
disadvantageous position vis-à-vis large manufacturers. It would be very difficult for them to take a comprehensive view of the
various requests that had come from the power and industry sector. If it had been one individual case, that needed to be initiated,
they would had done that, But, apparently, that was not adequate to address a very important basic problem that was facing this
sector.
4.42  Revenue Secretary informed that they had differing viewpoints. But, the point over which there was consensus was that the
present status quo should be maintained. The point of view of the Ministry of Heavy Industries, Ministry of Power and other
Ministries would be taken up by the Revenue Department while finalising the overall Budget proposals. He had the interaction
with some groups like CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, along with the private sector and the public sector, and, they were preparing
their own proposals to submit it to the Revenue Department.
4.43  He would have some interaction with the Revenue Secretary and they would put their point of view, and, then a consolidated
thing would emerge in the larger interest of all the sectors. They had total unanimity that nothing could be done at this stage, and,
therefore, the status quo must be maintained. The main idea was to find out ways to facilitate cheaper power to this sector, which
would be in the larger interest of the capital goods industry. They had discussion on several other points, namely, (i) import duty
on coal, (ii) concessions for power projects, and, (iii) infrastructural structure to transportation and distribution sector. There was a
task force working under Mr. N.K. Singh on Investments and Reforms in the power sector, and, they were looking for the
incentives to be given so that this power sector, which was very crucial, came up to the expectation of all.
4.44  Secretary DGFT, said that the exercise for the next Annual Exim Policy had started. Accordingly, they would be having
extensive discussion with the Ministry of Finance, particularly, with the Department of Revenue, and, the effect of any decision
having bearing on the Exim Policy would be reflected in the next years policy.
4.45  Revenue Secretary said that when they had discussions, they also had the benefits of presentations from the Clio Various
tariff, excise and customs duty exemptions had been requested. At the moment, it was for mega power projects. There were a host
of issues like whether this could also be extended to projects below 250 mw that would had to be balanced against the revenue
implications. But, keeping in view the importance of infrastructure, this was an economic decision, as also be a political decision.
4.46  Representative of CII informed that they were in the process of putting together the pre Budget recommendations to the
Ministry of Finance, and they would address to the Heavy Industries as well. This process was on, and, they would send it as a
consolidated proposal shortly.
4.47  Representative of BHEL stated that the domestic manufacturers faced cost disadvantage to the extent of 14 to 23 per cent
due to state levies and deficiencies in financial and physical infrastructure. In the absence of any such level playing field, domestic
manufacturers would become uncompetitive while bidding for non-funded, non-mega projects, and manufacturing facilities set up
in the country would be under utilised.

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
4.48  The Convenor observed that so much time had been spent by the Committee on this. If nothing comes out, the Committee
should sit separately and prepare its report which was supposed to be very valuable in the interest of the local industry.
                                                                 
CHAPTER-V
REPORT OF COMMITTEE OF SECRETARIES
5.0   The Committee had been deliberating on the issue of refund of TED for a long time and it had given its recommendations on
the issue in its 36
TH , 45 Th and 59 TH  reports. The Department of Heavy Industries in their Action Taken Notes informed the
Committee that the matter did not find favour of the DGFT on one or the other ground.
5.1   The Committee decided to take up the matter afresh on receiving a representation from the Indian Electrical and Electronics
Manufacturers’ Association. The Committee deliberated on this issue at its meeting held on 5 TH  August, 2003 and heard the
views of Secretaries of Department of Revenue, Department of Heavy Industries, Ministry of power, DGFT and CMDs of BHEL
and NTPC. Since there were divergent view on this issue the Committee recommended that a Committee of Secretaries be set up
under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of heavy Industries with Secretaries of Department of Revenue, Ministry of
power and DGFT as members to sort out the issue.
5.2   The Department of Heavy Industries forwarded the minutes of the meeting of Committee of Secretaries held on 21.8.03
(Annexure IV) along with the minutes of the meeting held on 28.8.03 at the level of Joint Secretaries of Department of Revenue,
Department of Heavy Industries and Ministry of Power (Annexure V).
5.3   Before the said meeting could be circulated for the meeting of the Committee which was scheduled to be held on 4.9.03, the
Committee received a separate note from the Ministry of Power (Annexure VI).
5.4   The power Secretary at the meeting of the Committee held on 4.9.03 advanced the following reasoning in support of his
furnishing a separate note:
(a)   In the present scenario, so far as the competition was concerned, the domestic bidder did get an advantage of the order of
a about 4.4%. if  the Basic Customs Duty of 5% and CVD of 16% was evaluated, then, as compared to the foreign
bidder, the domestic bidder had an advantage of the order of 4.39%.
(b)   If BCD was 21% and CVD was zero, the advantage of domestic bidder may  be increased to 17%.
(c)   This kind of margin did not exist today in global competition. The moment this kind of arrangement was in place, there
would be no competition. Even 4.9% sometimes constrained the competition.
(d)   It would lead to higher capital cost, which would, in turn, mean higher cost of power.
(e)   The Ministry of power did a shadow working in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries. The Ministry of Power
decided that implication of the proposal be worked out in terms of number. Persent proposed and if there was an adverse
impact then Committee of Secretaries would have to think about it. Ministry of power had sent the details to the Ministry
of Heavy Industry. The Ministry of Power wanted to discuss this in detail so that the new arrangement did not lead to
constraint in competition due to high cost of capital.
(f)    The Indian  industry was not competitive due to higher tariff and are not competitive from the point of view of  outside
competition. Ministry of Power have approached the Department of Revenue for this purpose.
(g)   There were a number of instances where competition had played a role in reducing the cost of the package or the cost of
the product. Now in this context, Secretary, Ministry of Power added that so far as taxes were concerned, they had been
duly taken into account and at least in respect of the interest regime. The interest regime in India had also become very
favourable. Beside, foreign exchange situation was very good as of today. Indian companies were able to get foreign
exchange fluctuation on a long term basis.
(h)   A Committee under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission was considering all these factors.
The status quo till this should be maintained.
5.5   CMD, BHEL, observed that it was not clear to him as to how the benefit for domestic companies would go from 20 to 21%
and also how from 4 to 17%. They have to see the calculation made by the Ministry of Power.
5.6   The Convenor observed that the scope of the subject had been widened by bringing various factors into it. However, he said
that the Committee of Secretaries should meet again and come out with a consensus report.
5.7   The Committee met again on 14.10.03. To its surprise the Committee came to know that Committee of Secretaries had not
been able to sort out the problem and it wanted more time to formulate a report. The Committee expressed its unhappiness over
the delay in formulating the report. The Committee directed that by the Ist week of November, the Committee of  Secretaries
should come with the report.
5.8   The Committee of Secretaries met on 4.11.03 and submitted its report to the Committee (Annexure VII). The Committee met
on 14.11.03. Secretary, Heavy Industry informed the Committee that the Committee of Secretaries had long discussions but they
could coincide with each other and come to some conclusion. He further informed that whatever advantage they could get or not
get would be limited to the remaining three months of the current financial year. However, budget exercises had already been
started. Both Department of Industry and Ministry of Power would send their proposals to the Department of Revenue. After
reconciling all the views they would formulate the final proposal,
5.9   The Committee, after hearing the Ministry of Power, DGFT, CMDs  of BHRL, NTPC and representatives of CII, agreed to
the proposal.
 

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6.0   With the announcement of New Industrial Policy 1991 and concomitant policy initiatives that followed, resulted in huge
impetus to industrial activity in the country. This warranted huge capital investments in infrastructure and to meet this
investments, finances were at times obtained from multilateral funding agencies like World Bank, Asia Development Bank, etc.
6.1   In the hitherto  scenario, even the supplies made to these projects also qualified for Deemed Export benefits and the present
procurement of these funding agencies also stipulated that price preference to the extent that are consciously quantified by the host
country for such projects in the form of tariff only barriers or customs/excise/countervailing duties.
6.2   At the same time, it is important to note that in spite of the spirit of new industrial policy being carried out through
liberalization of linkages like monetary policy, liberalization of licensing including introduction of automatic routes, progressive
reduction of interest rates, the Indian capital goods industry had not attained a state of level playing ground with the international
capital goods manufacturers due to comparative higher cost of capital, sales taxes and other levies at State Government levels,
higher infrastructure bottlenecks, etc. hence, it is imperative that the level playing field had to be accorded to the Indian capital
goods industry to the extent that is recognizable by the multilateral funding agencies through fiscal instruments.
6.3   One of the objectives of Exim Policy is to provide consumers with good quality good and services at internationally
competitive prices while at the same time a level playing field for the domestic players. Central Government provides a level
playing field for the domestic producers and therefore, wherever, the domestic producers secure orders even from within India,
such suppliers are treated as Deemed Exports, provided such orders are secured through International Competitive Bidding
procedure. Deemed Exports are eligible for all benefits in respect of manufacture and supply of goods.
6.4   All power projects are entitled to get (i) advance license and Deemed Exports, (ii) Deemed Exports drawback and (iii)
Refund of TED. But domestic suppliers in power projects with domestic funding are getting only first two benefits. Prior to
1.4.2000, such suppliers were getting many more benefits. With the announcement of Exim Policy on 1.4.2000 the refund of RED
was discontinued with the reduction of BCD and imposition of CVD. Such mid term policy changes resulted in either the
manufacturer/supplier absorbing substantial loss or project cost substantially going up. When the matter was taken up with DGFT,
they maintained that changes effected in the Exim Policy came into affect immediately and all supplies effected from 1.4.2000 are
not entitled for TED.
6.5   Initially, Ministry of Power supported the contention of Department of Heavy Industries for restoration of refund of TED.
However, when the Committee directed that Committee of Secretaries be constituted and a report be given in the matter, the
Ministry of Power submitted a separate note (Annexure VI).
6.6   The Committee understands from the oral evidence tendered by the Department of Heavy Industries and Ministry of Power
that although a conclusion was reached at the meeting of Committee of Secretaries and Joint Secretaries of Department of
Revenue and Department of Heavy Industries and Ministry of Power, did work out the number and it was felt that the number,
which were being worked out, came to a stage where there was no increase in the cost of the project. Ministry of Power, however,
thought that apart from an increase or decrease in the project cost, the input of competition is necessary.
6.7    In the present scenario the domestic industries get an advantage of 4.4%. if BCD is 21% and CVD is 0% and TED is
restored, the domestic industries would get a substantial advantage over foreign bidder. The new arrangement will constrain the
competition and foreign bidders would shy away from bidding. Moreover, this kind of margin does not exist in today’s
competition. If there were limited bids, the cost would be higher than the estimates. Whenever, there are large numbers of parties
participating in the bid, there would be competitive rate leading to reduction of cost of package. In case of limited bids, the cost of
power would be higher and ultimately people have to bear the brunt of such a limited bidding. India’s cost of power is three times
higher than China who is India’s close competitor.
6.8    Moreover, foreign exchange fluctuation on a long term basis and interest regime should be taken into account before
finalizing any scheme for the domestic industry. Foreign exchange fluctuation is very good today and Indian companies are able
to get foreign exchange on a long-term basis. Today, rate of interest has also come down which is a motivating factor for reducing
the cost of product. Large industries are able to get finance form lead banks at 7% which was 12% or 13% 3 year ago.
6.9    Indian industries are facing higher tariff which is a major constrain for the Indian industries. A Committee headed by Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission, is looking after all these issues. In view of this, present status quo may be maintained till all
issues are addressed.
6.10  There is one task force also, which is looking after investment and reforms in power sector and other aspects for giving
incentives to power sector. When it finalises its study, all those things will be taken into account during budget exercise.
6.11  The Committee observes that the basic concept of Exim Policy was to provide a level playing field between domestic
supplier and foreign suppler. If started form those projects which were funded by multilateral agencies where items were allowed
under zero duty to give the domestic suppliers a level playing field so that can they can compete with the foreign companies. But
in the light of Chaturvedi Repot, BCD was brought down from 20% to 5% and CVD was intorduced 16% and TED was
withdrawn. CVD was the protection given to domestic industry over and above 5% BCD. The industries are supposed to have a
built in cushion of 5% and they are getting the  deemed export benefit. But there are certain inefficiencies and bottlenecks in our
systems. The domestic industries have to pay various taxes to the State Governments and they have some legacies of the past in
the form of townships, which are social obligations, and the cost of this in our country is very high. These disadvantages are not
neutralized. The Committee feels that some sort of balance is to be stuck to neutralize the disadvantage faced by the domestic
industries.
6.12  The Committee observes that Government should see how domestic industry would survive in the present globalised world.
Government has to see the interest of domestic industries compared to the foreign comparies. Government should also look into

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
the matter relating to the local taxes domestic industry has to pay.
6.13  The Committee is not against globalisation process, but at the same time it would also want to see to it that reasonable
protection is given to the domestic industries. Similarly, power cost should not go up in the larger interest of the consumers but it
should be seen that capital industry is also protected.
6.14  The Committee is booking at it in a larger perspective, that is, the interest of the country. Every ministry has its own
problem, but they have to find a way to protect the domestic industry. There should be a give and take attitude.
6.15  If a contract has been awarded earlier and if Government make any changes in policy, the whole contract remains in
dispute. This makes projects very difficult. The Committee, therefore, recommends that whenever change is made in the
Exim Policy, it should be for the prospective contracts.
6.16  Since disadvantage forced by the domestic industries due to mid term policy change, the Committee recommends
that where orders/letters of intent has been placed before 31.3.2000 for power and fertilizer projects, the provision of Exim
Policy of 1999-2000 may be made applicable to allow refund of Terminal Excise Duty.
6.17  In the present scenario, there are three stake holders with redard to the establishment of power projects, namely, the Project,
Revenue Department, and lastly the Domestic suppliers.
6.18  The project cost can be reduced if the import duties are reduced but in that case, there will be adverse impact on the revenue
and the domestic suppliers will also be adversely affected. To balance the interests of all parties, if the overall duties which are
presently 21.8% (5% CD + 16% CVD) are reduced to a single customs duty of 20%, the project cost shall come down by 1.8%
and the effect of revenue will not be substantial.
6.19  In view of the proposal of reduction of CVD to NIL from present rate of 16%, the domestic industry shall become eligible
for refund of TED. The refund of TED to the domestic supplier is also essential as they supper from other cost disadvantages like
Sales Tax, infrastructure bottleneck, higher cost of finances etc. which together account for 14% to 23%.
6.20  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the duty structure should be rationlised as under:
  l            Customs Duty 20%
  l            CVD - nill
  l   With corresponding refund of TED to the domestic suppliers
6.21  The Committee finally recommends that Government should take into account the recommendations made by this
Committee while doing the budget exercise (2004-05) and provide a level playing field for the Indian capital goods
industry.
 
MINUTES
XIV
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
        The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th December,
2003 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           PRESENT
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander     -----     Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     4.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
     5.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
     6.   Shri K. Chandran Pillai
           LOK SABHA
     7.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
     8.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
     9.   Shri K. Francis George
   10.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   11.   Shri A. C. Jose
   12.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   13.   Shri Sunil Khan
   14.   Shri Manjay Lal
   15.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   16.   Shri P. Rajendran
   17.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   18.   Shri Radha Mohan Singh
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary

143rdreport of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/143rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:45:13]
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
           Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and recalled the work transacted by the Committee
during the year 2003. The Committee also took note of the work transacted by the four Sub-Committees.
3.     The Committee then took up the following reports for its consideration :-
(i)    130th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Himachal Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(ii)    131st Report on constraints in Industrial Development of North Eastern Region (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises);
(iii)   132nd Report on MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Power Sector (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(iv)   133rd Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee's 117th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(v)   134th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Committee's 119th Report
on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(vi)   135th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Committee's 120th Report
on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);
(vii)  136th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Committee's 127th Report
on MoU performance in respect of PSUs of Shipping Industry, (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(viii)137th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in Committee's 122nd Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of (Ministry of Steel);
(ix)   138th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee's 111th Report on
Operational Efficiency and Survival of Alloy Steel Plant (ASP) Durgapur (Ministry of Steel);
(x)   139th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee's 125th Report on
Implementation Status of Modernization Expansion and Financial-cum-Business Restructuring Programme of SAIL at a
Glance (Ministry of Steel);
(xi)   140th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Committee's 126th Report
on Revival of Nagaland Pulp and Paper Mills (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(xii)  141st Report on Potential and Promotion of Coir Industries in West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar (Ministry of
Agro and Rural Industries);
(xiii)142th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee's 123th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of (Ministry of Mines);
(xiv)143rd Report on level Playing Field for the Capital Goods Industries (Ministry of heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); and
(xv)  144th Report on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations contained in the Committee's 124th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries.
4.     The Chairman requested the Members to give any suggestion or change in the Report, if required. After a brief discussion all
the Reports were adopted.
5.     The Committee authorised Prof. M.M. Agarwal and in his absence Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi, Member Rajya Sasbha, to
present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha. It also authorised Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee and in her absence Shri A.C. Jose, Member
Lok Sabha, to present the Reports in the Lok Sabha on 22nd and 23rd December, 2003.
6.    *                                                   *                                                        *
7.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
 
***Relates to other matters.