92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
NINTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
 ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE 73RD REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-- RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2002-03) OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (MINISTRY OF HEAVY
INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website : http:/parliamentofindia.nic.in
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5. MINUTES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 1st January, 2002)
   *1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander  —  Chairman
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.  Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     4.  Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     6.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.  Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
     9.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.  Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.  Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.  Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.  Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.  Vacant
          LOK  SABHA
   16.  Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.  Kumari Mamata Banerjee
   18.  Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   19.  Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   20.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   21.  Shri Deepak Kumar
   22.  Shri Thomas Hansda
   23.  Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
   24.  Shri A.C. Jose
   25.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   26.  Shri Brijlal Khabri
   27.  Shri Sunil Khan
   28.  Shri Manjay Lal
   29.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.  Shri A. Narendra
   31.  Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.  Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
_______________________________________________________________________________________________   
* Appointed  Member  and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 12
th November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi ceased  to
be the Member of the Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th August, 2002.
 
   33.  Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
   34.  Shri Uttamrao Patil
   35.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   36.  Shri P. Rajendran
   37.  Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   38.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
   39.  Shri Ramanand Singh
   40.  Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
   41.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   42.  Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   43.  Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   44.  Shri Beni Prasad Verma
   45.  Vacant  
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
          Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
          Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
          Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this Ninety-second Report on the Action Taken  on the recommendations contained in
the 73rd Report of the Department-- related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry on "Demand for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Public Enterprises".
2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken note on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's 73rd Report on Demand for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Public Enterprises.
3. The Committee at its meeting held on 11th December, 2002 considered and adopted the report.
NEW DELHI; 
11 December, 2002
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER
 Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in its 73rd Report of the Department-- related Parliamentry Standing Committee on Industry on the Demand for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Public Enterprises which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok
Sabha on the 14th May, 2002.  
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. They have been categorized as follows:
        (i)       Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:-
                  Paras 2.4, 3.2, 4.2, 8.7, 8.9 and 8.12 (Chapter -- I).
        (ii)      Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's replies:-
                  Para 6.9 (Chapter -- II).
        (iii)       Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of  the
Government:-
                  Paras 5.4, 5.5, 5.9, 5.10, 6.2, 6.6, 6.10, 7.8, 7.10, 7.11, 7.13, 8.10, 8.16, 8.17,
                  (Chapter --III).
        (iv)     Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of the Government have not been  received:-
                  Para 4.4 (Chapter -- IV).
3.  The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Heavy Industries has accepted its recommendations as
mentioned in Chapter -- I of the Report.
4.  In respect of the recommendations made in Paras 3.17 and 3.21 in Chapter -- II, the Committee is convinced with the
logic and explanation advocated by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and therefore does not want to pursue further.
5.  The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapter -- III
and therefore the Committee desires that the Ministry of Heavy Industries would furnish logical explanation in respect
of these recommendations.                                                                                                                            
                                                                CHAPTER -I
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Para 2.4

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Allocation of funds for counselling, retraining and redeployment of workers
 
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee is of the view that the work relating to retraining and redeployment of rationalised employees of
Central PSEs is s major task recently assigned to the Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that additional funds may be allocated at RE stage to fill the gap of the requirements of the department.
 
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
  The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and will be kept in view while assessing the fund requirement
at RE stage.
Para 3.2
RECOMMENDATION
  Taking into consideration the major works done by the Department relating to the Central PSEs, the plan allocation of
Rs. 10.00 crore seems to be inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the plan allocations may be
reviewed at RE stage.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
The recommendation of the Committee will be kept in view while budget proposals are at the RE stage.
Para 4.2
Non-Plan Expenditure for the Department of Public Enterprises
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee feels that though it is good on the part of the Department to minimize non-Plan expenditure, yet the
decreasing non-Plan investment should not hamper the important functions of the Department. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that additional requirements of the Department, if any, may be considered at the RE stage.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
  The recommendation of the Committee will be kept in view, for additional requirement of funds, if necessary, so that
the important functions of DPE do not hamper for want of funds.
Para 8.7
Memorandum of Understanding
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee is happy to note that the MoU system has enabled the DPE to undertake objective assessment of
CPSEs. The Committee recommends for further strengthening of the MoU system and hopes it will be able to adopt
itself to the requirements of PSEs in a globalised economy.
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
  Efforts have alreday been made to strengthen the MoU system by introducing parameters relating to strategy,
benchmarks of efficiency, quality control, modernisation and customer satisfaction. It is also being considered to
involve the professionals, management experts and technocrats in the process of finalising the MoUs and it is hoped that
this will be another step to further strengthen the MoU system.
Para 8.9

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
RECOMMENDATION
  The Commitee is happy to note that over 100 Central PSEs have signed the MoU. The Committee is of the view that
efforts to bring more PSEs under the abmit of MoU system be made in the right earnest.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
  For the year 2002-03, MoUs in respect of 100 PSEs were finalised which also include 58 subsidiaries. Thus the total
number of PSEs covered under the MoU system would work out to 158. 44 PSEs are referred to BIFR and the
remaining PSEs are very small in size or sick or are under construction. Efforts will be made to cover a few more PSEs
which have stabilised their operations.        
Para 8.12
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee is concerned to note that the MoU Division is not fully equipped to meet the challenges of the present
day situation. The Committee recommends that consultants/specialists from the private industry be hired to make the
implementation of the MoU system more effective and realistic.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
  The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Department is already considering to avail the services of
Consultants/Specialists for the Ad-hoc Task Force.
           
                                                               CHAPTER -II
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
           
Para 6.9
Counselling, Retraining/Redeployment, setting up of New Centres/Addition of Nodal Agencies
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee is happy to note that the methodology adopted for retraining of workers availing VRS is laudable. The
Committee hopes that the target of 8000 trainees should not only be achieved but the Department of Public Enterprises
should surpass it.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
  The projected target of 8000 has not only been achieved but also surpassed during 2001-02 in spite of the initial
procedural delays, which had been there due to implementation of the CRR programme for the first year, by Department
of Public Enterprises. For the year 2002-03 it has been projected that the programme should meet 10000 plus target.
 
                                                                 CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Para 5.4
Status of Navratna and Miniratna companies
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee notes that Non-Official Directors for Navratna and Miniratna PSEs have benefited immensly due to
the status assigned to them. The Committee feels that the Department of Public Enteprises should undertake all possible
steps to introduce professionalism in these Public Sector Enterprises so that they are able to face challenges of changing
times and able to develop competitive edge.
Para 5.5

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
RECOMMENDATION
  The Committee, however, proposes to undertake a study to know how far Directors of MoU signing PSEs are given
sufficient power to enable them to take quick decisions in their business related matters and formation of joint venture
etc. in India and abroad.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
  Steps have already been taken for professionalising the Boards of Navratna and Miniratna PSEs. A Search Committee
was set up for selecting non-official part-time Directors for Navratna/Miniratna PSEs. The delegation of enhanced
financial powers to the Navratna and Miniratna PSEs is subject to the condition that the Boards of these PSEs are
professionalised by inducting at least 4 non-official Directors in the case of Navratnas and at least 3 non-official
Directors in the case of Miniratnas. These non-officials are eminent persons drawn from various disciplines like
technocrats, management experts and consultants, professional managers in industry and trade, etc.  Induction of non-
official professionals through the Search Committee mechanism is a countinuous process.
  The MoU system is based on the principle of enhanced autonomy and accountability. Accordingly, the Boards of MoU
signing PSEs enjoy certain financial and operational autonomy within the guidelines. As and when the Committee
desires to undertake the study, this Department will provide requisite assistance to coordinate it.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
  The Department of Public Enterprises has informed about the steps taken about the professionalization of the Boards of
Navratna and Miniratna companies. But it has not stated how far they have been successful to face the challenges of
changing time. The Committee needs the detailed breakup of the composition of Boards of Navratna and Miniratna
companies to have an insight with regard to professionalization of Boards and how far they have played proactive role.
Para 5.9
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee is of the opinion that the grant of Navratna and Miniratna status should not be a one-time affair. The
Committee is of the view that the Navratna/Miniratna status should be reviewed periodically and those PSEs, which
underperform as compared to their targets should be denied Navratna/Miniratna status.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
  The government has already taken a decision to introduce the mechanism to periodically review the Navratna and
Miniratna status of the PSEs. An Apex Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary is to regularly review their
performance for which a detailed format has already been circulated to the PSEs and the Administrative Ministries.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee notes that a mechanism has been introduced to periodically review the Navratna and Miniratna
status of PSE and the administrative Ministries for the purpose. The Committee wishes that it may be apprised about the
feed back received from the PSEs and Ministries in response to the said circular and actions taken by the Department of
Public Enterprises thereon.
Para 5.10
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee also recommends that greater financial, operational and managerial autonomy should be given to
Navratnas/Miniratnas PSEs so as to enable them to take independent decisions.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Through the Navratna and Miniratna scheme enhanced financial, operational and managerial autonomy has already
been granted to the PSEs. However, an institutional arrangement has already been set up to review the working of the
scheme and the need for grant of further autonomy will also be considered under this arrangement.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
The Committee stresses that it should be apprised of the results of review done so far of the  scheme of the enhanced
financial, operational and managerial autonomy granted to the PSEs.                                                 
Para 6.2
Counselling, Retraining/Redeployment, Setting up of New Centres/Addition of Nodal Agencies
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee feels that the initiatives taken by the DHI to counsel, retrain and redeploy the employees of CPSEs
are laudable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that greater focus on proper implementation and regular
monitoring of the above scheme is required to make it more effective at the ground level.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
DPE would strive for further improvement under the CRR Programme. For regular monitoring of the programme,
the Monitoring Cell set up under the CRR Programme has been in close touch with the Nodal Training Agencies and
Central PSUs for proper implementation and monitoring of the programme. Regular field visits have been made to the
Nodal Agencies and locations of the training imparted in order to closely watch and monitor the programme, have the
feed back from the beneficiaries and also to meet the Central PSUs in the surroundings so as to create a cohesive
environment for the CRR programme. Besides, at the local level provision has already been made for setting up of
Coordination Committee consisting of the Members from Central PSUs, Nodal Training Agencies and credit institutions
so that the issues can be discussed and sorted out locally.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee wishes to know number of visits have so far been made to the nodal agencies and locations of the
training and details of feedback received from the beneficiaries and results achieved after meeting the Central PSUs in
the surroundings. The Committee further wishes to know whether coordination Committee at local level consisting of
Members from Central PSUs, Nodal Training Agencies and credit institutions has since been formed, if so, at how many
places and results achieved therefrom.
Para 6.6
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee is of the opinion that with the increase in the number of employees opting for VRS, the programme
for retraining and redeployment of these employees requires tremendous technical expertise. The Committee has been
informed that training agencies have been identified throughout the country to rehabilitate workers who have retired
under the VRS scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Public Enterprises should
exercise greater monitoring over the working of these agencies and ensure that effective training depending on the
actual job market conditions is imparted.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Visualizing the professional/technical expertise required, the selection of the Nodal Training Agencies have been
made in such a way that it should cater to the need of the restructured employees. Both the Central PSUs as well as
Nodal Training Agencies, who are the key elements of the CRR programme have been advised to draw up the training
modules for 20 days/30 days/40 days in such a manner that should cater the individual needs of the rationalised
employees of CPSUs. They should also take into account the market opportunity available, the strength and weakness of
the trainees, the resources required for that particular project that the trainees would be taking up and the capacity of the
individual concerned etc. Besides, constant monitoring alongwith field visits by officers of Monitoring Cell, DPE are
made so as to have first hand feed  back from the beneficiaries and the difficulties/suggestion, if any are put into place
so as to bring further improvement in this programme. However, recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should play a proactive   role in the matter and
watch the quality of training programme, guide the trained persons in taking up projects in consultation with the Small
Industries Service Institutions and have meetings with the Credit Intitutions to facilitate availability of required funds.

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Para 6.10
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee, however, observes that there may be cases where VRS optees are in the age group of 50-57 and by
human nature they stop learning any new grade and imparting training to them would only result in waste of time and
Government money. The Committee, therefore, recommends that provision may be made for giving training to the
sons/daughters of such persons and that too before they are retired.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
The recommendations of the Committee in regard to providing the facilities under the CRR programme to the
sons/daughters of the VRS optees who are in the age group of 50-57 have been noted. Considering the human angle, as
recommended by the Hon'ble Members, the matter would be taken up for consideration appropriately.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee stresses that the provision for imparting training under the CRR Programme to the sons/daughters of
the VRS optees in the age group of 50-57 should be made without further delay.
Para 7.8
The Purchase Preference Policy
RECOMMENDATION
   The Committee is happy to note the extension in the Purchase Preference Policy upto 31
st March, 2004. However, the
Committee is very much concerned to note that some PSEs are not following the Purchase Preference Guidelines and
are not specifying this provision in their NITs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Public
Enterprises should scrupulously monitor the compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy and all the administrative
Ministries/Departments should issue necessary instructions to the PSEs unde their jurisdiction to comply with the
Purchase Preference Policy.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Recommendations of the Committee on the compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy have been noted. As the
Committee is aware that DPE has already issued an OM dated 19
th November, 2001 to all administrative
Ministries/Departments and CPSUs for strict compliance of the policy. DPE has also issued another OM on 7.8.2002 to
all Ministries/Departments and Chief Executives of PSEs to follow the above OM in letter and spirit.
In view of the ERC recommendation to downsize the department, no headway has been made to set up a monitoring
cell in DPE due to shortage of trained and experienced manpower/officers. However, the same could be re-looked into.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that there was delay of two and half months in issuing the circular to the
PSUs and administrative ministries. There are certain P.E.Ss, autonomous bodies who deliberately do not include
Purchase Preference clause in their Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) and there is a possibility that these bodies might have
taken the opportunity not to include the said clause in their NIT during that period. Similarly those PSUs who could
have availed the Purchase Preference Policy during that period could not do so in the absence of the said circular. The
Committee feels that D.P.E. should not have taken so much time to issue the circular.
The Committee strongly recommends that Purchase Preference Policy should be extended for two and a half months
beyond 31.3.2004 to make good the loss, which took place due to departmental inaction.
Para 7.10
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee in its 62
nd Report had recommended that a monitoring cell should be set up in Department of Public
Enterprises which would submit a status note to the Cabinet Secretariat every quarter in this regard with a copy to the

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Department -- related Parliamentry Standing Committee on Industry for effective monitoring of the Policy by the
Department of Public Enterprises. In reply, the Department of Public Enterprises have stated that implementation of the
Policy is the responsibility of the concerned Ministry/Department. The Committee feels that Department of the Public
Enterprises should not run away from its duty and responsibility. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in
62nd Report. 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations of the Committee on the compliance of the Purchase Preference Policy has been noted. As the
Committee is aware that DPE has already issued an OM dated 19 th November, 2001 to all administrative
Ministries/Departments and CPSUs for strict compliance of the policy.
In view of the Expenditure Reforms Committee (ERC) recommendation to downsize the Department (15 posts have
already been abolished) and objections from other Ministries/Departments, no headway has been made to set up a
monitoring cell in DPE. However, the same could be re-looked into.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee feels that D.P.E.'s approach in this regard is evasive. The Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendations that a monitoring cell should be set up in D.P.E., which would submit a status note to the Cabinet
Secretariat every quarter in this regard with a copy to Department-related Parliamentry Standing Committee on
Industry.
Para 7.11
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee fully understands the role and responsibility of maintaining of allied executive authority of the
Ministry/Department and in no way wants it be diluted. The Committee only wants itself to be kept informed of
changing position in this important area so as to be of positive help to the Ministry. 
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
View of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
The Committee expects that Department of Public Enterprises would kept the Committee informed about the
changing position in the important area.
Para 7.13
Inter P.S.U. Cooperation
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee is of the view that the very existance of several PSEs is at stake and if they do not bring in synergies
amongst themselves by resorting to inter-PSE cooperation, the possibity of their survival appears dim. The Committee,
therefore strongly recommends that strategic alliances may be made amongst PSEs in a mutually beneficial manner and
for that Department of Public Enterprises should be an initiative by devising suitable mechanisms on a priority basis.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that department of Public Enterprises should appoint a Task Force to devise a
mechanism early. 
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
This Department has already instructed all the PSEs to prepare their strategic plan outlining the road map for their
growth on a long-term basis. Forming a strategic tie ups and alliances is a part of the bussiness strategy and the
managements of the PSEs are in a better position to take a decision in this regard. Setting   up of task force in DPE may
not serve the purpose, however, the supporting role of Administrative Ministries will be crucial in this direction. 

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee feels that the reply given by Department of Public Enterprises is disappointing. For all practical
purposes the Department of Public Enterprises wants to remain as a helpless spectator. The Committee desires that the
Department of Public Enterprises should play a protective role in combining the synergies of various PSUs. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
Para 8.10
Memorandum of Understanding
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should seperately submit a status note to the
Committee highlighting the benefits reaped by MoU signing PSUs and citing the probable reasons which presented
other profit making PSUs from signing MoU so as to enable the Committee to take a more in front view on the efficacy
of the system.
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
A separate status not is annexed.(Annexure-I)
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee notes that 20 PSEs have not been short-listed for signing MoU as these are sick or insignificant. The
Committee needs information about the extent of their sickness and whether any scheme has been formulated for their
revival.
Para 8.16
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee is of the view that hiring or taking people on deputation from other PSEs can neutralize the impact
of the recommendation of ERC on the MoU Division. The Committee recommends that the views of organizations like
CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, etc.  may be taken to make the MoU system more
effective and rational.   
ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
The recommendations of the Committee are noted.
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATION
The Committee requires a studied reply in the matter.
Para 8.17
Six day Week in P.S.Us
RECOMMENDATION
The Committee while visiting the PSEs located in various parts of the country noted that Saturdays are observed as
holidays in the Head Offices, Registered Offices and Regional Offices on the pattern   the Central Government Offices.
In a business-oriented environment such a practice is not a healthy sign. In a way this Practice amounts to loss of man-
hour. The Committee feels that Department of Public Enterprises should examine the matter and come out with a
proposal for six-day week for the PSEs.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
This is a general management matter in which normally the government may not interfere. This falls within the
jurisdiction of the respective management who has to decide it keeping in view the commercial interest and efficient
functioning of the PSU.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION
The Committee desires that its concerns should be conveyed to all PSUs. The Committee feels that PSUs should
inclucate business culture leaving behind the babu culture in the post liberalized era.
 
CHAPTER -IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
                                                                                                                                                       
Para 4.4
Non-Plan Investment for the Department of Public Enterprises                                                          
RECOMMENDATION
Since DPE is an important Agency of the Government to make policies and review performance of the central PSEs
through MoUs signed by them, the Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that the Government should strengthen this
department.
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
The observation of the Committee is noted. A separate proposal is being prepared to seek plan assistance for
strengthening the MoU system in the Department of Public Enterprises.
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
The Department of Public Enterprises has informed about the steps taken about the professionalization of the Boards
of Navratna and Miniratna Companies. But it has not stated how far they have been successful to face the challenges of
changing time. The Committee needs the detailed breakup of the Composition of Boards of Navratna and Miniratna
Companies to have an insight with regard to professionalization of Boards and how far they have played proactive role. 
                                                                                                                   (Paras 5.4 and 5.5)
 
The Committee notes that a mechanism has been introduced to periodically review the Navratna and Miniratna
status of PSE and the administrative ministries for the purpose. The Committee wishes that it may be apprised about the
feedback received from the PSEs and Ministries in response to the said circular and actions taken by the Department of
Public Enterprises thereon.                                                                                                           (Para 5.9)
 
The Committee stresses that it should be apprised of the results of the review done so far of the scheme of the
enhanced financial, operational and managerial autonomy granted to the PSEs.
                                                                                                                         (Para 5.10)
 
The Committee wishes to know number of visits have so far been made to the nodal agencies and locations of the
training and details of feedback received from the beneficiaries and results achieved after meeting the Central PSUs in
the  surroundings. The Committee further wished to know whether coordination Committee at local level consisting of
Members from Central PSUs, Nodal Training Agencies and credit institutions has since formed, if so, at how many
places and results achieved there from.                                                                                                  (Para 6.2)
 
The Committee recommends that Department of Public Enterprises should play a protective role in the matter and
watch the quality of training programme, guide the trained persons in taking up projects in consultation with the Small
Industries Service Institutions and have meetings with the Credit Institutions to facilitate availibility of required
funds.           (Para 6.6)
 

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
The Committee stresses that the provision for imparting training under the C.C.R. Programme to the sons/daughters
of the V.R.S. opteers in the age group of 50-57 should be made without further delay. (Para 6.10)
 
The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that there was delay of two and a half months in issuing the circular to the
PSUs and administrative ministries. There are certain PSEs, autonomous bodies who deliberately do not include
Purchase Preference clauses in their Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) and there is a possibility that these bodies might
have taken the opportunity not to include the said clause in their NIT during that period. Similarly those PSUs who
could have availed the Purchase Preference Policy during that period could not do so in the abrace of the said circular.
The Committee feels that Department of Public Enterprises should not have taken so much time to issue the circular.
 
The Committee stronghly recommends that Purchase Preference Policy should be extended for two and half months
beyond 31.3.2004 to make good the loss, which took place due to Departmental inaction. (Para 7.8)
The Committee feels that department of public Enterprises's approach in this regard is evasive. The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendations that a monitoring cell should be set up in Department of Public Enterprises which
would submit a status note to the Cabinet Secretariat every quarter in this regard with a copy to Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry.                                                                                           (Para 7.10)
 
The Committee expects that D.P.E. would keep the Committee informed about the changing   position in the
important area.     (Para 7.11)
 
The Committee feels that the reply given by the Department of Public Enterprises is disappointing. For all practical
purposes the Department of Public Enterprises wants to remain as a helpless spectator. The Committee desires the
Department of Public Enterprises to play a protective role in combining the synergies of various PSUs. The Committee,
therefore, reiterates its recommendation.                                                                    (Para 7.13)
 
The Committee notes that 20 PSEs have note been short-listed for signing MoU, as these are  sick or insignificant.
The Committee needs information about the extent of their sickness and whether any scheme has been formulated for
their revival. (Para 8.10)
 
The Committee requires a studied reply in the matter.                                          (Para 8.16)
 
The Committee desires that its concerns should be conveyed to all P.S.Us. The Committee feels that PSUs should
inculcate business culture leaving behind the babu culture in the post liberalized era.    (Para 8.17)  
MINUTES
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
          The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11
th December, 2002 in Room No. 62, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
            PRESENT
     1.  Dr. P. C. Alexander  —  Chairman
          RAJYA  SABHA
     2.  Prof. M. M. Agarwal
     3.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     4.  Shri P. K. Maheshwari
       
          LOK  SABHA
     5.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
     6.  Shri A.C. Jose

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
     7.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
     8.  Shri A. Narendra
     9.  Shri Ananta Nayak
   10.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   11.  Shri P. Rajendran
   12.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
   13.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
   14.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
          SECRETARIAT
          Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
          Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
          Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2. At the out set the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda for the meeting of the day.
3. The Committee thereafter, took up auto policy for discussion. The Chairman apprised the Members that the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry had  recommended in its 59
th Report that the Government should
formulate an Auto Policy  in view of the ongoing liberalization of the economy and W.T.O. Obligations. In response to
the Committee's recommendations the Department of Heavy Industries in its Action Taken Note has informed the
Committee that Government of India has brought out an Auto Policy on 7th March, 2002.
3.1 The Chairman stated that the Committtee on Industry took up the Auto Policy for detailed discussion as the policy
laid down certain recommendations for the growth of the Industry. Since most of these recommendations required
actions by the Ministries other than the Department of Heavy Industries and so far  these recommendations had not been
translated into real  Government Policy. 
3.2 The Chairman apprised the Members that the Committee had already taken up the matter for discussion and in this
regard the Committee had held two meetings on 24 th June, and 16 th July, 2002. Based on the discussion held on 24 th
June, 2002 a  questionnaire was prepared and replies thereon was obtained from Department of Heavy Industries. In the
meeting held on 16th July, 2002 the Committee had interacted with Automotives Research Association of India (ARAI);
Society of India Automobiles Manufacturers (SIAM); Automotive Tyre Manufacturers Association (ATMA); and
Automotive Component Manufacturers Association (ACMA); Prozon Inc. (manufacture of Fuel saver). Apprising the
Members the details of discussion held in these two meetings, the Chairman spelt out the scope for discussion in Auto
Policy which inter-alia  included import of second hand imported cars; lack of testing facilities; foreign direct
investment, research and development; construction of bus-body building ; terminal life policy; lifting of quantitive
restriction; using spurious items and related 'e' mark issue; excise duty on tyre and concession on import tyre; ban on
used tyre; difficulties due to octroi on 5-6 States, switching over from tube tyre to tubeless tyre; encouragement to small
car industries; infrastructure import tariff; environmental aspects etc.
3.3 The Committee, thereafter, discussed in details the aims of Auto Policy which  aimed at to promote integrated,
phased, enduring and self-sustained growth of the Indian Automobile Industry. The Committee discussed also the
objective of Auto Policy which inter-alia include promotion  of a globally competitive automotive industry; Exalting
the sector as a lever of industrial growth and an employment; Establishment of an internatinal hub for manufacturing
small affordable passenger cars and key center for manufacturing Tractors   and Two wheelers in the world; Ensuring a
balanced transition to open trade at a minimal risk to the Indian Economy and local industry; Modernisation of the
industry by facilitating indigenous design, research and development; Steering up India's software industry into
automotive technology; Development of domestic safety and environmental standard at par with international standards;
assisting development of vehicles propelled by alternative energy sources.
4.         *                                                          *                                                                      *
4.1 After a brief discussion all Reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.

92nd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/92ndreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
*** relates to other matter.