RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
THE PUBLIC SECTOR IRON AND STEEL COMPANIES 
(RESTRUCTURING) AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1993 
(TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
Presented on 19th Apr:J, 1994 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 1994/CHAITRA, 1916 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
3. APPENDICES 
I. List of witnesses who tendered evidence before the Committee. 
II. 
III. 
Minutes of the meetings of the Committee. 
Minutes of the meeting of the Sub-Committee. 
PAGES 
(iii)-(iv) 
1-6 
7-8 
9-23 
24 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman. 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Anil Kumar 
4. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri J.P. Javali 
6. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
11. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
12. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
*13. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
15. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
16. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
18. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
19. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
20. Shri Balin Kuli 
21. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
22. Shri Vishweshwar Bhagat 
23. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
24. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
25. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
26. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
27. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
28. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
29. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
30. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
31. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
32. Shri Ramdew Ram 
33. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
34. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
35. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
36. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
37. Shri Manjay Lal 
38. Shri Rasheed Masood 
39. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
40. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
41. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
42. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
43. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
*Nominated to the Committee on 10.1.1994 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri O.K. Saksena , Depu ty Secretary 
Shri Shamsher Singh Rana. Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriya l, Comn11ttec Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE l\liNISTRIES 
I. Ministry of Steel 
l. Shri ~1 oosa Raza, Secretary 
2 ~r!ri S. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. ".hn r, ·, .. \1. Rao , Depu ty Secretary 
4. Shri V ~ R. Nair, Chairman, SAIL 
5. Shri Arvind Pande, Vice Chairman, SAIL 
6. Shri R. Jambunathan, Director (Finance), SAIL 
7. Shri K V . Pai , Managing Director (liSCO) 
8. Dr. L.K. Singhal, Director (Technical), MECON 
9. Shri D. Sinha, Deputy General Manager (Finance), MECON 
II. Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Saluja, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
III. Ministry of Finance 
1. Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia, Secretary 
2. Shri D.C. Gupta, Joint Secretary 
IV. Planning Commission 
Shri Yogesh Chandra, Special Secretary 

SIXTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf , present this Sixth 
Report of the Committee on the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and 
Miscellaneous provisions (Amendment) BilL 1993. "To be introduced in the Lok Sabha". 
2. The Bill which was to be introduced in Lok Sabha, was opposed at the introduction stage 
and was not introduced. It was thereafter, referred to the Committ ee for examination and report 
through separate paras published in Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Bulletins Part II dated the lOth 
January and 13th January, 1994 respectively. 
3. The Committee at its first meeting held on 17th January , 1994 hdd a general discussion on 
the said Bill including the procedure to be adopted by the Comm itte e t o dea l with the subject. In 
the afternoon session of the same meeting the Committee heard the oral evide nce of the 
representatives of Central Trade Unions and the Workers' Unions ope rating at liSCO, Burnpur. 
4. The Committee at its second meeting held on 18th January, 1994 heard the oral evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministries of Steel. Law, Justice and Company Affairs and a lso the 
representatives of the II~CO and SAIL management on the need to bring the new le;Islat ion 
under reference. The discussion was not concluded and the Committee decided to hear these 
witnesses again for further clarifications on the subject. The discussion continued on 9th a11J lOth 
February, 1994 and concluded thereafter. 
5. The Committee while considering the said Bill, also heard the ora l evidence of the Fin a 1 ~·~...: 
Secretary and Special Secretary, Planning Commission with regard to budgetary/funds allocation 
in respect of modernisation of liSCO. 
6. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill provides that due to unsatisfactory 
management and deterioration in the condition of the plant leading to decline in the company's 
performance, Government took ove1~ the management of Indian Iron and Steel Company 
(liSCO) in 1972. Parliament enacted the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1972 in this behalf. The share capital of the company was also acquired by 
Government in 1976 through the Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 
1976. All the shares held . by the Central Government in liSCO were transferred to the Steel 
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) by the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructur­
ing) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978 and liSCO became a wholly owned subsidiary of 
SAIL. 
The object of take over of liSCO was to secure proper management of the affairs of the said 
company and continuity and development of production of steel through programmed invest­
ments on modernisation of the steel works. Since the take over of the said company a capital 
expenditure of around Rs. 600 crores has been incurred i n this company mainly for plant , 
rehabilitation, maintenance and undertaking prelimi nary and e nabling works as a prelude to 
modernisation of the steel works. 
One of the main purposes of take over of liSCO was its modernisation which could not be 
achieved due to severe financial constraints. The company"s performance , therefore , continued to 
decline over the years and its has incurred accumulated losses of over Rs. 800 crores as on 
31.3.1993. 

To achieve the objective of modernisation of liSCO in a time bound manner, it is proposed to 
allow private sector participation through transfer of shares. While doing so it will be ensured 
that the assets of liSCO and the interests of the workers are fully protected. 
The Bill seeks to amend the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978, to allow transfer of shares of liSCO by SAIL and to impose 
certain restrictions on further transfer of shares and capital assets of liSCO . 
7. The Committee considered the draft Report at its sitting held on the 15th March, 1994 and 
decided to seek further extension of time for presentation of the report by the last day of next 
Session of Parliament. The Committee again reconsidered the matter on 17th March, 1994 and 
decided to constitute a Sub-Committee of the Committee to reformulate the draft report and also 
seek extension of time for presentation of the Report on the Bill by the last day of the next 
Session of Parliament. Accordingly, the Chairman of the Committee constituted a Sub­
Committee of nine Members, 6 from Lok Sabha and 3 from Rajya Sabha with following 
composition:-
!. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta, Member, Lok Sabha. 
2. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar, Member, Lok Sabha. 
3. Shri Manjay Lal, Member, Lok Sabha. 
4. Shri Tej Narayan Sing, Member, Lok Sabha. 
5. Shri P.G. Narayanan, Member, Lok Sabha. 
6. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah, Member, Lok Sabha. 
7. Shri Jibon Roy, Member, Rajya Sabha. 
8. Shri K.K. Veerappan, Member, Rajya Sabha. 
9. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody, Member, Rajya Sabha. 
Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah was nominated as convener of the Sub-Committee . 
8. The Sub-Committee discussed the subject alongwith other relevant papers at its meeting held 
on 24th March, 1994 and reformulated the ·report. The Sub-Committee directed that the Report, 
as re-drafted, may be circulated for the consideration of the Committee. The Committee 
considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 30th March, 1994 and 
authorised the Chairman and other Members to present the same to the Parliament on 
19th April, 1994. 
9. The Committee considered and examined the following documents received from the 
Ministry of Steel in connection with the Bill:-
(i) Indian Iron and Steel Company (Taking over of Management) Act, 1972; 
(ii) Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976; 
(iii) The Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1978; 
(iv) Report of the Committee of Experts on private Participation in the Indian Iron and Steel 
Company Limited, submitted to the Government of India (Two volumes); 
(v) Information Memorandum on the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited; 
(vi) Minutes of the meeting of the Public Investment Board (PIB) regarding liSCO; 
(vii) Modernisation proposal prepared by SAIUDasturco, which PIB had cleared; 
(viii) Valuation report prepared by MECON; and 
(ix) Evaluation Report prepared by SAIL and MECON on Mukand proposal. 
10. Besides, the Committee considered a memorandum submitted by liSCO Officers' 
Association. 

11. The Committee also referred some questionnaire received from the members of the 
Committee to the ministry of Steel for written replies and examine d the replies received from 
them. 
12. On the basis of the documents received from the Ministry of Steel and the evidence of 
representatives of Steel Ministry and SAil/liSCO management, the Committee has gathered 
that liSCO is one of the oldest steel companies in India with captive iron ore and coal mines, a 
foundry works and a fully owned subsidiary engaged in production of pipes. The principal unit of 
the company is the Burnpur Steel Works, which achieved and susta ined a production level of 
about 1 million tonnes of ingot steel and 0.8 million tonnes of finished steel in 1962-63 and 
1963-64. Thereafter, the company ran into serious mismanagem~nt. Government of India had , 
therefore, to intervene in the matter and accordingly nationalised the company in 1976 for the 
purpose of modernising the Burnpur Steel Works. liSCO has however been incurring losses for 
last about 15 years despite of Governments' efforts to check the same. 
12.1 According to the Government it stands Committed to the modernisation of the 
company but no scheme could be sanctioned for implem entation, basically due to resource 
constraints of Government and Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) unwilling to undertake 
the work without budgetary support. Therefore, Government proposes to allow private 
participation in the equity and management of liSCO so that the liSCO is modernised and 
prodcution reaches to the desired level within a time frame and also to ensure that the private 
participant is restrained from disposing the shares of liSCO that he may have acquired from 
SAIL as also the assests of liSCO until the responsibility of modernisation is fully met by him. 
12.2 Government have highlighted the following salient features of proposed legislation by 
amending Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) an J Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act of 1978:--
(a) The aforesaid Act of 1978 provide for transfer d shares held by Central 
Government in liSCO to SAIL by making liSCO a sub~.Jdiary of SAIL. The present 
Bill enables Govenment to allow SAIL to tn1ns1cr ts shares in liSCO to any person 
including private parties (Amendment to Section 11). 
(b) A new Section i.e. 11 A is proposed to be inserted in Act of 1978 which would 
impose certain restrictions on the person to whom shares are transferred with 
respect to (i) further transfer of shares to any other person and (ii) transfer by sale 
etc. of capital assets of liSCO. The new legislation also proposes to exclude 
employees of IISCQ to whom SAIL may transfer shares from the restriction on 
furth er transfer. 
(c) The new Bill proposes to amend Section 22 of the Act of 1978 providing to exempt 
SAIL from taxes, duties etc. which may be leviable on transfer of capital assets from 
IISCO to SAIL or any of SAIL's subsidiaries. 
(d) The Bill proposes to exclude the private party to whom the share are transferred, 
from the benefit of exemption of taxes , duties etc. 
12.3. The Committee has been informed that even after the entrustment of management to 
SAIL, and a capital investment of around Rs. 600 crores made for rehabilitation of the plant 
upkeep of the health of plant and machinery and preliminary and enabling? works for the 
modernisa tion of Burnpur Steel Works, financial performance did not improve and the company 
contined to be sick, marked by technological obsolescenc e, outmoded work practice, declining 
profitability etc. Several studies have been conducted since 1977 for modernising the company but 
the resource constraints always came in its way. As on 31.3.1993, the cQmpany has an 
accumulated loss of over Rs. 816.00 crores and a negative net worth of over Rs. 433 crores. 

12.4 As per the Government 's proposal for modernisation of liSCO before the Public 
Investment Board the modernisation cost of Rs. 6520 crores is expected to be financed in the 
following manner:-
External Supplier's Credit 
SDF Loans 
Equity-
(i) Additional 
(ii) Disinvestment 
Additional mobilisation of resources by SAIL 
through market price adjustment 
(Rupees 
Total 
in crores) 
1565 
1600 
1000 
800 
1555 
6520 
The PIB , while exammmg modernisation proposal of liSCO was also informed about 
modernisation proposal of Mls Coparo Group Limited. 
12.5 The Secretary of Ministry of Steel during his deposition before the Committee informed 
that the total losses that have been incurred by SAil so far were over Rs. 1000 crores, including 
the writeoff of Rs. 250 crores. While liSCO was continuing to incur losses, SAIL made efforts to 
prepare modernisation programmes. Several studies were conducted and every time a study was 
made , a proposal was also made and the Ministry aproached the Government for budgetary 
support but funds were not made available. Even in 1991 when PIB was approached for clearance 
of modernisation proposal, the SAIL was not in a position to raise .any of the resources, either 
from the budget or loan from the market. In such situation the only possibility was to bring in 
private participation so that modernisation of the liSCO could be arranged. 
12.6 The representatives of the Workers' unions during the course of their oral evidence 
before the Committee, altogether opposed Govenment's move to privatise liSCO According to 
them during all these years they have been requesting Government, not to throw liSCO in 
private hands and instead find ways and means to modernise the company . The main reason for 
liSCO incurring losses is the loans extended to it in past by Government. Government has 
committed blunders by trying to compensate losses through loans instead of going for 
modernisation of the company. The solution could have been to write-off the loans and make the 
company viable by modernising it. SAIL, having a team of experts, has the capability to 
undertake the modernisation plan and the company could be made viable by other proposals 
which can be utilised by the country to keep the undertaking in the public sector . The Workers' 
Unions have all kinds of doubt about capability of any other party than SAIL to undertake 
modernisation of the plant. According to them the report of Committee of Experts is totally 
invalid as excep t one, nobody in the Committee had any experience in the steel industry and the 
only technical member of the Committee has given his note of dissent not having agreed with the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee . The Workers' Unions expressed before the 
Committee that when SAIL is capable of undertaking modernisation of other integrated ste~l 
plants like Durgapur, Rourkela and Bokaro Plants why not the liSCO be handled by it? 
On being asked whether Worker's Cooperatives could take up the plant, the representatives 
deposed that they are prepared to have a joint management of Workers and Executives. 
However, the concept of workers cooperatives is not workable in view of heavy funds required 
for running the company. They also expressed their strong will to jointly work out proposals for 
modernisation of the company. However, according to them the step to privatise the steel 
industry would be very ludicrous and harmuful to the country. 
At a later stage the workers' unions sent a written representation to the Committee 
conveying their willingness to have equity participation of 50 per cent with SAIL in liSCO and 
their full co-operation in the modernisation of the plant. 
12.1 The Finance Secretary during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee 
explanined that the Ministry of Finance makes an assessment of the total amount of resources for 

development. The question of allocating these resources is the responsibility of Planning 
Commission which chalks oul the priority areas for which funds are to be allocated out of the 
total resources. The representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that during the 
discussion on the issue with PIB. the Secretary, Planning Commission and other officials felt that 
the Ministry of Steel should explore the private part icipation in liSCO modernisation. The 
Ministry of Steel decided the posstbility of private participation as SAIL was found incapable to 
undertake modernisation in view of its limited internal and extra budgetary resources. no 
budgetary support coming from Government and also its committed modernisation projects in 
plants at Durgapur, Bokaro, Rourkela etc. On being asked whether Government would consider 
extending tax benefits to SAIL if liSCO is merged with it, the Finance Secretary clarified that the 
SAIL never came forward for any type of concess ions nor has it ever sent any capital 
restructuring proposal, which would have been considered by his Ministry if received. He further 
clarified that his Ministry would have no objection if SAIL wants to internalise the losses of 
liSCO. Reacting to a question whether some budgetary support is possible for liSCO 
modernisation m view of improved economic situation and better foreign exchange reserves. the 
Finance Secretary informed the Committee that foreign reserves are meant for attracting 
investment in the country. According to him it is the Planning Commission which determmes the 
priority in that regard and in the present juncture the Planning Commission would have to cut 
plan expenditure of other sectors. Winding up his evidence the Finance Secretary maintained that 
if required his Ministry would have no objection to re-examine the whole issue of liSCO 
modernisation, which is a matter to be decided by SAIL. 
13. The Special Secretary, Planning Commission deposed before the Committee that priority 
in funds allocation for liSCO modernisation could not be materialised as SAIL failed to raise the 
expected financial resources despite of decontrol of steel and external borrowings and it was not 
possible to cut out plant expenditure from other sectors. According to him SAIL prepares tts 
annual as well as five year plans and for that guidelines have been issued by National 
Development Council and Parliament. The basic objective of the Planning Commission is to 
allocate the scarce resources available with Government to various competing demands of the 
national economy and it is not feasible to provide funds for liSCO modernisation because the 
kitty is limited and the same amoul)t could be used to provide basic needs for the people. 
14. Though the Statement of Objects and reasons declares that it ~viii be ensured that the 
assets of liSCO and the interest of workers are fully protected by the Committee finds that the 
provisions of the Bill are silent in that regard and there is no mentivn of workers at all. It boils 
down to the bare fact tha! the workers will be governed by the existing labour laws and in that 
eventuality the legal requirements can not be stopped. As such the Committee is of the opinion 
that the proposed amendments are against the Statement of Objects and Reasons and have not 
properly been drafted to be inconformity with the Statement of Objects and Reasons. There is 
every possibility of misuse of these proposed amendments in future. 
Conclusions: 
15. The Committee finds that the provisions of the Bill require to be specific in terms of 
ensuring that the workers' jobs are protected and adequate provisions should be made that no 
measures can be taken of retrenching them under any existing laws for the time bemg in force. 
As such the Bill needs to be re-drafted before it is introduced. The Committee feels that the 
Government has an inherent right to introduce a Bill in the Parliament, subject to leave being 
granted by a House. In a democratic polity the Government cannot be denied that right, though 
the Parliament in its wisdom can reject or pass the Bill depending on its merits. The workers' 
representatives have offered to participate in 50% equity which government may consider. 

15.1 The Committee finds that the terms and reference set out for the Committee of Experts 
were limited enough to restrain that Committee in recommeding concrete proposals for 
modernisation of liSCO. In fact Government should have ask.;!d the Committee to suggest all 
alternatives instead of concentrating on scrutiny of bids in the global tender for private 
participation. 
15.2 The Committee finds that at no stage SAIL has expresssed its mability to undertake the 
modernis?tion programme of liSCO and in fact SAIL has not been extended the required funds 
for the purpose during all these years despite its viable proposals submitted to the Government 
time and again and this fact has been corro oorated by the Financr Secretary in his oral evidence 
before the Committee. While clanfymg the point further the Spec ial Secretary of Planning 
Commission informed the Committee thai' tt is for the Ministry ·of Steel to readjust its priorities 
out of the total plan ouday. The Committee is thus not convinced with the Governments 
approach in rejecting the proposals made by SAIL itself towards the modernisation by not 
providmg the requisite budgetary support to SAIL out to its toral allocation made to it by 
Planning Commission by readjusting its priorities for liSCO. 
15.3 In v1ew of 1ts above mentioned observations, and also the fact that this is the ftrst time 
Government proposes to privatise a public sector steel company in the country, the Committee 
recommends that an indepth study of the modernisation proposals should be made again before 
reaching a final decision about the fate of the company. While doing so in inviting fresh offers al! 
the past offers may also be considered. The:·efore, even now, Government should work out a 
practicable formula through consesus. For this the management, workers and the Government 
should sit together and devise through a tripartite discussion some positive solutions to modernise 
the company The Committee had rccieved reservation on the technical competence or companies 
not having expenencL. in the making of steel through the open hearth furnace route. SAIL has 
full capabilities in this regurd and this needs to be explored in greater depth. The workers have 
3lso come forth with tremendous enthus1asm offering as high as 50% particip tion by them. The 
West Bengal Lcgi:-lattve Assembly has also passed a resolution lli1animou!.ly supporting and 
recommending that SAIL mu!.t take over the entire responsibilities and modernisation of liSCO. 
The possibility of the \llest Bengal Government takmg over liSCO should also be explored on 
the same terms and L~nditions. The Committee believes that, m brining the iegislation, in the 
presen: global scenar io ano the a·.,ailability ot substantial foreign moPe~ as also consider ing that 
the decision of not ronsidcnng the offer from a large multinational company and another large 
steel company in the private sector having the open hearth furance experience and more 
importantly 'IS mentioned above that this is the first attempt of the nation to privatise a public 
sector steel pla t, the Government should consider all these important facts in its perspective. 
15.4 The Committee has made its observation about the Bill in its report but since the Bill 
was not introduced m 1he Lok Sabha 1t is not being appended to this report. 
NEw DeLHI 
March 30. 1994 
MOTURU HANUMANTHA RAO. 
Chairman 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry. 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
APPENDIX-I 
LIST 01 r WITNESSES WHO TENDERED EVIDENCE BEFO'RE THE COMMITTEE 
A - R« !presentatives of the Ministry of Steel 
1. Shri Moosa Raza, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Nau tiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.M.M. Rao, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri M.R.R. Nair, Chairman, SAIL 
5. Shri Arvind Pa.nde, Vice Chairman, SAIL 
6. Shri R. Jambu nathan, Director (Finance), S.AIL 
7. Shri K.V. Pai, Managing Director (liSCO) 
8. Dr. L.K. Singhal , Directo ,· (Technical), MECO N 
9. Shri D. Sinha, Deputy General Manager (Finance), ME'.CON. 
B - · R1epresentatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Saluja, Joint Secret~ry 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
C - Rep resentatives of the Ministry of Finance 
1. S '.hri Montek Singh Ahluwalia. Secretary 
2. S bri D.C. Gupta , Joint Secretary 
D -- Repr ~·st.~ntative of the Planning Commission 
Shri Y ogcsh Chandra, Special Secretary 
Repres.enta.ti.ve of ~he Central Trade Unions and Workers' Unions operating at liSCO, 
Burnpur. 
All Indi .l Trade Union Congress 
Indian J ~ational T1·ade Union Congress 
Centre of Indian Tr:-1de Union 
J:Iind ~fazdoor Sabha 
Bharti}' a Mazdoor Sabho.~ 
Asanso'l Iron and Steel Workers Union, 
Burnp•nr 
ABK ~v'le\'al and Engg. Workers Unions, 
Burn pur 
Shri Gaya Singh 
(i) Shri Krishna Prasad 
(ii) Shri Gopeshwar 
Shri M.K. Pandhe 
(i) Shri Umraomal Purohit 
(ii) Shri Arun Kumar 
Shri Ramprakash Mb·hra 
(i) Shri K.C. Prasad 
(ii) Shri N. G. Sarkar 
(iii) Shri N.P. Bose 
(iv) Shri S. Bose 
(v) Shri S.L. Passey 
(i) Shri B.P. Mukherj ee 
(ii) Shri Balaram Goswami 
(iii) Shri Jatin Dubey 

8. 
9. 
10. 
13urnpur !spat Karmachari Sangh, 
Burnpur 
Iron Steel and Engg Workers' Union, 
Burn pur 
liSCO Officers' Association. Burnpur 
Shri V.N S. Kapoor 
Shri R.N. Verma 
(i) Shri D.K. Palit 
(ii) Shri M. Mazumdar 

APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
XXIV 
Twenty Fourth Meeting 
The Committee met from 12.05 P.M. to 1.20 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 5.30 P.M. nn 
Monday, the 17th January, 1994 in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J. P. Javali 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Ourudas Kamat 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
10. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Chiranjit La! Sharma . 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Oaikwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
16. Shri Ramdew Ram 
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
18. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
19. Shri Manjay Lal 
20. Shrimati Suseela Oopalan 
21. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
22. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
23. Shri P.O. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri O.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 

WITNESSES 
Representative of the Central Trade Unions and Workers' Unions operating at liSCO, 
Burnpur . 
1. All India Trade Union Congress Shri Gaya Singh 
2. Indian National Trade Union Congress (i) Shri Krishna Prasad 
Shri M.K. Pandhe 3. Centre of Indian Trade Union 
4. Hind Mazdoor Sabha (i) Shri Umraomal Purohit 
(ii) Shri Arun Kumar 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Bhartiya Mazdoor Sabha 
Asansol Iron and Steel Workers Union, 
Burn pur 
ABK Metal and Engg. Workers Unions, 
Burn pur 
Burnpur !spat Karm achari Sangh, 
Burn pur 
Iron Steel and Engg. Workers' Union, 
Burn pur 
liSCO Officers' Associa tion, Burnpur 
Shri Ramprakash Mishra 
(i) Shri K.C. Prasad 
(ii) Shri N. G. Sarkar 
(iii) Shri N.P. Bose 
(iv) Shri S. Bose 
(i) Shri B.P. Mukh erjee 
(ii) Shri Balaram Goswami 
(iii) Shri Jatin Dubey 
Shri V.N.S. Kapoor 
Shri R .N. Verma 
(i) Shri D.K. Palit 
(ii) Shri M. Mazumdar 
2. At the outset the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the new member of the 
Committee Shri Jibon Roy . The Chairman informed Members that Hon 'ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha has referred the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companie s (Restructuring) an<1 Miscellane­
ous Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993 "To be introduced in the Lok Sabha" to the Committee 
for examination and report within a period of one month. The Committee thereafter held a 
general discussion on the said Bill including the procedure to be adopted by the Committee to 
deal with the subject. 
3. The Committee thereafte r heard the oral evidence of the above-mentioned representatives 
of Central Trade Unions and the Workers' Unions and the Workers' Unions operating at liSCO, 
Burn pur. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on 18th January , 
1994. 
XXV 
Twenty Fifth Meeting 
The Committee met from 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18th January, 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 

3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
6. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABRA 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Redd y 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
20. Shri .Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri P.G. Naraya nan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G.K. Saksena, 
Shri S.S . Rana, 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, 
WITNESSES 
Deputy Secretary 
Under Secretary 
Committee Officer 
Representative of the Ministry of Steef, Managements of SAIL and IISSCO 
1. Shri Moosa Raza, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.M.M. Rao, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri M.R.R. Nair, Chairman, SAIL 
5. Shri Arvind Pande, Vice Chairman, SAIL 
6. Shri R. Jambunathan, Director (Finance), SAIL 
7. Shri S.N. Das , Director (Parliament), 
8. Shri M. Usman . Sr. Manager (Parliament) 
9. Shri K.V. Pai, Man aging Director (liSCO) 
SPECIAL INVITEES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Saluja, Joint Secretary. 
3. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above-mentioned witnesses with regard to 

the need of bringing the new legislation i.e. the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies 
(Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993. The discussion remained 
inconclusive and the Committee directed the witnesses to appear before it again on 8th February, 
1994 for further clarifications on the subject. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.25 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 19th 
February, 1994. 
XXVI 
Twenty Sixth Meeting 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th January, 1994 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
6. Shri Santosh ·Kumar Sahu 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mullappally Ramachandrci'n 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G.K. Saksena, 
Shri S.S. Rana 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal 
Deputy Secretary 
Under Secretary 
Committee Officer 
2. The Committee further considered the various provisions of the Public Sector Iron and 

Steel Compames (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993 including 
the procedural issues involved in the matter. The Committee felt that a detailed study of the all 
papers connected with the subject is required .. tG-- be made before reaching to any definite 
conclusion and that it may need extention of time. The Committee directed that the material 
regarding balance sheets of liSCO for the year 1972-73, 1977-78, 1988-89, 1991-92 and 1992-93 be 
obtained from the Ministry for its examination.******* 
3. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 8th, 9th 
and lOth February, 1994 respectively. 
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 
XXVII 
Twenty Seventh Meeting 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th February, 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri J.P. Javali 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Chiranjit Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
16. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
17. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
18. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
19. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
20. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
21. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
22. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
23. Shri Manjay Lal 
24. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
25. Shri 'Pej Narayan Singh 
26. Shri P.G. Narayanan 

27. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri O.K. Saksena 
Shri S.S. Rana 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal 
WITNESSES 
- Deputy Secretary 
Under Secretary 
- Committee Officer 
1. Shri Gopeshwar, General Secretary, 
Indian National Trade Union Congress. 
2. Shri S.L. Passey, President, 
Asansol Iron and Steel Workers Union, Burnpur. 
2. The Committee heard the evidence tendered by the above witnesses on the Public Sector 
Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993. 
The scheduled oral evidence of· the Secretary of the Ministry of Steel and representatives of 
SAIVIISCO management was postponed for next day by the Unanimous decision of the 
Committee. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M. to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on 9th 
February, 1994. 
XXVIII 
Twenty Eighth Meeting 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th February, 1994 in Committee 
Room No. 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
4. Shri J.P. Javali 
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
6. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
7. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
8. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
10. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
11. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao kshirsagar 
12. Shri Rama Krishna. Konathala 
13. Shri Balin Kuli 
14. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharm~ 
15. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
16. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
17. Shri M. Bag a Reddy 

18. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
19. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
20. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
21. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
22. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
23. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
24. Shri Manjay Lal 
25. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
26. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
27. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
28. Shri P.O. Narayanan 
29. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri O.K. Saksena - Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana - Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal - Committee Officer 
Representatives of Ministry of Steel and Sail!IISCO Management. 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
1. Shri Moosa Raza, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.M.M. Rao, Deputy Secretary 
SAIL 
4. Shri M.R.R. Nair, Chairman, SAIL 
5. Shri A. Pande, Vice Chairman, SAIL 
6. Shri R. Jambunathan, Director (Finance), SAIL 
7. Shri S.N. Das, Director (Personnel), SAIL 
8. Shri P.K. Mathur, Joint Director (Project), SAIL 
9. Shri K. Padmanabh, Manager, SAIL 
10. Shri K.V. Pai, Managing Director, liSCO 
MECON 
11. Dr. L.K. Singhal, Director (Technical), MECON 
12. Shri D. Sinha, Deputy General Manager (Finance), MECON 
13. Shri A.K. Roy, CMM, MECON 
Special Invitees From the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
1. Shri A.C.C. Unni, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses by way of 
clarifications on the need to bring the new legislation i.e. the Public Sector Iron and Steel 
Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Ammendment) Bill, 1993 and the 
provisions thereof. The evidence was not concluded and the Committee directed the witnesses to 
appear before the Committee again on the next day. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.35 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on lOth 
February. 1994. 

XXIX 
Twenty Ninth Meeting 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lOth February, 1994 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
5. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
6. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
7. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
9. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Slui Mullappally Ramachandran 
15. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
16. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
17. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katharia 
19. Shri Naval Kishore Rai · 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G.K. Saksena - Deputy Secretary 
Shri S.S. Rana - Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal - Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Steel, Managenients of SAIL and liSCO. 
1. Shri Moosa Raza, Secretary, 
2. Shri S. Nautiyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R. Jambunathan, Director (Finance), SAIL 
4. Shri D.M.M. Rao, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri K.V. Pai, Managing Director, liSCO 
6. Shri P.K. Mathur, Joint Director, SAIL 
7. Shri A.K. Ray, CMM, MECON 
8. Shri D. Sinha, Deputy General Manager (Finance), MECON 
9. Dr. L.K. Singhal, Director (Technical), MECON 

2. The Committee completed the hearing of the oral evidence of the above witnesses on the 
Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous provisions (Amend­
ment) Bill , 1993. The Committee then took up the reporting aspect of the Bill and after some 
discussion the Committee felt that it would require some more time to complete its deliberations 
on the subject and report the same to the parliament towards the end of first part of the ensuing 
session. The Committee , thus, authorised the Chairman of the Committee to request the Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for granting extension of time to the Committee, to present its report on 
the Bill, by last day of the first part of ensuing Budget Session of Parliament. 
3. ***** ***** ***** ***** 
4. ***** ***** ***** ***** 
A verbatim of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then considered its future programme and decided to meet on 21st, 22ncl 
and 23rd February, 1994, respectively, to consider its pending business. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
XXX 
Thirtieth Meeting 
The Committee met at 5.30 P·.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd February, 1994 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chanclrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri J.P. Javali 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mocly 
5. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
7. Shri Guruclas Kamat 
8. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
10. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
11. Shri Balin Kuli 
12. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
17. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
18. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shri Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 

23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. S. Rana-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal- Committee Officer 
2. "'"'"'** **"'"'"' ***** ***** 
3. Thereafter the Committee took up further consideration of the Public Sector Iron and 
Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993 and after 
some discussion the Committee decided to hear the views of the Secretary of the Ministry of 
Finance and the Secretary, Planning Commission on the matter of budgetary/funds allocation in 
respec t of liSCO modernisation. The Committee felt that after hearing the views of these 
Secretaries , the Secretariat may be directed to prepare the rep ort on the Bill. 
A verbatim recor d of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 P.M. to meet again 5.30 P.M. on 23rd February, 
1994. 
XXXII 
••Thirt y Second Meeting 
The Committee met at 9.00 A.M. on Tuesday , the 8th March , 1994 in Committee Room 
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Cha irman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bhu baneswar Kalit a 
3. Shri Raj endra Prasad Mody 
4. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
5. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
7. Shri Gurud as Kamat 
8. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
9. Shrimati Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Shri 
Manoranj an Bhakt a 
M. Baga Reddy 
Hari sh Narayan Prab hu 
Raj endra Agnihotri 
Y. Dhananjaya Kumar 
Ramd ew R am 
Puma Chandra Mal ik 
P. G. Narayanan 
Boll a Bulli Ramaiah 
Zantye 
••Minut es of the 31st meeting relates to other matters. 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena-Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal-Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Finance 
1. Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia, Secretary 
2. Shri D. C. Gupta, Joint Secretary 
II. 1. Representative of the Planning Commission 
Shri Y ogesh Chandra, Special Secretary 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in connection 
with the public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
(Amendment) Bill, 1993. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee thereafter considered the Bill further and directed the Secretariat to 
prepare a draft report on the above mentioned Bill for its consideration on 15th March, 1994. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 A. M. to meet again on 15th March, 1994. 
XXXIII 
*Thirty Third Meeting 
The Committee met at 5.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15th March, 1994 in Committee Room No. 
63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Shrimati Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
5. Shri Nyodek Yonggam 
6. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
11. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shri Rajendra 1Agnihotri 
17. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
*Relate to Other matters 

18. Slui S. N. Vekaria 
19. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
20. Slui Manjay La! 
21. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
22. Shri Puran Chandra Malik 
23. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
24. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui G. K. Saksena- Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyai- Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the draft Seventh Report on the Public Sector Iron Steel 
Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993. In this 
connection, the Committee also took note of suggestions made by members on the subject. After 
detailed discussion the Committee felt that it would require more time to finalise its conclusions 
on the subject. The Committee, therefore, unanimously authorised the Chairman of the 
Committee to request the Hon' ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for granting exten­
sion of time to the Committee, to present its report on the BilL by last day of the next session of 
Parliament. 
A summary of the discussion was kept. 
3. ···~ · ***** ***** ***** ***=?:* 
4. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 7.50 P.M. to meet agam on 17th March, 1994. 
XXXIV 
Thirty Fourth Meeting 
The Committee met at 6.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th March, 1994 in Committee Room No. 
63, Parliament House , New Delhi. 
I' RESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rao- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Chandrika Abhinanclan Jain 
3. Shri J. P. Javali 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
6. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
8. Shrimati Pratibha Devising Patil 
9. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Balin Kuli 
11. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
12. Shri Vishveshwar Bhagat 

13. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
14. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
15. Shri M. Buga Reddy 
16. Shri Rajenclra Agnihotri 
17. Shri S. N. Vekaria 
18. Shri Manjay Lal 
19. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
20. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Slui Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui G. K. Saksena-Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Ramt-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal-Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman of Committee proposed that a Sub-Committee of the 
Committee may be constituted to formulated a report on the Public Sector Iron and Steel 
Companies (Restructuring) was Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 1993 on which the 
Committee of the Committee was yet to finalise its recommendations. The suggestion was 
approved unanimously by the Committee and accordingly, the Ch~tirman announced the 
constitution of Sub-Committee with the following composition:-
!. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta, Member. Lok Sabha (Cong. -I) 
2. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar. Lok Sabha (I3.J.P.) 
3. Shri Man jay Lal, Member. Lok Sabha (J.D.). 
4. Shri Tej Narayan Singh, Member. Lok Sabha (C.P.I.) 
5. Shri P.G. Narayanan, Member Lok Sabha (A.I.A.D.M.K.) 
6. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah, Member, Lok Sabha (T.D.) 
7. Shri Jibon Roy, Member, Rajya Sabha (C.P.I.-M) 
8. Slui K.K. Veerappan, Member, Rajya Sabha (D.M.K.) 
9. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody, Member, Rajya Sabha (Ind.) 
The Chairman nominated Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah as the convener of the Sub-Committee. 
3. 
*l)<l)tl)cllc 
***** ***** ***** ***** 
A Summary of the proceedings was kept. 
4. ***'~* ***** ***** ***** ***** 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 P.M. 

XXXIX 
Thirty Ninth Meeting 
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on the 30th March, 1994 in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Moturu Hanumantha Rae-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri J. P. Javali 
4. .<hri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
7. Shri K. K. Veerappan 
8. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
9. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
10. Shri Jibon Roy 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
12. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
13. Shri Rmna Krishna Konathala 
14. Shri Balin Kuli 
15. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
16. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
17. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
18. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
19. Slui Rajendra Agnihotri 
20. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
21. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
22. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
23. Shri Manjay Lal 
24. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
25. Shri Purna Chandra Maiik 
26. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
27. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri G. K. Saksena-Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. S. Rana-Under Secretary 
Shri Jagmohan Sundriyai-Committee Officer 
2. ***** ***** ***** *'~*** ***** 
3. The Committee, thereafter considered the revised draft as reported by the Sub-Committee 
on the Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
(Amendment) Bill , 1993 and after some discussion , adopted it unanimously with some minor 
changes. The Committee decided to present the report on the 19th April , 1994 and authorised 

Shri Jibon Roy and Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha. The 
Committee authorised Shri Manoranjan Bhakta and Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar to lay a copy of 
the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on behalf of the Committee. 
4 ••••• ••••• ••••• • •••• 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P. M. to meet again at 2.30 P. M. on Thursday, 
the 31st March, 1994. 

APPENDIX III 
MINUTES 01<' THE MEETING OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON REDRAFTING 
THE REPORT ON THE PUBLIC SECTOR IRON AND STEEL 
COMPANIES (RESTRUCTURING) AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1993. 
The Sub-Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 24th March, 1994 in Room No. 123, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Bolla Bul11 Ramaiah-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Slui Rajendra Prasad Mody. 
3. Shri Jibon Roy. 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Manoranjan Bhukta. 
5. Shri Manjay Lal 
SECRETARIAT 
6. Shri G.K. Sakscna-Dep11ty Secretary. 
7. Shri Shamsber Singh Rana-Under Secretary. 
8. Shri Jagmohan Sunclriyal-Committee Officer. 
2. The Sub-Comm1ttee considered the draft Seventh Report prepared by the Secretariat on 
the Public Sector Iron and Steel Compaines (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
(Amendment) Bill , 1993 and suggestions received from Members and other documents on the 
subject. After detailed discussions , the Sub-Committee re-formulated the report and adopted the 
same unanimously. 
3. The Convenor of the Sub-Committee directed that the revised draft as furnished by the 
Sub-Committee be circulated for the consiqeration of the Committee. 
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. 