PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 230
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
TH
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 225  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
HINDUSTAN MACHINE TOOLS LIMITED
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN NOTE ON THE 225 TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
THE REVIV AL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
HINDUSTAN MACHINE TOOLS LIMITED
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF HEA VY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPARTMENT OF HEA VY INDUSTRY)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/CHAITRA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—11
(i) Chapter – I
Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the
Ministry.................................................................................................................... 2—4
(ii) Chapter – II
Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies... ................................................. 5—6
(iii) Chapter – III
Recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry
to review its replies .............................................................................................. 7—8
(iv) Chapter – IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received ........................................................................ 9—11
4. M
INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution 31 st August, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Srinjoy Bose
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki
13. Shri Sabbam Hari
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
16. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
17. Shrimati Putul Kumari
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
21. Shri Somen Mitra
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Kishn V . Patel
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B.Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Shri E.G . Sugavanam
29. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
30. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
31. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report
on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
(Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Report on the Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools
Limited pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. I thank the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy
Industry) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the
Committee's Two Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 29
th February, 2012 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
29th February, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on the recommendations
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Report on the Revival and
Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools pertaining to Department of Heavy Industry.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:
Chapter–I– T he recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter-I of the Report.
Chapter–II– The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter–III– The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefor.
Chapter–IV– The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry
have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of
recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
2
CHAPTER-I
The Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendations/observations
1. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government for supporting the
HMT Machine Tools in every way for its commercial viability and profitability. It
compliments its top management for changing the attitude of the personnel of the Company
and inculcating among them the much needed team spirit and understanding that they can
once again make it commercially attractive, financially sound, technologically up to date and
profitable. The recent initiatives ushered in by the management, it is hoped, will go a long
way in creating a work culture which will help the Company to stand on its own strength
and make a name for itself through its quality product and high levels of customer
satisfaction.
(Para-26)
Action Taken Note
In order to support HMT Machine Tools Ltd. for its commercial viability and profitability
this Department has taken up with Ministry of Defence, BHEL etc. for placing orders for machine
tools with HMT Machine Tools Ltd. They have also been requested to make advance payments to
the tune of 50% of the order value so that the company can supply the ordered machine tools in
time.
For the revival of HMT Group of Companies including HMT Machine Tools Ltd., a
consultant has been engaged to conduct a study of the companies and recommend revival with a
firmed up business plan or otherwise. Further action would be taken on receipt of the report of
the consultant.
Recommendations/observations
2. The Committee recommends that the changes that have taken place after the
appointment of the part time Chairman and acting Managing Director must be taken note
of by the Department of Heavy Industry.
(Para-29)
Action Taken Note
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. It has been noticed that the
performance of HMT Machine Tools Ltd. is improving with the increase in the order book position
of `238 cr. (despatchable `175 cr. before March 2012). While this Department has taken up with
Ministry of Defence for getting orders from the Ordnance Factory Board alongwith advance
payment, BHEL has also been impressed to place their orders with HMT Machine Tools Ltd.
alongwith advance payment. Apart from that for revival of the company a consultant has been
appointed to study the loss making HMT Group of Companies including HMT Machine Tools Ltd.

3
and recommend revival with the firmed up business plan or otherwise. Further action will be taken
on receipt of the report of the consultant.
Recommendations/observations
3. The Committee is of the view that one person well acclaimed for his or her expertise
in engineering and technological fields and with adequate experience of administering
enterprises may be appointed as CMD for the HMT and its subsidiaries as a whole. He must
be given full responsibility and independence to make decisions for making the HMT
Machine Tools and other units more competitive and commercially relevant.
(Para-30)
Action Taken Note
In order to bring about the change in the management of HMT Machine Tools Ltd.,
Shri G.K. Pillai, CMD, Heavy Engineering Corporation has been appointed part-time Chairman for
HMT Machine Tools Ltd. from December, 2010 till the date of his retirement in December 2011.
He has also been given the additional charge for the post of MD, HMT Machine Tools Ltd.
However, the selection for regular appointment to the post of the CMD, HMT Ltd. has been
made as per the recommendations of Public Enterprises Selection Board.
Recommendations/observations
4. It is rather sad to note that the employees of most of the subsidiaries are getting
pay scales which were determined in early 90s. It is all the more shocking to know that
Senior Managers of the Company are drawing salaries which are less than that of the
workers who due to accumulation of their annual increments get more salaries than the
officers at the managerial position. This is an anomaly which demotivated those who are
asked to play leadership role in the Company. The Committee understand that there are
some sections of employees who did not draw their pay for several years. They pathetically
pleaded before the Committee for payment of their salaries so that at least they would feed
their families. In fact, the long pending pay/wage revision has to be put on fast track
without which both the Company and employees would face hardships. In the absence of
attractive pay scales the Company has lost valuable human resources to other private
players.
(Para-36)
5. The Committee was told that the pay revision could not be effected in 1997 except
in case of the HMT (International) due to the huge loss suffered by all the HMT Companies.
The Committee strongly recommends the Government to look into this problem and take
measures to address it.
(Para-37)
Action Taken Note on Para-36 & 37
The anomaly in the pay by which the Executives and Officers of HMT Group of Companies
have been drawing less pay than that of the workers lies in the fact that while the workers have
been getting regular increment on a percentage basis in an open-ended pay structure, the officers
and the executives have been stagnating, once they reach the maximum of the pay scale, without

4
any stagnation increment. This anomaly can be removed by implementation of the 1997 pay
revision.
The Department has initiated action to consider the feasibility of implementation of 1997 pay
revision in respect of CPSEs under the Administrative control of this Department including HMT
Group of Companies. The 1997 pay revision has already been implemented in HMT International
Ltd.
As regards payment of budgetary support for salary/wages and statutory dues, it is stated
that payment has been released upto March, 2011 and the release for the months April to
September 2011 is under process.

5
CHAPTER-II
The Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendations/observations
1. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the subsidiaries must be given due
independence and autonomy. If all the time these subsidiaries remained dependent on
holding company, their own progress would be retarded by virtue of the fact that these will
not be able to take faster decision for manufacturing products and doing business.
(Para-28)
Action Taken Note
On this recommendation, views of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) were called
for. DPE has held as follows:
The recommendation of the Committee pertains to relationship between a holding company
and its subsidiaries. In the case of CPSEs, the holding company and its subsidiaries generally have
separate Board of Directors and therefore subsidiary company derives due autonomy and flexibility
as it has its own Board of Directors who should be competent to take decisions regarding day to
day working of the concerned company. It may also be pointed out that subsidiary company is a
separate entity distinct from its holding company. The Department of Public Enterprises agrees with
the recommendation made by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
for imparting due independence and autonomy to subsidiaries.
It may be added that the Guidelines on Corporate Governance issued in May, 2010 prescribe
the following provisions with regard to subsidiary companies:
• At least one Independent Director on the Board of Directors of the holding company
shall be a Director on the Board of Directors of its subsidiary company.
• The Audit Committee of the holding company shall also review the financial statements
of its subsidiary company.
• The minutes of the Board meetings of the subsidiary company shall be placed at the
Board meeting of the holding company. The management should periodically bring to the
attention of the Board of Directors of the holding company, a statement of all significant
transactions and arrangements entered into by its subsidiary company.
HMT Ltd. has stated that each of the subsidiary companies has a Managing Director and
Functional Directors who manage the affairs of the company through the Board which also
includes a Chairman, Government Directors and independent Directors. As such the subsidiary
companies do have due independence and autonomy and are not dependent on the holding company
for their day-to-day operations. However, in a diversified business structure as that of HMT it
would be required that certain policies be common across business. Further, it is to be noted that
the subsidiary companies are wholly owned by the Holding company and are responsible to the
Board of the holding company which in turn is answerable to the Government.
5

6
Recommendations/observations
3. During its presentation before the Committee, the HMT provided a road map on
strategies to achieve its target. While the HMT (International) which is a profit making
subsidiary requested the Government to make it a nodal agency for projects of the Ministry
of External Affairs, it wanted to appoint representatives in more countries to pursue its
business activities. It also desires to scale up its business to two hundred cores in two years
and focus attention on high value machine tools/turn key projects. The Committee feels
that its future road map and strategies are achievable. The success of the HMT
(International) is indicative of the fact that range of the products of the HMT Companies
such as machine tools, watches, tractors, bearings, general engineering products, industrial
commodities, software, etc. have a market outside the country. This means if the
subsidiaries are made viable and profitable it can get more business abroad. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommends for the revival of the HMT and its subsidiaries.
(Para-40)
Action Taken Note
Since HMT International Ltd. is a profit making company and 1997 pay revision has already
been implemented. The company is in a good position to expand its business activities in various
countries. Accordingly, the Company has been asked to increase the procurement of orders for
export of machine tools, watches, tractors, bearings, general engineering products, industrial
commodities software, etc. in different countries as also pursuing vigorously with Ministry of
External Affairs for securing MEA projects on turn key basis in various countries. The performance
of HMT International Ltd. in exporting machine tools, watches, tractors, bearings, general
engineering products, industrial commodities, software, etc. would also enhance the business
activities of sister organizations like HMT Machine Tools Ltd., HMT Ltd., HMT Bearings Ltd. and
HMT Watches Ltd.

7
CHAPTER-III
The Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has either not
accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendations/Observations
1. The Committee is extremely pained to know that the Government of India adopted
a casual attitude in not taking measures for modernization of plant and machinery of HMT
to face the increasingly competitive market. The Committee feels that the management of
HMT will have to be held accountable for not keeping the company technologically and
economically viable. There are many public sector enterprises which have successfully
adjusted to a highly commercialized business environment and registered profit. A company
like HMT which is engaged in machine tool sector has a wider market for supplying
machines which are in growing demand across the economic segment.
(Para-11)
Action Taken Note
Consequent to the opening of economy during 1990s, the company’s prospect was affected
by the competition from overseas players, structural changes in the market, price and customer
preferences as well as talent attrition. Due to various reasons of policy issues, the changes
necessary could not be implemented quickly by HMT in accordance with the new economic
environment and suffered a decline in performance. This resulted in cash loss leading to resources
constraints and as such modernization of plant/machinery and technology upgradation could not be
taken up by the management. Moreover, significant investment for product diversification/
development, technology upgradation, plant modernization was not envisaged in the Turn around
Plan of 2000. Added to this, the VRS loan alongwith interest burden resulted in the erosion of
working capital. This in turn affected the bottom line and led to lower credit ratings. Because of
non-availability of funds the management was unable to take up modernization of plant and
machinery and technology upgradation to face the increasingly competitive market.
In the context explained above, it would be very difficult to hold the management of HMT
Ltd. accountable.
As regards the revival plan of HMT group of companies, it is stated that revival plans in
respect of HMT Ltd., HMT Watches Ltd., have been under consideration. A revival package of
Rs.880.80 crore was sanctioned to HMT Machine Tools Ltd. in February 2007. As recommended
by BRPSE the HMT Chinar Watches Ltd. is to be handed over to the Government of J&K and
follow up action on this line is under process. As regards HMT Bearings Ltd. the revival package
sanctioned in 2005-06 could not yield the desired results due to non-availability of fund for working
capital and CAPEX which the Company could not raise through loan from banks against GOI
guarantee.
This Department has decided in the matter of revival to engage a consultant to study the
HMT Group of Companies (except HMT International Ltd. and HMT Chinar Watches Ltd.) and
recommend revival with a firmed up business plan or otherwise. After receipt of the revised revival
proposals the same will be processed for obtaining approval of BRPSE.
7

8
Further recommendation
The reply of the Government, to the extent that it is difficult to hold the
management of HMT Ltd. accountable, does not cut ice with the Committee. If Ministry
sticks with their view, then the Committee expects them to fix responsibility for the current
plight of HMT and communicate the same to the Committee as the Government is also
having its say in the management board through Government director, who looks after the
smooth functioning of PSE. Accordingly, notwithstanding the reply of the Government, it is
the considered view of the Committee that the management could have equipped HMT
better to face the new environment of competition and modernization in the wake of a
liberalized economy and open market. In the opinion of the Committee, this is the prime
responsibility of the management of any company, which faces the situation that HMT
encountered. Further, the Committee finds it difficult to decipher why HMT, which was a
market leader in its field before the introduction of market driven economy in India, could
not survive competition as demonstrated by many of its counter parts in the private sector
who withstood and excelled in the face of similar market conditions. In view of the
preceding, the Committee reiterates its stand that either the government or the
management of HMT has to be held responsible for not keeping the company technologically
and economically viable as the demand of the time and eventually lead the Company to
failure.
Recommendations/observations
2. The Committee also takes note of the fact that the retirement age for the employees
of the Company is 58 years whereas in many other PSEs it is 60 years. Due to the fixation
of retirement age at 58 years, the Company is in a disadvantageous position to retain its
skilled work force and managers beyond that age. This problem has been further
compounded by the absence of fresh recruitment of new personnel. All these issues require
serious and focused attention from the Department of Heavy Industry and Government of
India. It is recommended that the retirement age may be increased to 60 years.
(Para-38)
Action Taken Note
As per DPE guidelines the retirement age of employees can be enhanced from 58 years to
60 years in respect of the companies who have been making profit in preceding 3 years. In view
of the loss making position of these companies, all HMT Group of Companies except HMT
International Ltd. are not eligible for enhancement of retirement age to 60 years.
The issue relating to enhancement of retirement age from 58 years to 60 years is also under
consideration separately.
Further recommendation
The Committee while accepting the reply of the Ministry would like to further
reinstates its earlier stand that since many of the PSEs have fixed the age of retirement
as 60 years. Because of the retirement of the employees at the age of 58, the Company
would be deprived of the efficient, experienced, administrative skilled people to sustain their
service. Therefore, it would be more beneficial if there is uniformity in the age of
retirement in all PSEs irrespective of it being profit making or loss incurring.

9
CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendations/observations
1. Our economy is growing at a reasonable higher rate. It is also expanding and
diversifying. Therefore, the demand for machine tools is bound to grow up. It is in this
context that concerted efforts have to be made to tap this vast market by manufacturing
such tools within our country. HMT Machine Tools has to show greater dynamism and
business competence to increase its share of market for its products.
(Para-13)
2. It can be done by employing better skills and market management. The Department
of Heavy Industry referred the loss making HMT Machine Tools Ltd. and HMT Bearings
Ltd. to the BIFR at a time when the Government of India is acknowledging the resilience
of public sector enterprises as a major factor for withstanding the financial crisis and at a
time when the Government is reasonably happy with the performance of the PSEs, it is
important that special and focused attention be given to the revival of HMT which can be
made robust and forward looking.
(Para-14)
Action Taken Note on Para 13 and 14
HMT Machine Tools Ltd. has been making efforts for increasing its market share,
modernization of plant and machinery, and upgradation of its product technology. The company has
had series of discussion with the reputed companies for JV formation. The company had advertised
seeking EOI for JV or Joint Working Arrangement. Initial discussions with M/s EMMER Machine
Tools Ltd., India’s representative of M/s Zayer and M/s Kondia are under progrees. Fructification
of these efforts would enhance the business competence of HMT Machine Tools Ltd. to address
the needs of the vast market.
HMT Machine Tools Ltd. and HMT Bearings Ltd. stand referred to Board for Industrial and
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) under the provisions of Sick Industrial Companies Act (SICA)
because of their negative networth. As mentioned in reply to para 11, a revival package of
Rs.880.80 crore was sanctioned to HMT Machine Tools Ltd. in February, 2007. The revival plan
is still under implementation. A revival plan sanctioned to HMT Bearings Ltd. in 2005-06 could not
yield the desired results due to non-availability of fund for working capital and capex. In line with
the directions of CCEA the proposal for identifying a strategic partner for HMT Bearings Ltd. is
under process.
Further, the consultant appointed for studying the HMT Group of companies including HMT
Machine Tools Ltd. and make recommendations with a firmed up business plan has submitted its
report to the company. However, proposal of the company based on the recommendations of the
consultant is awaited.
9

10
Recommendations/observations
3. It is recommended that in case of HMT Ltd. which manufactures tractors the
possibility of establishing joint ventures for this purpose may be explored. In case of HMT
Bearings Ltd. it is recommended that a strategic partner may be tapped to carry forwards
its business and expands it. It is also proposed that infusion of more finance to it may be
examined.
(Para-35)
Action Taken Note
As regards tractor manufacturing by HMT Ltd., a revival plan based on the report of the
consultant is under consideration. The issue relating to the possibility of establishing joint ventures
for the manufacture of tractors is also included as a part of the revival plan proposals and it would
be given due consideration at the time of finalizing the revival plan of HMT Ltd.
As regards the induction of a strategic partner for HMT Bearings Ltd. action has already
been initiated.
Recommendations/observations
4. It is painful to note that revival plan is under the consideration of the Government
of India for almost half a decade. The slow pace at which the Government tries to consider
the revival plan is indicative of its mindset in making our public sector undertakings viable
from the point of view of business proposition. The Government’s commitment to
strengthen public sector enterprises does not sound convincing the way it is treating the
revival plan of the HMT group of companies.
(Para-39)
5. The revival restructuring of the sick public sector units receive priority attention of
the Government. However, the Committee notes with concern that the inordinate delay on
the part of the Government in taking up the revival package will further sink the loss
making PSEs to a pitiable state of affairs. The public sector undertakings have to remain
tuned to the new market situation. On 27 June 1961, in a letter to the Chief Ministers,
first Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who described the public sector enterprises
as the commanding heights of economy, had written that, “The old idea that profit making
is a private concern and not a public concern has to be discarded completely. Our public
enterprises have to be run with the greatest efficiency and the greatest profit.” He made
those insightful comments. in the context of the remarkable success achieved by the
Hindustan Machine Tools of Bangalore. The Department of Heavy Industry, the HMT as a
whole and the Government of India has a historic responsibility to once again revive the
HMT to its past glory. All concerned must respond to the call of duty to achieve that goal.
The Committee recommends that the Government of India must expedite the revival
process of HMT taking serious note of the special concern for the industry and employees
on the whole.
(Para-43)
Action Taken Note on Para-39 and 43
In order to revive the loss making HMT Group of Companies the revival proposals would
be considered and finalised expeditiously on receipt of the revised revival proposals based on the
report of the Consultant engaged for recommending revival of the HMT Group of Companies with
a viable and firmed up business plan.

11
In reply to the preceding paragraphs, it has been indicated that on the issue of revival of
HMT Group of Companies (except HMT International Ltd. and HMT Chinar Watches Ltd.) a
Consultant has been engaged to conduct a study of the companies and recommend revival with a
firmed up business plan or otherwise. Further action will be taken expeditiously on receipt of the
revised revival plan based on the report of the Consultant.
Recommendations/observations
6. In a fiercely competitive market where private players are offering attractive
watches to the consumers, it is very difficult to promote HMT watches which once enjoyed
the confidence of the customers across the country. It has been proposed that in the present
day economic environment watch making is no more considered as a viable proposition as
small scale industries find it cheaper to get imports from abroad at a lesser cost than the
one manufactured in India. The management of HMT Watches Ltd. is of the opinion that
HMT Watches still has a brand value in the market. It is hoping that by manufacturing only
quartz watches it can take advantage of the brand image of HMT watches still persisting in
the mind of the consumer. The Committee cautiously welcomes the hopeful proposition of
the management of the HMT Watches Ltd. It, therefore, recommends for the examination
of this hopeful proposition and accordingly see if HMT watches can be made economically
viable and attractive for the  customers in the present day globalised market situation. One
possible option is to tap the customers in the villages of Indian by adopting innovative
marketing strategies. This would mean reaching out to them through many other agencies
such as post offices or some of the public sector banks which may display HMT watches in
remote areas through their branches and take a commission for doing so. This would be
quite a different approach in relation to the approach involving establishment of showrooms
in urban areas and cities. Usually it would be very difficult to compete with private players
who have catered to the customers in towns and cities by providing them with new models
of watches.
(Para-42)
Action Taken Note
The proposal for revival of HMT Watches Ltd. is also subject to the study and
recommendations of the Consultant. The issues relating to the revival of HMT Watches will be
taken care of while considering the revised revival proposal based on the report of the Consultant.

MINUTES

VIII
EIGHT MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 29 th February, 2012 in Committee Room
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
2. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
3. Shri K.B. Shanappa
4. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
5. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
7. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
8. Shri Ramsingh Kaswan
9. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Somen Mitra
12. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
13. Shri Kishn V . Patel
14. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
15. Shri Ramsingbhai Patalbhai Rathwa
16. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
17. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
18. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and briefed them that the agenda of
the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 228
th and 230 th reports of the Committee on Action
15

16
taken Notes on the 219 th report on Revival and Restructuring of Cement Corporation of India Ltd.
and on the 225 th report on Revival and Restructuring of Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd., respectively.
2. Thereafter, the 228th and 230 th Reports were taken up by the Committee for consideration,
separately. After some discussion, Members of the Committee suggested a few points to be
incorporated in both the draft Reports. At the end of the discussion, the Committee unanimously
adopted the 228
th and 230 th Draft Reports along with the suggestions.
3. Further, the Committee also decided to undertake a study visit to Jammu-Srinagar-
Chandigarh during the month of June, 2012. Accordingly, it has been directed to take necessary
permissions for the abovementioned study tour.
The meeting adjourned at 12.30 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.