 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka Era)     
  
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the 326th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
Pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025) 
REPORT NO. 
329 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in   

 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2.  INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iii) - (v) 
4.  REPORT 1-34 
 CHAPTER–I : THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 2-5 
 
CHAPTER–II: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
6-10 
 
CHAPTER–III: THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT 
ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
11-34 
5.  MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE MEETING  35-36 
 
  

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f.  26th September, 2024) 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva (Chairman) 
2. Shri  Golla Baburao 
3. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
4. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
5. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
8. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
9. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
10. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Afzal Ansari 
12. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
13. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
14. Shrimati Veena Devi 
15. Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
16. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
17. Shri Subbarayan K. 
18. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
19. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
20. Km. Sudha R. 
21. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
22.  Shri Rakesh Rathor 
23. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
24. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
25. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
26. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
27. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
28. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
29. Shri E. Tukaram 
30. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
31. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K. S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Niangkhannem Guite, Director 
3.   Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Sunil Kumar, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Industry, having been  authorised by the Committee, do hereby present this 329th Report 
on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 326th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2025 -26) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2. The 326th Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament on the 24th 
March, 2025. The Ministry of Heavy Industries furnished the Action Taken Replies on 
the 26th June, 2025. 
 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on  the 7th August, 2025 considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tiruchi Siva 
New Delhi                 Chairman       
7th August, 2025                                                             Department -related Parliamentary 
Sravana 16, 1947 (Saka Era)                                             Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAT Advanced Automotive Technology 
ACC Advanced Chemistry Cell 
ACMA Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India 
AE Actual Expenditure 
ARAI Automotive Research Association of India 
AUSCT Advanced Ultra Super Critical Technology 
AYCL Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 
B&R Bridge & Roof Company Ltd. 
BARC Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
BBJ Braithwaite, Burn and Jessop Construction Company Ltd. 
BCD Basic Customs Duties 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHEL Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
CCI Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 
CESL Convergence Energy Services Limited 
CMTI Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
CPSE Central Public Sector Enterprises 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DDM Direct Debit Mandate 
DISCOM Distribution Company 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 
DVA Domestic Value Addition 
e-2Ws Electric Two-Wheelers 
e-3Ws Electric Three-Wheelers 
e-4Ws Electric Four Wheelers 
EGoS Empowered Group of Secretaries 
EMPS Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme 
EOI Expression of Interest 
EPIL Engineering Projects (India) Limited 

iv 
 
EV Electric Vehicle 
EVPCS Electric Vehicle Public Charging Station 
FAME Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles 
FCRI Fluid Control Research Institute 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GSI Geological Survey of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HECL Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited 
HMT Hindustan Machine Tools 
I&EBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
ICE Internal Combustion Engine 
iCET initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies 
IEC Import Export Code 
IPEF Indo-Pacific Economic Framework 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
KABIL Khanij Bidesh India Ltd. 
KWh Kilo Watt Hour 
LPS Late Payment Surcharge 
MCLR Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate 
MEP Monthly Expenditure Plan 
MMDR Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
MoRTH Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MSP Minerals Security Partnership 
NAB National Automotive Board 
NSDF National Skill Development Fund 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OMC Operation Maintenance Centre 

v 
 
OPEX Operating Expense 
PCS Public Charging Station 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PIB Press Information Bureau 
PIO Project Implementation Organization 
PLI Production Linked Incentive 
PM E-DRIVE PM Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement 
PMA Project Management Agency 
PMC Project Management Consultancy 
PMP Phased Manufacturing Program 
PRMC Project Review and Monitoring Committee 
PSEs Public Sector Entities 
PSM Payment Security Mechanism 
PSU Public Sector Undertakings 
PTA Public Transport Authority 
QEP Quarterly Expenditure Plan 
R&D Research and Development 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RE Revised Estimates 
REIL Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited 
RoDTEP Remission of Duties and Tax on Exported Products 
RVSF Registered Vehicle Scrapping Facility 
SBI State Bank of India 
SIAM Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPMEPCI Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars in India 
STUs State Transport Undertakings 
TSI Technology Security Initiative 
UTs Union Territories 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
This Action Taken Report (ATR)  of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s 326 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2025–26) pertaining to the Ministry. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies received from the MHI in respect of the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 326th Report have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I The Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry. 
   
Para: 17, 40, 61, 71  
(Total 04) 
 
Chapter-II  The Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue further in view of the Ministry’s replies. 
 
 Para: 21, 43, 57, 59, 70 
(Total 5) 
 
Chapter-III The Recommendations/observations in respect of  which the Committee has not 
accepted the replies of the Ministry. 
  
Para: 8, 10, 12, 16, 20, 25, 28, 30, 31, 33, 35, 38, 47, 49, 50, 64, 65, 67  
(Total 18) 
 
Chapter-IV The Recommendations/observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited.  
    
(Nil) 
  
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry, along with the further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee, if any, are provided in the subsequent pages.  
4. Further, the paragraph numbers cited in this Report refer to those in the 326th Report, and 
are indicated for ease of reference.  

2 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
BUDGET ALLOCATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1.  The Committee notes that the Budget 2024 -25 announced the establishment of a joint 
venture between NTPC and BHEL to set up an 800 MW commercial plant utilizing Advanced 
Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) technology, with the government providing necessary fiscal 
support. The Committee is pleased to know that the site for the 800 MW AUSC technology -based 
power plant has been finalized at Korba, Chhattisgarh, and that the technical specifications and 
supply chain have also been finalized.  
(Para 17) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Noted. 
 
AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries finalize guidelines and 
SOPs to ensure the swift and effective implementation of the PM e -Bus Sewa Payment Security 
Mechanism (PSM) Scheme. It is crucial to expedite coordination with States to facilitate the 
registration of Direct Debit Mandates (DDMs) with the RBI, ensuring wider participation 
beyond Karnataka and Telangana. Additionally, the Ministr y should establish a robust 
monitoring mechanism to track implementation progress and address any challenges 
stakeholders face to enhance the scheme’s effectiveness. 
(Para 40) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The draft SOPs are approved in the 2 nd Steering Committee  meeting held on 30 th May, 2025 
which will be disseminated to the States/Cities. 
  
The RBI acknowledgement of Direct Debit Mandate (DDM) is received of 4 States as on 
30th May, 2025 (Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Telangana). 

3 
 
 The Steering Committee, headed by MHI, is formed to monitor the implementation and progress 
of the Scheme. Two Steering Committee meetings are held as on 30th May, 2025. 
 
CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR (HEAVY ENGINEERING AND MACHINE TOOLS) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee notes that among the 04 autonomous bodies under the Ministry, only the 
Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) has been allocated funds in the BE for FY 
2025-26, while no provision has been made for the other 03 autonomous bodies. G iven the 
critical importance of R&D and technological upgradation in maintaining global 
competitiveness, it recommends that the Ministry extend its focus to other R&D institutions and 
ensure they receive adequate budgetary support for technological advance ment. Furthermore, 
the budget allocated to CMTI, Bengaluru, should be utilised efficiently to achieve the intended 
outcomes. The Ministry may consider seeking an enhancement at the RE stage if additional funds 
are required. 
(Para 61) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) received Rs.18.89 Cr. in FY 2024 -25. 
This is the partial support towards meeting expenditure of salary and administrative expenses. 
CMTI fully utilized this amount for the said purpose.   The total expe nditure towards Salaries & 
Welfare and other Administrative Overheads for the FY 2024-25 (unaudited) = Rs.43.42 Cr.   
 
CMTI Challenges and the need for financial support  
 
The Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) faces several challenges as a Research 
and Development (R&D) institute dedicated to designing and developing cutting-edge machinery 
that is new to India. These challenges highlight the need for financial support to ensure the 
Institute's continued success. 
 
CMTI's expertise in designin g and developing pioneering machines and process technologies 
makes a significant contribution to nationally essential programs. For instance, CMTI has 
designed and manufactured various new machines for the Indian Space Program and defence 
missions, with i nstitutions such as ISRO, BARC, and DRDO as they relying on CMTI's 
expertise. Additionally, CMTI supports Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) by 
providing specialized testing, inspection, and calibration services. It also plays a crucial role in 
training the workforce to enhance the country's manufacturing capabilities.  
 

4 
 
FCRI:- (a).  FCRI is a self -sustaining autonomous body under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. As per the financial statements of FCRI for 2023 -24 and 2024-25 
(Prov), it has adequate capital funds to meet its R&D requirements. Further, since no request for 
grants has been received from FCRI for this purpose, the issue of extending budgetary support 
does not arise. 
(b). Financial position of FCRI is as follows: 
(Rs. In lakh) 
Parameters 2023-24 2024-25 (Prov) 
Revenue from Operations 1679.64 1760.96 
Other Income 536.98 595.35 
Expenditure 1332.16 1663.57 
Excess of Income over Expenditure 884.46 692.74 
Capital Fund 17390.07 18082.81 
 
NAB/ARAI:-Noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Committee observed that no budgetary allocation has been made under the Capital 
Section in BE 2025 -26 for skill development programs for locals in CPSEs under the Ministry. 
Emphasizing the need for a skilled workforce in the evolving industrial landscape, it 
recommends that sufficient funds be sought at the RE stage (2025 -26) in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to impart vocational training to local for 
enhancing their employability and strengthen India's industrial competitiveness. 
(Para 71) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Under Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013, among the other enlists activities, Employment 
Enhancing Vocational Skills and Apprenticeship Training activities has also been included by 
companies as Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). 
 
As per circular dated 12/02/2016 of Ministry of Corporate Affairs, companies will be encouraged 
to spend at least 25% of their CSR funds on skill development initiati ves directly or through 
National Skill Development Fund (NSDF) to empower the youth of the country with skill sets 
which make them more employable and more productive in their work environment.  
 
As the CPSEs are, therefore, encouraged to spend on skill de velopment out of their CSR fund. 
No budgetary grant had ever been sought for by MHI under the skill development programme. 
 
The following activates regarding skill development have already been undertaken by CPSEs in 
Ministry of Heavy Industries: 

5 
 
(i). CCI:- Cement Corporation of India (CCI) appoints Artisan Trainee for development of their 
skill and for enhancing their employability, Further CCI is also promoting skill development 
through CSR activity. 
 
(ii). HMT:-Hindustan Machine Tools (HMT Machine Tools Ltd.) one of the subsidiary of HMT 
Limited, operates well -established Skill Development Centres and has been actively imparting 
training to local youth. However, with appropriate support in the form of Government schemes 
or funding, the Company would be be tter positioned to fully leverage its infrastructure and 
training capabilities to contribute to local employability and industrial growth. 
 
MHI has noted the recommendation of the Committee to bring  sufficient funds at the RE stage 
(2025-26) in collaborat ion with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship to 
impart vocational training to local for enhancing their employability and strengthen India's 
industrial competitiveness. 
---  

6 
 
CHAPTER–II 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
  
AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry formulate targeted strategies to enhance 
global competitiveness, address export barriers, and strengthen trade agreements to boost 
international market penetration. Additionally, policy interventions should focus on improving 
domestic demand, incentivizing innovation, and ensuring the sustainable growth of all vehicle 
categories to reinforce India's leadership in the global automotive industry. 
(Para 21) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
India contributes 7.1% to global GDP through its automotive sector and ranks 4 th in global 
vehicle production. Govt. of India schemes like FAME, PM E -DRIVE, and PLI have mobilized 
Rs.66,000+ crore to support EVs and localization (Source PIB dated 15/4/2025).  
 
The Indian Government is exploring opportunities to enhance trade relations  with foreign 
countries and also to improve domestic demand. This includes boosting the automotive industry 
through initiatives like "Make in India," "Atmanirbhar Bharat," The following schemes are being 
implemented by MHI to reinforce India’s leadership in the global automobile industry:- 
 
I. FAME India Scheme (Phases I & II):  The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of 
Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) Scheme has been pivotal in promoting clean mobility in 
India. Phase I and Phase II, with an outlay of Rs. 89 5 crore and Rs.11,500 crore, focuses on 
demand incentives for electric two -wheelers, three -wheelers, buses, and the development of 
public charging infrastructure. FAME -II also aimed to promote technology platforms for EVs 
and create a robust domestic EV ecosystem. 
 
II. PM E-DRIVE Scheme (2024 –26): Launched for a period of 2 years on 01/10/2024 till 
31/03/2026 to accelerate EV adoption and reduce urban pollution, with a total outlay of 
Rs.10,900 crore.  The Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme (EMPS) 2024 has been  subsumed in 
the PM Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement (PM E -DRIVE)Scheme. 
The Scheme targets large -scale incentivization of approximately 28 lakh EVs including e -2Ws, 
e-3Ws and e -buses. Rs.2,000 crore have been earmarked for setti ng up of upstream charging 
infrastructure for e -2Ws, e-3Ws, e-4Ws, e-buses and e -trucks and to address the issue of range 

7 
 
anxiety.  Three new segments viz. e -ambulances, e-trucks, upgradation of testing agencies have 
also been included under the PM E-DRIVE Scheme.   
  
III. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto Component 
Industry in India (PLI -Auto): The Government approved this scheme on 15.09.2021 for 
Automobile and Auto Component Industry for enhancing India's manufacturingcapabilities for 
Advanced Automotive Technology (AAT) products with a budgetary outlay of Rs.25,938 crore. 
The scheme provides financial incentives to boost domestic manufacturing of AAT products 
with minimum 50% Domestic Value Addition (DVA) and attract investments in the automotive 
manufacturing value chain.  
 
IV. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Advanced Chemistry Cell :  With a 
total allocation of Rs.18,100 crore, the scheme aims to boost the domestic manufacturing of 
advanced automo tive technologies, including EVs, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, and advanced 
battery storage solutions. It provides financial incentives to OEMs and component manufacturers 
for investing in cutting -edge technologies, achieving economies of scale, and integr ating into 
global supply chains. The scheme also prioritises domestic value addition, export readiness, and 
job creation through technology-driven innovation.   
 
V. Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars in India 
(SPMEPCI): This sche me has been notified on 15.03.2024 to promote the manufacturing of 
electric cars in India. This requires applicants to invest a minimum of Rs.4,150 crore and achieve 
a minimum DVA of 25% at the end of third year and DVA of 50% at the end of fifth year.  
 
VI. Provision of Phased Manufacturing Program (PMP) and Domestic Value Addition 
(DVA) The PMP was initially introduced under Phase -II of the Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles in India (FAME India) Scheme with the 
objective of pro moting domestic manufacturing and increasing DVA. The applicability of PMP 
as per FAME -II scheme continued for the electric vehicles being manufactured and sold under 
the Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme (EMPS) 2024. 
 
To promote exports in the automobile  industry, the automobile industry receives incentives 
through various schemes of the Government such as Export Promotion, Capital Goods Scheme, 
RoDTEP (Remission of Duties and Tax on Exported Products) Incentive scheme and Duty 
Drawback Scheme. 
 
2.  The Committee was informed that the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Automobile and Auto Components is expected to attract an investment of approximately Rs. 
42,500 crore and generate around 1.48 lakh direct employment opportunities over five y ears. As 
on 19.02.2025, total 77 variants of Champion Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)  and 
39 variant of Component Champion OEMs, both overseas and Indian, have been approved 

8 
 
under the components of this scheme. As per data provided by the Ministry of Heavy Industries, 
the actual expenditure under the scheme for financial year 2024 -25 up to 31 st January 2025 
stands at Rs. 246.21 crore, representing approximately 70.98% of the allocated funds. Given the 
critical role of this scheme in strengthening do mestic manufacturing under the Make in India 
and Aatmanirbhar Bharat initiatives, the Committee recommends that the funds allocated at the 
Revised Estimate (RE) stage be fully utilized by the end of the current financial year.  
(Para 43) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Aggregate incentive amount of Rs.322 crore has been released to 4 applicants during FY 2024 -
25 which is 95.61% utilization of RE of Grants-in-Aid General. 
 
CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR (HEAVY ENGINEERING AND MACHINE TOOLS) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee recommends regular assessment and monitoring of Phase II of the 
Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector  to ensure its 
effective implementation, with a focus on strengthening domestic manufacturing capabili ties and 
reducing reliance on imported high -end machines. This will help foster a globally competitive 
and self-reliant capital goods industry.  
(Para 57) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As per the guidelines of the Scheme for "Enhancement of Competitiveness in the  Indian Capital 
Goods Sector Phase II", there is a provision of   Project Review and Monitoring Committee 
(PRMC) for monitoring the progress of the projects approved under the Scheme. It includes 
Industry, technical and financial experts as well.   
 
The Project Review and Monitoring Committee (PRMC) regularly monitors the progress of the 
project assigned to it. Periodic meetings of PR&MC are organized by the Project Implementation 
Organization (PIO) at least once every three months during the project tenure.   The PIO submits 
the progress report of the project to the PRMC. Then PRMC review and monitor the physical 
and financial progress of the implementation of the projects and submit their recommendations 
to MHI.  
 
 
 
 

9 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Commit tee notes with concern the drastic reduction in Budget Estimates (BE) for 
2025-26 to Rs. 120.00 crore from Rs. 250.00 crore in previous two financial years, raising 
questions about the Ministry’s ability to implement key initiatives effectively. The shorta ge of 
funds poses a significant challenge to the execution of schemes. It recommends that the Ministry 
address funding shortfalls at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage to prevent underutilisation. 
Furthermore, the Committee observes that no allocations have been made for industry 
associations and public sector undertakings (PSUs) to support the capital goods sector. Given 
the crucial role of these entities in promoting Government schemes and raising stakeholder 
awareness, the Committee urges the Ministry to e ngage with the Ministry of Finance to reassess 
and enhance budgetary provisions for these essential activities. 
(Para 59) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Under the Scheme for "Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector", 
there was a budgetary allocation of Rs.250.00 crores at BE stage which was reduced to Rs 
120.00 crores at RE stage for FY 2023 -24. Further, Supplementary Grant of amo unt Rs. 64.00cr 
was allocated. The total expenditure under the Scheme for FY 2024 -25 was Rs.183.65 crore out 
of total amount of Rs.184.00 crore.   Further, under the Scheme for Enhancement of 
Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector, Phase II, pro jects have been allotted to 
BHEL, a CPSE under Ministry of Heavy Industries, Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
(CMTI) and Fluid Control Research Institute (FCRI) - autonomous bodies under MHI to support 
the Capital Goods Sector.  (Ministry will re quest Ministry of Finance to re -assess and enhance 
budgetary provision in the RE Stage). 
 
CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES (CPSES) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5.   The Committee noted that Rs. 500.00 crore  has been allocated for the first time for the 
Payment Security Mechanism. The funds will be utilized by Convergence Energy Services 
Limited (CESL) to act as a payment security mechanism or a financial safeguard against the 
payments related to the 38,000 e -buses targeted under the scheme. It recommends that the 
Ministry ensure the efficient and timely utilization of these funds to support the successful 
implementation of the programme.  
(Para 70) 
 
 
 

10 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As per the PSM Scheme, a payment security mechanism Scheme Fund needs to be created, 
which will be utilized for making the payment to the e -bus OEM/Operator in case of “payment 
default” by the respective Public Transport Authority (PTAs). The first tranche  of Rs.500 crore  
has been allocated for the creation of such Scheme Fund. 
  
As per the mechanism, PTAs are required to repay the disbursed amount within 90 days of the 
disbursement along with Late Payment Surcharge (LPS) @ 1% in addition to the SBI’s 3 ye ar 
MCLR rate prevailing on the date of disbursement, compounded annually. 
  
If PTAs doesn’t re -pay the disbursed amount along with LPS within 90 days, then MHI will 
request RBI to invoke the Direct Debit Mandate (DDM) for deducting the disbursed amount 
along with LPS from the respective State/UT Govt’s account maintained with RBI and recoup 
the PSM Scheme Fund. 
 
--- 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
BUDGET ALLOCATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee observes with dismay that the Ministry could not fully utilise its allocated 
budget for the previous two financial years i.e. 2022 -23 and 2023 -24. In 2022-23, the Ministry 
utilized only 84.23% of RE, while in 2023 -24, the utilization further declined to 76.87%.  In the 
current financial year 2024 -25, only Rs. 1,750.16 crore out of the Revised Estimate (RE) 
allocation of Rs. 4,560.69 crore has been utilised, accounting for just 38.37% (as on 
31.01.2025). It recommends that the Ministry ensure the entire RE is fully utilised within the 
financial year. For the next FY 2025-26, it recommends that the Ministry adheres to the Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) to ensure proper and timely 
utilisation. 
(Para 8) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
There has been improvement in funds utilization by MHI. The final expenditure of MHI for the 
year 2024-25 was Rs.2686.55 cr, which is 58.90% of the RE of Rs.4560.69 cr. The observations 
of Committee r egarding MEP and QEP compliance have been noted, and detailed instructions 
have been issued to all Programme Divisions of MHI, regarding MEP and QEP compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that while the Ministry has shown some improvement in fund 
utilization during FY 2024 –25, with final expenditure reaching ₹2,686.55 crore (58.90% of 
the RE allocation of ₹4,560.69 crore), the overall performance remains below acceptable  
levels. This continued under -utilization over three consecutive financial years reflects 
systemic issues in planning, execution, and intra -year fund flow management. The 
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry must ensure full 
utilization of budgetary allocations within the financial year. It further recommends that 
the Ministry institutionalize strict adherence to the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) and 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) across all programme divisions, supported by regular 
internal reviews and timely corrective interventions to avoid year -end bottlenecks and 
ensure efficient deployment of resources in FY 2025–26. 
 

12 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. The Committee observes that under the flagship scheme of the Ministry – PM E-Drive, a 
sum of Rs. 1870.76 crore was allocated in RE 2024 -25 against which the Ministry has only 
utilised Rs. 366.83 crore (*under EMPS - subsumed in PM E -Drive) till 31 st January, 2025. It 
expresses serious concern over the underutilisation of funds under PM E -Drive and the non -
utilization under the Payment Security Mechanism. It recommends that the Ministry may take 
necessary steps to ensure utilisation of funds allocated at the RE stage. Additionally, the Ministry 
should avoid  accumulation of the unspent funds in the last quarter of the financial year and 
refrain from spending more than 33% of the allocated amount during the last quarter and 15% 
in the last month of the Financial Year, as per the directions of Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 10) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As observed by the Committee, an amount of Rs.1,870.76 crore was approved and allocated 
under the Revised Estimate (RE) for FY 2024-25 under the PM E-DRIVE Scheme. It is pertinent 
to mention that an amount of Rs.993 crore (Rs.667 crore for e-2Ws, and Rs.322 crore for e-3Ws) 
has been spent against Rs.1,870.76 crore which represents 53% of RE for FY 2024 -25 till 31st 
March, 2025. 
 
The Committee has expressed concern over the underutilization of Payment Security mechanism 
funds. The primary objective of Payment Security Mechanism is to provide payment security to 
e-bus operators. This security is intended to cover potential defaults by Public Transport 
Authorities (PTAs) in making timely payments to selected bidders, operators, or OEMs on their 
monthly payment obligations for e-bus operations. 
 
It is also pertinent to mention that Convergence Energy Services Limited (CESL) (nodal agency 
for deployment of e -buses under PM Electric Drive Revolution in Innovative Vehicle 
Enhancement (PM E -DRIVE) Scheme and for managing PSM) issued EOI on 13.11.2024 for 
demand of e -buses from states, and the last date for which was extended till 11.04.2025. 
Therefore, no e -buses could be de ployed, and the amount earmarked towards Payment Security 
Mechanism (PSM) remained unutilized in FY 2024-25.  
 
It is pertinent to mention that the PM E -DRIVE Scheme was launched on 01.10.2024, and three 
new segments viz. e -ambulances, e -trucks and upgradat ion of testing agencies have been 
introduced then only. The primary reasons for lower utilization of funds at RE stage were that 
guidelines for these new components inclu ding Electric Vehicles Public  Charging Station 
(EVPCS) are still under finalization in  view of consultations with stakeholders and formulation 
for incentivization strategies for the new segments.  Once the guidelines for these segments are 
finalized, the funds will be used accordingly, in the current FY, i.e. 25-26. 

13 
 
The Ministry has noted the recommendation of Ministry of Finance (MoF) that there should be 
no accumulation of the unspent funds in the last quarter of the financial year and MHI will 
refrain from spending more than 33% of the allocated amount during the last quarter and 15% in 
the month of Financial Year, as per the directions of MoF. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes with concern that only ₹993 crore - just 53% of the Revised Estimate 
of ₹1,870.76 crore - was utilized under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme during FY  2024–25. 
While the Ministry attributes this underutilization to delays in finalizing guidelines for 
newly introduced segments such as e -ambulances, e -trucks, and Electric Vehicle Public  
Charging Stations (EVPCS), the Committee emphasizes that such procedu ral delays must 
be anticipated and addressed proactively. It is of the considered view that the timely 
formulation and notification of guidelines is essential to ensure effective implementation 
and fund absorption. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry expedite the finalization 
of operational frameworks for all pending components under the Scheme and ensure that 
budgetary allocations are fully utilized in FY 2025 –26. It also reiterates the importance of 
adhering to the Ministry of  Finance’s expenditure norms, particularly avoiding 
accumulation of unspent funds in the last quarter and limiting spending to not more than 
33% in Q4 and 15% in the final month of the financial year. These measures are critical to 
maintaining fiscal disci pline and achieving the intended outcomes of the PM E -DRIVE 
Scheme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee observes that for the Financial Year 2025 -26, the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries has been allocated a BE of Rs. 7,680.23 crore  by the Ministry of Finance, which 
constitutes 85.09% of its projected requirement of Rs. 9,025.83 crore. The Ministry of Heavy 
Industries has informed the Committee that the FAME-II Scheme ended on 31st March 2024, and 
the budget proposal of Rs. 722.00 cr ore under BE 2025 -26 was intended to meet payments for 
ongoing committed liabilities. However, the request was not acceded to. Given the pending 
liabilities, the Committee recommends reconsidering the allocation for the FAME -II Scheme at 
the RE stage to en sure the settlement of outstanding commitments. It further recommends that 
the Ministry make every effort to strategize and utilise the significant part of the allocations in a 
timely manner. After that, more funds should be allocated at the RE stage to im plement the key 
schemes effectively. 
(Para 12) 
 
 

14 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Ministry makes focused efforts to strategize and utilize the allocations in a timely manner 
but due to unforeseen circumstances there has been delay in deployment of buses and the 
commissioning of chargers. 
 
Further, in case of Electric Vehicles Public  Charging Station (EVPCS), it has been reported by 
Operation Maintenance Centre (OMCs) that there has been delay in electricity connection from 
DISCOM to energize the chargers, hence chargers were not commissioned. This has led to non -
disbursement of furth er amount Rs.262.05 crore EVPCS thereby leading to non -utilization of 
funds. Besides, there will be an additional fund requirement of Rs.17 crore for other Public 
Sector Entities (PSEs) for commissioning of EVPCS by PSEs.  
 
In view of the above liability, ongoing activities under the FAME -II Scheme, an amount of 
Rs.879 crore was sought in BE for FY 2025 -26 for the committed liability and  payable. 
However this amount may go up to Rs.1,757 crore in view of the pending disbursement of 
committed liability of e-buses, EVPS and claims of e-2Ws, e-3Ws and e-4Ws.  
 
MHI has duly noted the recommendation to strategize and utilize the significant part of the 
allocations in a timely manner. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee reiterates its concern over the substantial pending liabilities under the 
FAME-II Scheme, which may escalate up to ₹1,757 crore for FY 2025 –26. These include 
payments linked to e-buses, Electric Vehicle Public Charging Stations (EVPCS), and claims 
for various electric vehicle segments. Despite the Scheme having formally concluded on 31 st 
March 2024, the continuation of operational and financial obligations necessitates 
immediate fiscal attention. 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Mini stry urgently coordinate with the 
Ministry of Finance to reassess and earmark requisite funds under the Revised Estimates 
(RE) exclusively for settlement of these liabilities. Furthermore, the Ministry must establish 
a robust inter -agency framework involvi ng DISCOMs, OMCs, and PSEs to resolve 
infrastructure bottlenecks, particularly delays in energizing EVPCS and expedite 
deployment and commissioning. 
To ensure efficient implementation and avoid disruption to existing mobility initiatives, the 
Committee recommends that a substantial portion of the allocated funds be strategically 
utilized within the first three quarters of FY 2025 –26, thereby facilitating timely 
disbursement of dues and enhancing confidence in Government-led EV promotion policies. 

15 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Committee observes that significant funds have been surrendered in key schemes 
such as PLI Scheme for the Automobile and Auto Component Industry and the Enhancement of 
Competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector since FY 2022 -23 to 2023 -24. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to analyse the underlying reasons for the inadequate receipt of 
proposals under the key schemes. Additionally, the Ministry should identify and address 
procedural bottlenecks, particularly PFMS validation checks, to expedite fu nd disbursement. 
Furthermore, the Ministry should formulate a strategic plan to enhance awareness and outreach 
through targeted campaigns, ensuring optimal use and evenly distribution throughout the year of 
allocated funds and effectively contributing to the vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047. 
(Para 16) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
(i). Capital Goods Sector: - Under the Scheme on Enhancement of Competitiveness in the 
Indian Capital Goods Sector Phase-II, MHI utilized Rs.199.24 cr. against the RE of Rs.199.60 cr. 
allocation for FY 2022 -23. However in FY 2023 -24, due to the restriction imposed by the 
Validation check on PFMS that Sanction Order were generated only when the actual bank 
balance in the CNA Bank Account reaches the 6.25% of the budget earmarked for release 
through CNA for FY 2023 -24. Thus, token amount of Rs.1.00 was released against the 
sanctioned amount for the projects under the Scheme. By the end of Financial Year 2023 -24, a 
total of Rs.165.21 cr. had been sanctioned for the projects, though the actual re lease was 
Rs.83.3431 cr. under the Scheme. Therefore, had it not been for the restriction imposed by the 
validation check on PFMS, MHI would have been able to gainfully utilize the funds available at 
RE Stage. 
 
(ii). PLI AUTO:-As per the Gazette Notifications dated 29/12/2023, tenure of PLI-Auto Scheme 
has been extended by one year. Incentive is now applicable for determined sales for five 
consecutive financial years from 2023-24 to 2027-28 for which disbursement shall happen in  the 
subsequent year i.e. from FY 2024-25 onwards.  
 
FY 2023-24 was the first performance year under PLI-Auto Scheme and FY 2024-25 is first year 
for disbursement of incentive. Rs.322 crore  were disbursed during FY 2024 -25 as Incentive 
claims to 4 applicants (Three Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEMs) and one component 
champion).     
 
To address procedural bottlenecks, Standard Operating Procedures for Domestic Value Addition 
& for Claims processing have been issued by MHI. Regular workshops and outreach with 
approved applicants are being conducted to expedite claims filing and settlement. 
 

16 
 
Besides regular reviews at MHI, performance of PLI -Auto Scheme is periodically monitored at 
the level of Empowered Group of Secretaries (EGoS). 
 
To enhance the utilization of funds, PLI-Auto Conclave was held on 11.03.2025 as a part of IEC 
initiatives taken to ensure effective outreach and stakeholder participation in PLI Auto Scheme. 
A regular review was also organised with Applicants to ensure timely submission of claims. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that due to the PFMS validation check requiring a minimum 6.25% 
balance in the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) account, the Ministry of Heavy Industries was 
unable to release the full amount sanctioned under the Capital Goods Scheme (Phase -II) 
during FY 2023–24. This led to underutilization of funds despite approved allocations. 
 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Ministry, in consultation with the 
Department of Expenditure, explore procedural refinements in PFMS to allow timely 
sanction and release of funds, especially at the RE stage. Mechanisms such as conditional 
or staggered sanctioning may be considered to avoid delays and ensure optimal utilization 
of budgetary allocations. 
 
As regard PLI AUTO, the Committee recommends that the Ministry intensify its outreach 
and handholding efforts to ensure wider participation and timely claim submissions under 
the PLI -Auto Scheme. Wh ile initial disbursements have begun, the pace of utilization 
remains modest. 
 
To overcome procedural delays and improve fund absorption, the Ministry may consider 
setting up a dedicated facilitation cell for approved applicants, with technical support for  
claim documentation and compliance with Domestic Value Addition norms. Periodic 
capacity-building workshops and simplified digital claim interfaces should also be explored 
to streamline processing and enhance stakeholder confidence. 
 
AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee observes that India holds a strong global position in automobile 
production, ranking 2 nd in 2-Wheelers, 1st in 3-Wheelers, 4th in Passenger Vehicles, and 5 th  in 
Commercial Vehicles. However, despite high production volumes - 214.69 lakh 2-wheelers, 9.93 
lakh 3-wheelers, 49.02 lakh passenger vehicles, and 10.66 lakh commercial vehicles in FY 2023 -
24, exports remain relatively low, particularly in passenger and commercial vehicles. 
(Para 20) 

17 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As per SIAM data, the exports of Passenger vehicles and Commercial vehicles remain at 
7,70,364 and 80,986 in FY 2024-2025. 
 
In FY 2024 -25, overall exports grew by 19.2%, with strong contributions from Passenger 
Vehicles and Two-wheelers, which grew to 7.7 lakh units (y-o-y growth of 14.6%) and 41.9 lakh 
units (y-o-y growth of 21.4%) respectively. Commercial Vehicles also witnes sed a year-on-year 
growth of 23%, exporting more than 80 thousand units. 
 
More than 15% of Passenger Vehicles and 18% of Two -wheelers produced in India were 
exported in FY 24-25, while just 8% of Commercial Vehicles were exported.  
 
Indian OEMs have been e xploring opportunities in other markets such as Africa and Latin 
America and are also beginning to enter developed markets with globally competitive models.  
 
MHI works with industry associations like Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) 
and Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India (ACMA) to enhance the 
competitiveness of the auto sector, including export growth. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that while India holds a leading global po sition in automobi le 
production ranking among the top five across major vehicle categories, however, the share 
of exports remains relatively low, particularly in commercial vehicles. In FY 2024 –25, only 
about 8% of commercial vehicles  and 15–18% of passenger and two -wheelers produced 
were exported, despite year-on-year growth in export volumes. 
 
The Committee , accordingly, recommends that the Ministry intensify efforts to boost 
automotive exports by supporting OEMs in accessing new markets, improving global 
competitiveness, and addressing logistical and regulatory barriers. Strategic collaboration 
with industry bodies such as SIAM and ACMA should be further strengthened to promote 
export-oriented manufacturing, especially in segments with low export penetration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee notes that the budget allocation at the RE stage, amounting to Rs. 
1,870.76 crore, has reached only 19.61% utilisation as on 12.02.2025. It recommends therefore 
that the Ministry accelerate the implementation pr ocess and take proactive measures to ensure 
optimal budget utilisation in strict adherence to Financial Rules. 
(Para 25) 

18 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
An amount of Rs.1,870.76 crore was approved under the Revised Estimate (RE) for FY 2024 -25 
under the PM E -DRIVE scheme. Rs. 993 crore as on 31.03.2025 has been spent against 
Rs.1,870.76 crore, which represents 53% of RE for FY 2024-25. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that the PM E -DRIVE Scheme was launched on 01.10.2024 and three 
new segments viz. e -ambulances, e -trucks and upgradation of testing agencies have been 
introduced then only. The primary reasons for lower utilization of funds at RE stage were that 
guidelines for these new compone nts including EVPCS are still under finalization in 
consultations with stakeholders and formulation for incentivization strategies for the new 
segments.  Once the guidelines for these segments are finalized, the funds will be used 
accordingly, in the current FY i.e. 25-26. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that while budget utilization under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme was 
initially low, at 19.61% as of 12 th February, 2025, it improved to 53% by 31 March 2025 , 
following the launch of new segments such as e -ambulances, e -trucks, and testing 
infrastructure. The delay in finalizing guidelines for these components contributed to 
slower fund absorption during the early phase. 
 
The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry expedite the finalization of 
guidelines and incentivization strategies for all newly introduced segments under the PM 
E-DRIVE Scheme. Timely issuance of operational frameworks and proactive engagement 
with stakeholders will be essential to ensure optimal utilization of  allocated funds in FY 
2025–26 and adherence to financial norms. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries reconsider the 
reduction in incentives for registered e -2 wheelers, e-Rickshaws, e-Carts, and e-3 wheelers (L5) 
in FY 2025 -26, as the lower subsidy may slow down EV adoption in the country. Giv en the 
significant increase in the indicative number of vehicles to be supported across these segments, 
maintaining higher incentives would ensure sustained market growth, affordability, and 
alignment with the Government's clean mobility goals.  
(Para 28) 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
It is pertinent to mention that incentive structures for Electric Vehicles (EVs) are periodically 
reviewed to ensure optimal utilization of public funds, promote innovation, and encourage cost 
competitiveness in the sector.  
 
The tapering of incentive has been adopted keeping in view the global practice.  Globally, 
several countries have adopted a phased reduction approach in EV subsidies, with the objective 
of fostering a self-sustaining and competitive EV ecosystem over time. Cou ntries such as China, 
Germany, and the United Kingdom have gradually reduced direct purchase incentives while 
simultaneously strengthening non -fiscal support mechanisms, such as investment in charging 
infrastructure, R&D, and regulatory support. 
 
A similar approach has been adopted in the PM E -DRIVE Scheme, while keeping in view the 
fact that EV transition in India is at a critical stage, and affordability remains a key enabler, 
particularly for segments that serve as the backbone of urban and rural mobilit y, therefore, 
upfront subsidies are being provided to the buyers. The incentive per KWh has been tapered/ 
reduced year-on-year under FAME -II and the same principle of tapering of incentive has been 
considered in the PM E-DRIVE Scheme.   
 
It is pertinent to  note that despite tapering of subsidy levels in FY 2024 -25 under the PM E -
DRIVE Scheme, as per Vahan Portal of MoRTH, the sale of e -2Ws, e -3Ws (L5) has seen a 
growth of 21% and 57%, respectively.  As per Vahan data of MoRTH, the share of EVs sold in 
FY 2024-25 has gone up to 7.49% as compared to 6.82% in FY 23-24. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s rationale for tapering incentives under the 
PM E-DRIVE Scheme, in line with global practices aimed at fostering a se lf-sustaining EV 
ecosystem. It also notes the reported growth in EV sales in FY 2024 –25 despite reduced 
subsidies. However, the Committee remains concerned that the Indian EV market , 
particularly in the e -2W, e-Rickshaw, e-Cart, and e-3W (L5) segments, whi ch continues to 
be driven by cost -sensitive consumers, including first -time buyers and informal sector 
operators, for whom upfront affordability remains a critical factor. 
 
In this context, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry adop t a 
calibrated and segment -specific approach to incentive tapering. It recommends 
maintaining adequate subsidy levels for economically vulnerable and high -utilization 
categories until cost parity with internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles is more firml y 
established. This will help sustain momentum in EV adoption, support inclusive mobility, 
and ensure alignment with the Government’s clean transport objectives. 

20 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee observed that 4,57,840  claims were submitted on the PM E -DRIVE 
Portal. Of these, 2,26,099 claims (49.4%) had been incentivised as of 30 th November 2024. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries expedite processing pending 
incentive claims. The Committee al so observed that while the e -2W and e -3W (L5) categories 
have achieved 64.3% and 100.3% of their respective targets, the extremely low performance of 
e-rickshaws & e -carts, meeting only 2.99% of the target, necessitates urgent holistic 
intervention. It rec ommends that the Ministry implement targeted awareness campaigns, 
facilitate financial access, and enhance infrastructure support to improve uptake in these 
segments. Additionally, it recommends the establishment of a robust monitoring mechanism and 
regular stakeholder consultations to track progress and ensure the timely disbursement of 
incentives. These measures will help align the implementation of the scheme with the 
Government’s vision for accelerated adoption of electric mobility. 
(Para 30) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Answer:-The details of target vs. achievement of EVs sold under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme in 
FY 2024-25 (as on 31/03/2025) is as under : -  
 
Category 
 
Target EV Sold Under 
the PM E-
DRIVE 
Scheme* (Nos.) 
Claims of 
vehicles 
submitted on 
Portal in FY 
2024-25 (Nos.) 
No. of vehicles 
incentivized in 
FY 2024-25 
(Nos.) 
% Share of EVs 
Sold under 
scheme against 
target for FY 24-
25 
 (A) (B) (C) (D) (E)=(B)/(A) 
e-2w  10.64 10.61 7.93 6.68 100% 
e-3w: e -
rickshaw/ e-
cart  
0.43 0.02 0.02 0.01 5% 
e-3w: L5  1.45 1.35 0.98 0.80 93% 
Grand 
Total 
12.52 11.98 8.93 7.49 96% 
* excluding sales of Lakshwadweep 
 
It is evident from the above table that the total EVs sold under the Scheme in FY 2024 -25 were 
96% of the target set for FY 24-25 as per revised estimates (RE) submitted in January, 2025. 
 

21 
 
Further, it is pertinent to mention that e -3W (L5) sales were more than the target of FY 2024 -25 
which was 80,546 whereas the sales of e -3W (e -rickshaw & e -cart) were below the target. It 
appears that many e -rickshaw buyer s switched to electric L5, leading to an abrupt fall in e -
rickshaw sales and a steep rise in L5 sales.  
 
Further, since the PM E-DRIVE Scheme mandates incentivization of advanced battery EVs. It is 
understood that many of the e -rickshaw and e -cart sellers who manufacture and sell e -rickshaw 
with lead acid batteries therefore could not participate in the scheme.  The mandate of PMP 
compliance and indigenous components increases the cost of acquisition of such advanced 
batteries e-rickshaw. 
 
MHI has been cond ucting awareness programs and workshops about the Scheme, and a web 
portal for the PM E-DRIVE Scheme has been developed, wherein scheme related documents are 
available.  The dashboard depicts daily sales data vis -à-vis targeted outlay.  Further, models 
registered under the scheme and applicable incentives are also being provided on the Portal.  
 
Stakeholder consultations are also being conducted by MHI from time to time in order to 
promote e -mobility in the country and smooth operationalization  and implementation of the 
scheme and to promote localization.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that as of 30.11.2024, only 49.4% of the 4,57,840 claims  submitted 
under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme had been incentivized. While the overall  scheme 
performance improved by the end of FY 2024 -25, with 96% of the annual target achieved , 
the uptake in the e-rickshaw and e-cart segment remained critically low, achieving only 5% 
of its target . The Ministry attributes this to eligibility restriction s on lead -acid battery 
vehicles and higher acquisition costs due to compliance requirements. 
 
The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the processing of 
pending claims and develop a segment-specific strategy  to address barriers in th e e -
rickshaw and e-cart category. This may include targeted awareness campaigns, facilitation 
of financial access, and transitional support for compliance with scheme norms. 
Additionally, the Committee urges the Ministry to strengthen its monitoring framew ork 
and conduct regular stakeholder consultations to ensure timely disbursement of incentives 
and inclusive adoption across all eligible EV segments. 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
9. The Committee also notes that e -4 wheeler passenger vehicles and hybrid vehicles have 
not been included in the PM E -DRIVE Scheme. Since 4 -wheeler passenger vehicles constitute a 
significant share of the vehicle population, particularly in major cities, the Committee believes 
that incentivizing these categories would fur ther accelerate the adoption of electric mobility in 
the country. Therefore, it recommends incorporating these vehicle categories into the scheme. 
Additionally, it suggests introducing a subsidy mechanism linked to the scrapping of old diesel 
vehicles to encourage their phased replacement with electric vehicles, thereby promoting cleaner 
and sustainable transportation and ensuring a healthy environment. 
(Para 31) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The PM E -DRIVE scheme does not have provision for e -4 Wheelers.  However , the following 
two schemes which are being implemented by MHI are incentivizing e-4 Wheelers: -  
 
I. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Automobile and Auto Component 
Industry in India (PLI -Auto): The Government approved this scheme on 15.09.2021 fo r 
Automobile and Auto Component Industry for enhancing India's manufacturing capabilities for 
Advanced Automotive Technology (AAT) products with a budgetary outlay of Rs.25,938 crore. 
The Scheme provides financial incentives to boost domestic manufacturing  of AAT products 
with minimum 50% Domestic Value Addition (DVA) and attract investments in the automotive 
manufacturing value chain. 
  
II. Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars in India 
(SPMEPCI): This Scheme has been notified on 15. 03.2024 to promote the manufacturing of 
electric cars in India. This requires applicants to invest a minimum of Rs.4,150 crore and achieve 
a minimum DVA of 25% at the end of third year and DVA of 50% at the end of fifth year. 
 
As suggested by the Committee , a subsidy mechanism linked to the scrapping of old diesel 
vehicles to encourage their phased replacement with electric vehicles has been implemented 
under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme for incentivization of e -trucks and e -buses.  Trucks and buses 
are a major contributor to air pollution. In view of this, the Scheme mandates for incentivising e -
trucks only if a scrapping certificate issued from MoRTH approved vehicles scrapping centres 
(RVSF) is submitted by scrapping of old trucks. 
 
It is pertinent to mention th at a sum of Rs.4,391 crore has been provided for procurement of 
14,028 e-buses by STUs/public transport agencies. As per scheme notification, preference will 
be given to buses of cities/states, which are being procured after scrapping old STU buses, 
through authorised scrapping centres (RVSFs). 

23 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes that electric four -wheeler passenger vehicles and hybrid vehicles are 
currently excluded from the PM E-DRIVE Scheme, despite their significant share in urban 
transport and contribution to vehicular emissions. While the Ministry has highlighted the 
role of the PLI -Auto Scheme and the newly launched SPMEPCI in promoting domestic 
manufacturing of electric cars, the Committee observes that these schemes primarily 
benefit manufacturers and do not directly address the affordability barrier faced by 
consumers. In the absence of consumer -linked incentives, the uptake of e -4Ws may remain 
constrained, particularly among private buyers in metropolitan areas. 
 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Ministry consider introducing targeted 
consumer incentives or rebate mechanisms for e -4Ws and hybrids to complement existing 
manufacturing-linked schemes. It also urges the Ministry to establish a periodic review 
mechanism to assess whether benefits under the PLI Scheme are translating into improved 
market accessibility and reduced retail prices. Furthermore, the Committee recommends 
extending the scrappage -linked subsidy model, currently applicable to e -trucks and e -
buses, to old diesel four -wheeler passenger vehicles. This would encourage their phased 
replacement with electric alternatives, thereby supporting cleaner urban mobility and 
advancing national climate objectives. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10. The Committee acknowledges the steady growth in electric vehicle (EV) adoption, with 
the overall EV share rising from 5.30% in 2022 -23 to 7.32% in 2024 -25 (as on February 10). 
The significant penetration of electric three -wheelers (e-3Ws), surpassing 57%, reflects a strong 
shift towards electrification in this segment. However, the growth of electric two -wheelers (e -
2Ws) and electric four -wheelers (e-4Ws) remain moderate, while the adoption of electric buses 
and electric trucks continues to be limited. To a ccelerate this transition and work towards the 
country’s ambitious goal of 35% of total vehicle sales being electric by 2030, it recommends that 
the Ministry enhance policy support through targeted financial incentives, expansion of charging 
infrastructure particularly for e -2Ws and e -4Ws and promotion of localized manufacturing of 
key EV components. Additionally, a strategic focus on high -utilization segments like e-buses and 
e-trucks is crucial to decarbonizing commercial transport. 
(Para 33) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
It is submitted that under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme, a total of 24.79 lakh e -2Ws are to be 
incentivized with an outlay of Rs.1,772 crore.  Out of which vehicles of approximately 10 lakh e-

24 
 
2Ws have been sold in FY 2024 -25 under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme and a total of 1.31 e -3W 
(L5) have been sold under the scheme.  
 
Further, an allocation of Rs.2,000 crore has been made for setting up of adequate public charging 
infrastructure for various categ ories of vehicles to instill confidence amongst EV users on pan 
India basis including the suburban and rural areas. A total of 72,300 EVPCS are estimated to be 
installed under the Scheme including 1,800, fast chargers for e-buses, 48,400 fast public chargers 
for e-2Ws & e -3Ws and 22,100 fast public chargers for e -4Ws.  This will address the issue of 
range anxiety and alter the trend of charging infrastructure. In addition to setting up EV charging 
infrastructure within city limits, the Scheme also envisages  selected inter -city/ inter -state 
highways to be made EV ready. The above allocation of 2,000 crore towards installation of 
EVPCS also includes e-buses and e-trucks. 
 
Besides this, an allocation of Rs.4,391 crore has been made under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme for 
deployment of 14,028 e-buses to promote clean and efficient public transport.  
 
Similarly, Rs.500 crore has been allocated to incentivize and promote adoption of e -trucks under 
the PM E-DRIVE Scheme and reduce emissions from the freight sector, as the t rucks are major 
contributors of pollution.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee acknowledges the steady growth in EV adoption, with the overall market 
share rising to 7.32% in FY 2024 –25 (as on 10 th February). The strong performance in the  
e-3W segment, particularly L5 category, reflects positive momentum. The Ministry’s 
allocations under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme - ₹1,772 crore for e -2Ws, ₹4,391 crore for e -
buses, ₹500 crore for e -trucks, and ₹2,000 crore for public charging infrastructure 
demonstrate a comprehensive approach. However, the adoption of e -4Ws and commercial 
EVs remains limited, and the requirement of scrapping certificates for e -truck incentives 
may pose challenges for smaller operators. 
 
The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry strengthen demand -side measures 
for e -4Ws and commercial EVs through targeted financial incentives and consumer 
outreach. It also suggests reviewing the operational impact of scrappage requirements for 
e-truck incentives to ensure broader participation. Additionally, the Committee also 
recommends the Ministry to publish periodic utilization data for installed charging stations 
to monitor deployment effectiveness, especially in underserved regions. 
 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee observes that, at the initial stage, the Scheme covers only major cities 
with populations exceeding 40 lakh . Given India’s vast geography and the pressing need to 
reduce fossil fuel imports and vehicular air pollution, limiting e -bus deployment to a few large 
cities will not be sufficient to address these challenges comprehensively. Therefore, it 
recommends tha t the Ministry expand the scope of the Scheme to include smaller cities. If 
necessary, the Ministry should seek additional budgetary allocations at the Revised Estimates 
(RE) stage from the Ministry of Finance to maximize the Scheme’s potential in promotin g 
electric bus adoption and green energy transition.  
(Para 35) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
An allocation of Rs.4,391 crore has been made under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme for the 
deployment of 14,028 electric buses (e -buses) by State Transport Undertakings (STUs) an d 
public transport agencies, primarily of nine cities with over 40 lakh population, i.e. Delhi, 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Ahmedabad, Surat, Bangalore, Pune, and Hyderabad.  However, 
buses shall also be deployed by STUs in unique geographies like hilly and north-eastern states, 
island territories, coastal regions, etc. on non-OPEX (Operating Expense) model. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that PM -eBusSewa Scheme of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs aims to deploy 10,000 e-Buses in cities with population less than 40 lakhs. 
 
As per information posted by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) on PIB on 13 th  
February,  2025, a total of 7,293 electric buses have been approved for cities across 14 States and 
4 Union Territories (UTs). An amount of ₹983 .75 crore was sanctioned for the development of 
power and civil depot infrastructure, out of which Rs.563.34 crore has been sanctioned for power 
infrastructure in 66 cities and Rs.420.40 crore for civil depot infrastructure in 64 cities. It has 
further been informed that Rs.437.50 crore has been disbursed for the development of power and 
civil infrastructure in 7 States and 1 Union Territory in FY 2024 -25. Therefore, the PM -
eBusSewa Scheme is ensuring e-bus adoption and green energy transition in small cities in India. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is of the view that the curre nt deployment of electric buses i.e. 14,028 in 
nine major cit ies and 7,293 for cities across 14 States and 4 Union Territories  is grossly 
inadequate to meet the Government’s declared objective of achieving 30% electric vehicle 
penetration by 2030. Given the urgency of transitioning to clean mobility and the critical 
role of public transport in this shift, the Committee strongly re commends that the Ministry 
immediately pursue enhanced budgetary allocations at the RE stage for 2025 -26. A 

26 
 
substantial scale-up in the deployment of electric buses across both large and small cities is 
imperative to meet national targets, reduce fossil fu el dependency, and address the 
worsening urban air quality across the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12.   The Committee emphasises that charging infrastructure is crucial for successfully 
transitioning to electric mobility. A meagre Rs. 180.00 crore was allocated at the RE stage for 
2024-25 for installing EV public charging stations across the country, and the entire amount 
remains unutilised. It recommends that the Ministry proactively seek enhanced funding from the 
Ministry of Finance at the R E stage (2025 -26) to expedite the installation of charging 
infrastructure under the PM E -DRIVE, thereby providing a much -needed boost to electric 
mobility. 
(Para 38) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Rs.180 crore were allocated towards installation of EVPCS under the PM E-DRIVE Scheme at 
RE Stage in FY 2024 -25.  However, the total allocation for EV PCS under the Scheme is 
Rs.2,000 crore.  
 
Further, Rs.650 crore has been estimated under Budgeted Estimates for FY 2025 -26 towards 
installation of charging infrastructure as  per Guidelines of Ministry of Power. It is expected that 
in the current FY i.e. 2025 -26, approximately Rs.593 crore shall be spent towards installation of 
EVPCS. 
 
The guidelines on charging infra will be shortly released by MHI for rolling out adequate le vels 
of charging infrastructure. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes that although a total outlay of ₹2,000 crore  has been earmarked 
under the PM E -DRIVE Scheme for the installation of Electric Vehicle Public Charging 
Stations (EVPCS), only ₹180 crore was allocated at the RE stage in FY 2024 –25 and 
remained unutilised. While ₹650 crore has been budgeted for FY 2025–26 and ₹593 crore is 
projected to be spent, the Committee is of the view that the pace of allocation and 
utilisation remains misaligned with the overall target. It further observes that delays in 
finalising the charging infrastructure guidelines may impede timely deployment and 
undermine public confidence in EV adoption. 
 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Ministry expedite the issuance of 
comprehensive guidelines for EVPCS and prepare a structured, year -wise implementation 

27 
 
roadmap for the optima l and time -bound utilisation of the ₹2,000 crore corpus. This 
roadmap should include city -wise and corridor -specific targets to ensure equitable and 
demand-driven distribution of charging stations. The Committee also requests to be 
apprised of the projected timeline for full utilisation of the EVPCS allocation under the PM 
E-DRIVE Scheme, along with periodic progress updates to enable effective oversight. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. The scheme's budget rose sharply in 2024 -25, but actual expenditure remains below RE, 
highlighting utilisation challenges. For 2025-26, a budget allocation of ₹155.76 crore has been 
proposed. The Committee believes this scheme facilitates realising the goal of Make in India and 
Atmnirbhar Bharat by promoting newer and niche technologies. It needs to be implemented 
promptly and effectively with robust zeal. Therefore, i t is recommended that the scheme's 
implementation be streamlined to ensure efficient fund utilisation, timely disbursement, and 
alignment with industry demand to maximize its impact on domestic battery manufacturing.  
(Para 47) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The PLI ACC Scheme has been und er gestation period till December 2024. Moreover, since the 
Lithium-Ion cell manufacturing technology is a very niche technology, currently not fully 
developed in India, the projects under the PLI ACC Scheme (Round -1) could not meet their pre-
declared timelines in terms of commencement of communicated production.  
  
However, the Ministry of Heavy Industries is organizing monthly workshops with the 
beneficiary firms to monitor progress, ensure efficient fund utilization, timely disbursement and 
alignment with industry demand to maximize its impact on domestic battery manufacturing. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes the delays in project execution under the PLI ACC Scheme, despite 
the Ministry’s efforts through monthly workshops. Given t he strategic importance of 
domestic battery manufacturing for achieving self -reliance, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Ministry adopt a results -driven approach with clearly defined 
milestones, strict timelines, and accountability mechanisms. Tec hnical support and close 
monitoring must be intensified to ensure timely commencement of production and effective 
utilisation of funds, thereby accelerating progress toward the goals of Make in India and 
Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
 
 

28 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
14. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Heavy Industries implement the recent 
customs duty exemptions on 35 additional capital goods essential for lithium -ion battery 
manufacturing. Given India's reliance on battery imports, particularly from China , and the high 
investment required for ACC production, these exemptions will provide a competitive edge to 
domestic manufacturers. Additionally, their alignment with the PLI ACC scheme is expected to 
boost indigenous manufacturing, reduce import dependence , and enhance India’s position in the 
global EV market.  
(Para 49) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The Government's recent exemption of customs duties on 35 additional capital goods essential 
for lithium-ion battery manufacturing is poised to significantly impact the automotive industry in 
terms of the use of indigenous advanced chemistry cells. 
 
As Lithium -Ion cell manufacturing technology is a very niche technology, currently not fully 
developed in India, the cell manufacturers are required to invest heavily in t heir facilities 
including investment on import of latest capital goods required for manufacturing of ACCs.  
Due to lack of indigenous sourcing of capital goods, only way to get a competitive edge is by 
exempting customs duties on such critical capital goods. 
 
The duty exemptions complement the PLI ACC Scheme by incentivizing domestic 
manufacturing of ACC technologies. This synergy is anticipated to strengthen India's position in 
the global EV market, making the country's automotive sector more competitive internationally. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee welcomes the customs duty exemptions on 35 additional capital goods 
critical to lithium -ion battery manufacturing and acknowledges their strategic alignment 
with the PLI ACC Scheme. However,  to fully leverage this policy synergy, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry ensure swift and seamless implementation of these 
exemptions, along with regular consultations with industry stakeholders to identify any 
procedural bottlenecks. It further urges the Ministry to track and assess the on -ground 
impact of these exemptions on project cost reduction, capacity building, and localization 
efforts. Strengthening this facilitative ecosystem is essential to accelerate the growth of 
indigenous ACC manufacturing and reduce long-term dependency on imports, particularly 
from China. 
 
 
 

29 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
15. The Committee notes the significant changes in the Mines and Minerals ( Development 
and Regulation) [MMD R] Amendment Act, 2023 . The amendments to  the Act enables 
participation of private companies in mining exploration by providing them with exploration 
license for reconnaissance and prospecting of critical minerals. The Committee is hopeful that 
the participation of private players will expedite t he exploration and mining of critical minerals 
like lithium without technological constraints. This is expected to strengthen indigenous 
manufacturing of lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles and reduce dependence on imports of 
critical minerals. 
(Para 50) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
As per the information received from the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry of Mines has been 
empowered to auction blocks for grant of Exploration License through an order dated 21 st 
October, 2024 under Section 20A of MMDR Act 1957. Central Government has successfully 
auctioned 24 blocks of critical and strategic minerals in 04 tranches in 2024. 
  
The exploration of critical minerals has been significantly increased. Over the past thr ee years, 
the Geological Survey of India (GSI) has undertaken 368 exploration projects focused on critical 
and strategic minerals. In the FY 2024 -25, 195 projects were taken up, and 227 projects have 
been approved for the financial year 2025-26. 
 
100% FDI is allowed under “Automatic” route for mining and exploration of metal and non -
metal ores. A foreign company may incorporate an Indian subsidiary company or invest in an 
existing Indian Company to become eligible for grant of mining and exploration rights. 
  
To support the critical minerals sector, Government has eliminated customs duties on 25 
minerals and reduced Basic Customs Duties (BCD) on 2 minerals in the Union Budget for 2024 -
25. 
 
In the Union Budget 2025 -26, the Government proposed to fully exempt cobalt powder and 
waste, the scrap of lithium -ion battery, Lead, Zinc and 12 more critical minerals to secure their 
availability for manufacturing in India and promote more jobs for India’s youth. 
  
Ministry of Mines is engaged in various multilateral and bilateral platforms for strengthening the 
critical minerals value chain, focussing on multiple objectives, including the processing and 
recycling of critical minerals such as Minerals Security Partnership (MSP) and the Indo -Pacific 
Economic Framework (IPEF), initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies (iCET), the UK -
India Technology Security Initiative (TSI) and others. 

30 
 
 The Ministry of Mines has taken a significant step to acquire overseas mineral assets through the 
establishment of a joint venture co mpany, KhanijBidesh India Ltd. (KABIL). Its overarching 
mission is to identify and acquire overseas mineral assets that hold critical and strategic 
significance, specifically targeting minerals like Lithium, Cobalt and others. KABIL has signed 
an Explorati on and Development Agreement with CAMYEN, a state -owned enterprise of 
Catamarca province of Argentina, for Exploration and mining of Five Lithium Brine Block in 
Argentina with an area of around 15,703 Ha. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee acknowledges the positive developments in enabling exploration through 
private participation, successful auctioning of 24 critical mineral blocks, increased 
exploration projects by GSI, and fiscal measures such as reduction and exemption of 
customs duties on key minerals. It commends the Ministry’s efforts in securing overseas 
lithium assets via KABIL and engaging in international platforms for strategic mineral 
sourcing. 
 
However, the Committee remains concerned about the delayed operationalization of 
auctioned blocks, limited private uptake in high -risk exploration, and domestic refining 
gaps for key minerals like lithium. It recommends that the Ministry prioritize timely 
activation of blocks and strengthen coordination with industry, foreign partners, and  state 
agencies to fast -track exploration, processing infrastructure, and critical asset acquisition 
under platforms like KABIL and the Minerals Security Partnership to ensure long -term 
supply security and reduce reliance on imports. 
 
CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES (CPSES) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
16. The Committee observed that out of the 16 Operational CPSEs under the administrative 
control of the Ministry of Heavy Industries, 6 1 CPSEs are loss making CPSEs. It has also been 
observed that HEC is a loss-making enterprise continuously for the past several years. However, 
considering the recent performance of HEC, there seems to be potential for its revival if 
immediate measures are taken. It recommends that the Ministry should make concerted efforts to 
improve the situation of HEC and assess the reasons as to why the loss making CPSEs have 
increased from 5 to 6. The Ministry may develop strategic steps to revive the CPSEs and 
accordingly consider allocating funds at RE stage.  
(Para 64) 
                                                           
1Engineering Projects (India) Limited (EPIL), Heavy Engineering Corporation (HEC), Hindustan Machine Tools 
Ltd. (HMT), Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited (REIL), Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd. (AYCL) and NEPA 
Ltd.  

31 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) has 16 Operational Central Public Sector Enterprises 
(CPSEs). Out of these, following 5 CPSEs were loss making during FY 2022-23: 
i. Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. (HEC) 
ii. HMT Machine Tools Ltd. 
iii. NEPA Ltd. 
iv. Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. 
v. Rajasthan Electronics & Instruments Ltd.  
 
In FY 2023-24, one more Company, namely Andrew Yule & Company Limited (AYCL) became 
loss making CPSE. AYCL is m ainly engaged in growing and manufacturing tea. Due to Pest 
(looper caterpillars) and Fungal (fusarium) attack on Tea plantation, adverse climatic conditions, 
erratic rain falls, low sale realization, etc. in its Tea Division, it registered loss in FY 2023-24. 
 
As regards HEC, its financial health has been poor since long. In recent 3 years, it has registered 
Profit Before Tax as under: 
2021-22 - (-)256.07 Cr 
2022-23 - (-)230.85 Cr 
2023-24 - (-)275.19 Cr 
 
There is no indication for financial revival of the company and there is no significant 
improvement in performance of the company. However, the performance of CPSEs under 
administrative control of this Ministry is periodically reviewed and wherever required, funds 
under RE stage may be considered. 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee notes that the number of loss -making CPSEs under the administrative 
control of the Ministry has increased from five in FY 2022 –23 to six in FY 2023 –24, with 
Andrew Yule & Company Limited (AYCL) newly added due to a dverse agro -climatic 
conditions affecting its Tea Division. The Committee reiterates its concern over this trend 
and recommends that the Ministry undertake a detailed assessment of the operational and 
financial challenges faced by these CPSEs. Strategic in terventions, including restructuring, 
diversification, and targeted support, should be considered to arrest further deterioration 
and facilitate revival where feasible. 
With respect to Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd. (HEC), the Committee acknowledges 
the Ministry’s assessment of its prolonged financial stress. However, based on its ongoing 
consultations with stakeholders and experts, the Committee remains optimistic ab out 
identifying viable pathways for HEC’s revival. It recommends that the Ministry actively 

32 
 
engage with the Committee’s deliberations and prepare a time -bound revival strategy, 
including operational reforms and financial restructuring. The Committee furthe r 
recommends that, subject to progress on revival planning, the Ministry may consider 
allocating appropriate support at the RE stage to enable implementation of corrective 
measures. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
17. The Committee notes that the number of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) 
under the control of the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) is decreasing year after year. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry work towards enhancing the performance of CPSEs 
under its control and adopt rest ructuring measures to revive the loss -making CPSEs so that no 
further closure of the CPSEs takes place. Since privately run enterprises/industries are thriving, 
the Ministry should analyse the causes of its CPSEs' sickness and loss -making and make 
concerted efforts for their revival/restoration. 
(Para 65) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The observation of Committee is noted. MHI reviews performance of CPSEs under its 
administrative control periodically evaluating performance of the CPSEs on both financial and 
quantitative operating parameters (such as capacity utilization, realization of trade receivables, 
completion of pending orders, physical performance for completion of projects of national 
importance etc.). 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee observes that, despite the Ministry’s reference to periodic performance 
reviews of CPSEs, it has not provided specific insights into the root causes of sickness or 
the remedial measures being pursued for their revival. The Committee, therefor e, 
recommends that the Ministry should go beyond routine evaluations and undertake a 
comprehensive diagnostic review of each loss -making CPSE under its control. This review 
should clearly identify the structural, operational, or financial issues affecting performance 
and propose a concrete, time-bound revival strategy for each loss-making CPSE. A detailed 
and substantive response on these aspects may be submitted to the Committee in the Action 
Taken Replies. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18. The Committee having observed that as on 31.01.2025, the actual utilization of funds by 
several Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) through Internal & Extra Budgetary 

33 
 
Resources (IEBR) remains significantly low compared to the Annual Plan for 2024 -25. It  
recommends that the Ministry identify the reasons for this under -utilization and take necessary 
measures to ensure that the funds raised are effectively utilized before the end of the current 
financial year. 
(Para 67) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The details of actual utilization of funds by CPSEs through IEBR against Annual Plan 2024 -25, 
as on 31.3.2025 are as hereunder: 
 
Name of CPSE Annual Plan 
(2024-25) (in Rs. Cr.) 
Utilization as 
on 31.3.2025 
(in Cr.) 
(Provisional) 
Budgetary 
Allocation 
I&EBR Total 
Allocation 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 
(BHEL) 
- 229.00 229.00 245.00 
Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd. (AYCL) - 34.44 34.44 8.41 
Rajasthan Electronics & Instruments 
Ltd. (REIL) 
- 0.50 0.50 0.1150 
Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. 
(EPI) 
- 1.00 1.00 0.32 
Cement Corporation of India Ltd. 
(CCI) 
- 28.94 28.94 23.67 
Braithwaite Burn and Jessop 
Construction Co. Ltd. (BBJ) 
- 3.00 3.00 0.35 
Bridge & Roof Co. Ltd. (B&R) - 3.00 3.00 2.59 
HMT Ltd. 0.01 9.33 9.34 2.34 
 
Utilization of funds by BHEL has exceeded the earmarked funds in the Annual Plan 2024 -25 
whereas B&R and CCI have utilized more than 80% of their earmarked funds. 
 
Other CPSEs namely AYCL, REIL, EPI, BBJ and HMT Ltd. could not utilize the earmarked 
funds due to various reasons including: 
 
a) Working Capital constraints. 
b) Severe cash crisis affecting generation of internal resources for CAPEX. 
c) Undertaking projects on Project Management Consultancy (PMC) which does not need 
procurement of capital equipments. 

34 
 
d) Fulfilment of requirement with existing facilities  resulting in non -procurement of capital 
equipments. 
e) Decline in new orders. 
f) Descoping of some projects. 
g) Funds utilization as per actual operational requirement. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes with concern that several CPSEs under the administrative control of 
the Ministry have reported low utilization of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
(IEBR) as on 31 st March 2025, despite allocations made under the Annual Plan for FY 
2024–25. While Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL), Ceme nt Corporation of India Ltd. 
(CCI), and Bridge & Roof Co. Ltd. (B&R) have demonstrated satisfactory utilization, 
others such as AYCL, REIL, EPI, BBJ, and HMT Ltd. have significantly un derperformed. 
The reasons cited ranging from working capital constraints  and cash flow issues to 
descoping of projects and li mited capital procurement needs, indicate deeper operational 
and structural challenges. 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive review of the 
financial and operational plann ing processes of these CPSEs to identify persistent 
bottlenecks affecting fund utilization. It further advises the Ministry to develop tailored 
corrective strategies, including improved project pipeline management, enhanced order 
acquisition mechanisms, an d financial restructuring where necessary. These measures 
should be implemented in a time-bound manner to ensure that future IEBR allocations are 
effectively absorbed and contribute meaningfully to the capital and operational growth of 
the CPSEs. 
 
--- 
  

35 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
Eleventh Meeting  
  
 The Committee met at 3.00 pm on Wednesday, 07 thAugust 2025, in Committee 
Chairman’s Chamber i.e  Room No. 316, Third Floor, Block –B, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva    -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
3. Shrimati Sulata Deo 
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
6. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
7. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
8. Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Afzal Ansari 
10. Shri Chandan Chauhan 
11. Shrimati Veena Devi 
12. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
13. Dr. Ganapathy Rajkumar P. 
14. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
15. Km. Sudha R. 
16. Shri Khalilur Rahaman 
17. Dr. Mallu Ravi 
18. Shri Konda Vishweshwar Reddy 
19. Shri Daroga Prasad Saroj 
20. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
21. Shri E. Tukaram 
22. Shrimati Smita Uday Wagh 
23. Shri Rajabhau Parag Prakash Waje 
SECRETARIAT 
       1. Niangkhannem Guite, Director 
       2.  Shri Prabhakar Singh, Under Secretary 
 

36 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry welcomed the Members of the Committee to its eleventh meeting. 
2. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft reports: 
(i) 329th Report on Action T aken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 326 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2025–26) pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
(ii) 330th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations con tained in the 327 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2025 –26) pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises. 
 
3. Following a detailed discussion, the both the Reports was unanimously adopted. 
 
4. The Committee then decided to table the above Reports in both the Houses of Parliament 
on Friday, the 08 th August, 2025. It was decided that the Reports may be presented in the Rajya 
Sabha by the Chairman and, in his absence, by Shrimati Seema Dwivedi and in her absence, by 
Shri Sandosh  Kumar P. Likewise, the Committee decided that in Lok Sabha, Shri Konda 
Vishweshwar Reddy will table the reports and his absence, Shri Afzal Ansari, MP, would lay the 
reports. 
5. *      *     * 
6.  *      *     * 
The Committee adjourned at 4.00 pm. 
 
 
New Delhi                                                              NIANGKHANNEM GUITE 
7th August, 2025                                                                        DIRECTOR 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________ 
*Not related to the subject 