Ind. 26198 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN REPORTS OF MINISTRY 
OF INDUSTRY ON THE 17TH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
(PRESENTED ON THE lOTH DECEMBER, 1998) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1998/ AGRAHA YANA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS' 
I. CoMPOSITION oF THE CoMMITTEE. 
II. INTRODUCfiON. • • • • 
III. REPORT OF THE CoMMITTEE 
IV. ANNEXURE-A • • : • • 
V. ANNEXURE (MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS)- B & C • 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-115 
117-167 
167-178 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Shri Maurice Kujur 
4. Shri Karma Topden 
5. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
6. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
7. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
8. Shri C.O. Poulose 
9. Shri P. Prabhakar Reddy 
}fl. Shri Nagmani 
11. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
14. Shri Shibu Soren 
15. Shri Gaya Singh 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Muni Lall 
17. Shri M. Srinivas 
18. Shri Vijay Shankar 
19. Shri Gyan Singh 
20. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
21. Shri Ramanand Singh 
22. Shri Annasaheb M. K. Patil 
23. Shri Jual Oram 
24. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
25. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
26. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
27. Shri K. H. Muniyappa 
28. Shri Dutta Meghe 
29. Shri Konijeti Rosaiah 
30. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
31. Dr. Shakeel Ahmad 
32. Shri Sunil Khan 
33. Shri Ananda Pathak 
34. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
35. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
36. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav (Jahanabad) 
37. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
38. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
(i) 

39. Shri Prabhat Kumar Samantaray 
40. Shri Ajay Chakraborty 
41. Shri Zora Singh 
42. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja 
43. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
44. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
(ii) 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Twenty-sixth Report 
on Action Taken by the Ministry of Industry on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 17th Report of the Committee on "Industrialisation of Backward Areas and 
State of Capital Goods Sector". 
2. The 17th Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on the 7th March, 1996. The Ministry of Industry was requested to 
furnish action taken replies against the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report. The replies of the Ministry in respect of all the recommendations/observations were 
received. 
3. Subsequently, the Committee at its meeting held on the 28th July, 1997, constituted 
inter alia Sub-Committee-! to examine and report on the Action Taken Report of the 
Ministry of Industry on its 17th Report. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted its 
draft Report on the 3rd November, 1997.The same Report could not be adopted by the full 
Committee as it became defunct consequent upon dissolution of the 11th Lok Sabha. 
4. The newly constituted Committee met on the 14th August, 1998 and ·adopted the 
Report of the Sub-Committee (Minutes of the meeting are appended as Annexure-'C'). 
NEw DELHI; 
14th August, 1998 
RAGHAVJI 
Chairman, 
Department-related , Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 

SUB-COMMITTEE-I ON ACTION TAKEN REPORTS OF MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY 
ON 17TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry at the meeting held 
on the 28th July, 1997, constituted, inter alia, Sub-Committee-! to examine and report on 
the Action Taken Reports on the 17th Report of the Committee on Industrialisation of 
backward areas and the state of the capital goods sector. The composition of Sub-Committee 
is given below:-
··, 
1. Shri M. K. Patil - Convenor 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Govindrao Adik 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
5. Shriinati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
6. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
7. Shrimati Jayaprada Nahata 
8. Shri .Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
9. Chaudhari Chunni Lal 
10. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
11. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
12. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
13. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
14. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
15. Shri Sanat Mehta 
16. Shri Darbara Singh 
2. The 17th Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 7th 
March, 1996, and was laid in the Lok Sabha the same day. Government have furnished 
replies indicating the action taken on the various recommendations of the Committee. The 
Ministry of Industry was reminded on the 18th June and 22nd July, 1997 to intimate action 
taken by the various Ministries/Departments of Government of India as well as the State 
Governments on such of the Committee's recommendations which had been forwarded to 
them for necessary action. Certain specific points were also referred to the Ministry of 
Industry on the 14th August, 1997 for clarifications. The information/comments/ 
clarifications received from the Ministry of Industry in pursuance to these communications, 
are placed at Annexure-'A'. 
3. The Sub-Committee met on the 11th August, 1997, and considered the ATRs 
furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the various recommendations of the Committee and 
decided to have certain clarifications. It again met on the 22nd August, 1997 and heard the 
oral evidence of the Secretaries of various Departments of the Ministry of Industry except 
the Secretary SSI and A & RI alongwith Member Secretary, Planning Commission and 
Chairman, Disinvestment Commission. It met again on the 16th September, 1997 and heard 
the oral evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Industry (Department of SSI and A & RI) 
alongwith the representatives of K. V.I.C. 
4. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on 
the 3rd November, 1997. Minutes of the sittings of the Sub-Committee are appended as 
Annexure- 'B'. 
5. The Comments/Observations of the Sub-Committee on the various ATRs as received 
from the Ministry of Industry are contained in the succeeding paragraphs. 
1 
45351 RS I F-2-A 

2 
1. RECOMMENDATION 
Industrial Growth of Backward Areas 
The Ministry of Industry should assume the main responsibility to implement programme 
of industrial· growth in hitherto backward areas. It should draw up detailed blueprints of 
projects in collaboration with the Planning Commission and the State Governments. Detailed 
prescriptions of task for each area should embrace, apart from infrastructural planning such 
measures as the opening of a single window arrangement to cater to the requirements of 
potential entrepreneurs. 
Action Taken 
The primary responsibility for industrial development and development of industrially 
backward areas rests with the State Governments. With the introduction of the New 
Industrial Policy and various measures aimed at liberalisation of the economy there has been 
gradual reduction in intervention by the State. It is in this context that that the role of the 
Union Government is supportive in development of backward areas and the Ministry of 
Industry in the discharge of this responsibility is already implementing the Growth Centre 
Scheme and the Transport Subsidy Scheme for development of backward areas .. This 
recommendation has also been brought to notice of the Planning Commission and the State 
Government so as to enable them to fully addressed themselves to the recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It is not convinced with the 
Ministry's reply that primary responsibility for industrial development and development of 
backward areas rests with the State Governments. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the 
Central Ministry of Industry has a definite role to play in this regard. The Sub-Committee 
notes that the Central Government are implementing the Growth Centre Scheme and the 
Transport Subsidy Scheme for the development of industrially backward areas, but it is 
unhappy over the pace of implementation of the Growth Centre Scheme. The Sub­
Committee notes with regret that the Growth Centre Scheme which was announced in the 
year 1988 could take off as late as in the year 1994-95 ·and out of the 71 growth centres 
proposed to be set up during the 8th Plan period only 54 were approved. The number of 
growth centres actually set up and in operation must be even less. 
As regards the Transport Subsidy Scheme the Sub-Committee notes that the subsidy 
released was higher than the allocations under the annual plans for the year 1992 and 
thereafter. The Sub-Committee further notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Industry 
are pursuing for increasing the allocations under this scheme from Rs. 200 crores to Rs. 300 
crores for the 9th Plan period. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
Monitoring of infrastructural facilities 
The Planning Commission should, in collaboration of the State Governments and the 
Union Ministry, set up a cell to monitor the availability of basic infrastructural facilities such 
as railway net-work, power, roads and water. 
4535 I RS I F-2-.B 

3 
Action Taken 
The Planning Commission, the State Government and the Union ·T-en.itory 
Administrations have been apprised of this recommendation and would address themselves 
to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It is of the opinion that the 
existing system wherein the Committee of Secretaries in the Cabinet Secretariat and the 
Ministry of Planning and Programme Implementation periodically review the performance of 
various infrastructure sectors of economy and monitor the status of various ongoing projects 
is not sufficient. The Planning Commission review the infrastructure projects only at the time 
of the finalisation of the outlays for the concerned sector .during the annual plan meetings. 
The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation to set up a Cell in the 
Planning Commission for monitoring the availability of basic infrastructure facilities in 
collaboration with the State Governments and the concerned Central Ministry. 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
Disinvestment of PSUs shares 
There is a need to formulate clear-cut policies with regard to the role the Union 
Government intend to play in respect of its Public Sector Undertakings, particularly with 
reference to disinvestment of its share holding. 
Action Taken 
The policy of the Government on disinvestment is clearly spelt ,Gfut in the Industrial 
Policy Statement of July, 1991. It states that Government will ensure that public sector plays 
its rightful role in evolving socialistic scenario of the country. The Government will also 
ensure that public sector is run on business lines as envisaged in the Industrial Policy 
Resolution of 1956 and would continue to innovate and lead in strategic areas of national 
importance. As regards the disinvestment of Government sharehol~ing, the Industrial Policy 
Statement, July, 1991 mentions that in order to raise resources and to encourage wider 
public participation, part of Government shareholding in public sector would be offered to 
mutual funds, financial institutions, general public and workers. In pursuance of this 
Industrial Policy Statement, the disinvestment of shareholding in the PSU!I is being resorted 
to. So far disinvestment has taken place in 39 PSUs and it is ens1Sred that after disinvestment 
of part of Government shareholding the controlling stake in the PSUs continues to remain 
with the Government. So far no PSUs has been privatised on account of disinvestment of 
Government shareholding. The disinvestment policy is decided by the Ministry of Finance 
and disinvestment process is implemented by the Department of Public Enterprises. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes that the Central 
Government's role in relation to the public sector undertakings is definite and has been 
stated in the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 as well as in the Industrial Policy 
Statement of 1991. 
The Sub-Committee further notes with satisfaction that the division of functions 

4 
between the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Public Enterprises has been 
modified for the purpose of achieving better results. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
Reference of PSUs to BIFR 
The Government also needs to re-define its policy concerning the public undertakings 
which are under reference to the Bureau for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). 
In this connection, possibiDties may be explored for common production planning by a group 
of sick Public Sector Units located in reasonable proximity to one another and specialising in a 
similar range of products.;: 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Finance {Department of Banking), who are concerned with the subject, have 
been addressed in the matter ro take appropriate follow-up action on the above 
recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Industry have simply 
forwarded the Committee's recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for appropriate 
follow-up action and the Committee has not been apprised of the Action if any taken by 
Government on it. 
The Sub-Committee reiterates the Commitee's recommendation for exploring the 
possibilities for common production planning by a group of sick Public Sector Units located 
in reasonable proximity to one another and specialising in similar range of products. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
PMRY 
The banks have not been till now very enthusiastic about projects under the Prime 
Minister's Rozgar Yojana. It is necessary to ensure that time-bound measures are taken for 
examination, allocations and release of funds for such of these projects as are considered 
viable. It is desirable that the Ministry of Finance evolves special stipulations and norms for 
facilitating speedy implementation of projects with high employment generating and output­
boosting potential, in particular in the designated backward areas. 
Action Taken 
While assigning yearly targets to the States/UTs, instructions have been given that time­
bound measures should be taken for examinations, allocations and release of funds to the 
PMR Y beneficiaries having viable projects. 
In the Banking Division's meetings held in Delhi and Bombay, suggestions have been 
given for the timely disbursement of loan bv the bankers to the PMR Y beneficiaries. In the 
all India Workshop on PMRY held on lOth November, 1995 the progress of PMRY was 
reviewed, the States and banks were requested to see that eligible cases are disbursed within 
a month or two. 
The senior officers from SIDO have been deployed to each State/UT as Nodal Officers 
for follow-up -Of PMRY cases. On the basis of the feed back given by the nodal officers, 
action is being taken for better implementation and timely disbursement of loan to the 
PMR Y beneficiaries. 

5 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes that the Ministry of 
Industry are already taking action in terms of the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee, however, is unhappy to note that against the target of 7 lakh youths under 
PMRY Scheme for the 8th Plan period only 5,43,317 youths could be provided loan as on 
the 31st March, 1997. The number of youths to whom the loan was sanctioned was 8,18,374. 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that difference between number of loans sanctioned 
and disbursed is very high. In the opinion of the Sub-Committee, the targets should be fixed 
in terms of the number of loans disbursed to enable the Government to have a more realistic 
view of the implementation of the scheme. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Planning of Industrial Development 
In order to .Provide an integrated approach for the industrial development, blueprints of 
recommendations should be vetted jointly by all agencies concerned for, say, for a five year 
period. Such blueprints should be worked out at all levels of administration. The blueprints at 
the national level should be dovetailed into those for the States and pa11chayats. 
Action Taken 
The Planning Commission, the State Governments and the Union Territory 
Administrations have been apprised of this recommendation, who would address themselves, 
to this recommendution. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the Committee has not been informed of 
the action taken either by the Planning Commission or by State Governments on the 
Committee's recommendations. The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's 
recommendation and it desires that the Ministry of Industry should intimate to the 
Committee the action taken on the recommendation, urgently. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
Development of North-Eastern States 
The North-Eastern States have had been long neglected. It is necessary that a time-bound 
programme is drawn up for economic development of this region, with emphasis on the 
development of basic infrastructures such as rail links, roads, air services, power and water. 
Action Taken 
The Union Ministries concerned with infrastructures viz. Ministries of Railways, Surface 
Transport, Civil Aviation, Power and Water Resources have been apprised with this 
recommendation and would address themselves to this recommendation on their respective 
spheres. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs have appointed five working groups from the year 1994 onwards for the 
purpose of assessing the infrastructural development requirements of the roads and civil 

6 
aviation sectors in the North-Eastern region. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government 
would pay due attention towards the recommendations of these working groups and take 
necessary steps urgently for setting up of basic infrastructural facilities in this region. 
8. RECOMMENDATION 
Transport and Tax subsidies 
Transport and tax subsidies to backward areas and the North-Eastern region should 
continue, care should also be taken that transport subsidies are also paid in time and adjusted 
upwards when considered appropriate. 
Action Taken 
The Union Ministry of Finance and the State Governments have been apprised of this 
recommendation and would address themselves to this recommendation in their respective 
spheres. In so far as Deptt. of Industrial Policy & Promotion, it has already extended the 
Transport Subsidy Scheme which was applicable to the North-Eastern region, upto 
31.3.2000. The Deptt. of IP&P has also made higher plan outlays and adjusted them 
upwards, under this Scheme. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion has 
extended the Transport Subsidy Scheme upto 31st March, 2000 and the Department of IP&P 
has also made higher plan outlays and adjusted them upwards under this Scheme. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Government would keep in view the Committee's 
recommendation regarding continuance of tax subsidies in backward areas including the 
North-Eastern region. 
9. RECOMMENDATION 
Promotion of SSI units In Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
The Ministry of lndustr:y should take special time-bound measures for development and 
promotion of small scale units In the island territories of the country, namely, Andaman and 
Nlcobar Islands; the transport subsidy prevalent here should continue without restrictions; the 
port facilities in the Islands must also be Improved. 
Action Taken 
The Development Commissioner, SSI, which has a regional office in the Island territory 
of Andaman & Nicobar for development of small units have been apprised, and are seized 
of this recommendation. Similar action has also been taken with the Ministry of Surface 
Transport. In respect of subsidy on transport, the Department of Industrial Policy & 
Promotion has extended the transport subsidy upto 31.3.2000. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee has noted additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It is, however, unhappy to note 
the fact that the Andaman & Nicobar administration have been able to utilise only about 
half of the out-lay under the Village and Small Industries Scheme in the year 1995-96. The 
outlay for subsequently year on this account stands reduced by about 30%. The Sub­
Committee recommends that Government should give special emphasis 
on the industrial development in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands and the developmental 

7 
schemes etc. drawn up for these areas should be strictly implemented within the prescribed 
time-frame. 
The Sub-Committee notes with constraint that while the Ministry approves plan, 
schemes and pattern of assistance thereunder, but does not oversee that the funds are 
actually utilised. If there are any difficulties in utilisation of funds, it ought to be the 
responsibility of the Ministry that these are removed/solved wi,,;, speed and funds are 
utilised in full. 
10. RECOMMENDATION 
Prerogatives of State Governments under Articles 268 and 269 
The Union Government should sympathetically consider representations about the 
desirab~lity of granting certain prerogatives to the State Governments in terms of Articles 268 
and 269 of the Constitution so larger funds become available for industrial growth on the 
initiative of State Government. 
Action Taken 
The Union Finance Ministry has been apprised of the recommendation and would 
address themselves to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee regrets to note that there has been no feed back to the Committee 
on its recommendation regarding grant of certain prerogatives to the State Governments 
under Articles 268 & 269 of the Constitution. The Sub-Committee reiterates the 
Committee's recommendation and desires that the Committee be informed of ·the action 
taken on the recommendation, urgently. 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
Criteria for declaring a State industrially backward 
Requests from State Governments for declaration their States as industrially backward 
should be considered sympathetically, and the criteria for declaring a State industrially 
backward should be reviewed from time to time so as to take into account shifting realities. 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission have been apprised of this 
recommendation and would address themselves to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-I). It notes that the criteria for 
identifying the industrially backward States/Districts was reviewed by a Working Group in 
the year 1968 and thereafter by Study Groups constituted in May, 1994 under the 
Chairmanship of Shri M.K. Kow. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would review 
the criteria more regularly and frequently and consider the requests of the State 
Governments sympathetically. 

8 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
Technical and Vocational Training Institutions in Backward Areas 
All backward areas should be blanketed by technical and vocational training institutions 
and polytechnics so as to ensure supply of skilled labour when the development process 
catches on. 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Human Resource Development have been apprised of this recommendation 
and would address themselves to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes that the Ministry of 
HRD are taking necessary action on the Committee's recommendation. 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
Role of Pa11chayats in Industrial Growth 
District Pa11chayats should play much greater role than at present for planning industrial 
growth. Special cells should be set up in the district pa11chayats and arrangements made to 
provide technical advice of the appropriate kind with such cells. 
Action Taken 
The State Governments/UT Administrations have been apprised of this 
recommendation and would address themselves to it. The recommendation has also been 
brought to the notice of the Ministry of Rural Development which would also address itself 
to this recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations on the Comm:~tee's 
recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee'<i recommendation regarding 
increased role of District Panchayats in planning industrial growth and setting up of Special 
cell therein. 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Funds for Local Level Projects 
The Union and State Governments should earmark funds to ensure that projects 
formulated at the local level on the basis of local resources are not allowed to die out. 
Action Taken 
The State Governments/UT Administrations and the Planning Commission have been 
apprised of this recommendation and would address themselves to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is-unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
on the Committee's recommendation. The recommendation of the Committee is reiter:tted. 

9 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
Vesting of Executive Powers in Panchayats 
Panchayat institutions should be vested with executive and monitoring powers for 
implementing programmr:s aimed at eradicating industrial backwardness. The responsibility 
for preparing blueprints of growth at the local level and its subsequent implementation should 
rest with the panchayats. 
Action Taken 
The Union Ministry of Rural Development has been apprised of this recommendation 
which would address itself to it. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Rural Development on the Committee's recommendation. The 
recommendation of the Committee is reiterated. 
16. RECOMMENDATION 
Constitution of joint decision making body for Railway Development 
The Ministries of Industry and Railways should constitute a joint decision-making body 
alongwith the Planning Commission to decide on the aggregate sum to be set aside for railway 
development m the country's backward regions over a five year period, indicate its region­
wise break-down and settle the sequence according to which the projects are to be executed. 
Action Taken 
The Union Ministries of Railways and Planning Commission have been apprised of this 
recommendation. As the Union Ministry of Industry is also associated with the deliberation 
of the Working Group, constituted by the Planning Commission and they would also address 
themselves to this recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the concerned Ministries on the Committee's recommendation regarding Railway 
Development in the Country's backward regions. The recommendation of the Committee is 
reiterated. 
17. RECOMMENDATION 
Literacy programme in areas of retarded growth 
In order to cut through industrial backwardness, massive literacy programme should be 
launched in the areas of retarded growth. 
Action Taken 
The Union Ministry of Human Resource Development has been apprised of this 
recommendation and would address themselves to it. 
4535/ RS I F-3·A 

10 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes that the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development are taking necessary action on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
18. RECOMMENDATION 
Women's participation in industrial development 
Women should be associated in the on-going process of industrial and economic 
development in the backward regions. The administration both at the Union and State levels 
must ensure that statutory minimum wages for women in the specified industries are not only 
announced but also duly implemented. 
Action Taken 
Department of Women and Child Development and Ministry of Labour in the Union 
Government have been apprised of this recommendation and would address themselves to 
this recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been informed of the action 
taken by the concerned Ministries on the Committee's recommendation regarding association 
of women in the process of industrial and economic development in the backward regions. 
The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
19. RECOMMENDATION 
Housing and security arrangements for women workers 
The housing and security arrangements for migrant women workers need to be carefully 
monitored and superintended and working hours for women should be strictly regulated and 
adhered to. 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Labour, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been informed of the action 
taken by the Ministry of Labour on the Committee's recommendation regarding housing and 
security arrangements for migrant women workers. 
20. RECOMMENDATION 
Setting up of co-operative institutions by women entrepreneurs 
Women entrepreneurs, especially in the relatively backward regions, should be 
encouraged to set up co-operative institutions and help may be provided to them to obtain 
both financial accommodation and entrepreneurial advice from financial agencies including 
the NABARD, the IDBI and other financial institutions. 

11 
Action Taken 
Office of the DC(SSI) through the field officers of Small Industries Service Institute, 
located in each and every State are conducting entrepreneurship Development Programmes 
for the promotion and development of small scale enterprises. Lot of importance have been 
attached to conduct these programmes in relatively backward regions so that the benefits are 
spread for better economic development of the country. In additon to conducting the 
entrepreneurship development programme for educated and unemployed youth wherein 
women entrepreneurs are also admitted in the training programme, exclusive programme for 
women entrepreneurs are also organised. During the year 1995-96, 40 such exclusive 
programmes have been conducted to benefit 1200 women entrepreneurs. 
They are also encouraged to set up their enterprises under Co-operative sector so that 
they have the benefit of better size of operation in terms of production and marketing. 
The women entrepreneurs after being trained in such programmes are also guided in 
availing financial assistance/loans from nationalised banks and other financial institutions. 
SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (SIDBI)-has been operating 
special schemes of assistance to women entrepreneurs covering, besides term loan assistance 
on liberal terms, soft seed capital assistance, EDP training project consultancy support and 
escort services. Further, assistance by way of loans and or grant is also extended to 
voluntary agencies engaged in upliftment of women. The special schemes of SIDBI are 
(i) Refinance Scheme for Women Entrepreneurs; (ii) Mahila Udyam Nidhi Scheme; 
(iii) Mahila Vikas Nidhi; and (iv) Savings-cum-Credit Scheme for informal banking. 
(i) REFINANCE SCHEME FOR WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS 
The scheme for women entrepreneurs has been formulated with the twin objectives of 
(i) providing training and extension services support to women entrepreneurs through a 
comprehensive package suited to their skill and socio-economic status and (ii) extending 
financial assistance on liberal terms to enable them in set up industrial units in the Small 
Scale Sector. 
(ii) MAHILA UDYAM NIDHI (MUN) SCHEME 
The objectives of the MUN scheme is to provide soft loan (quasi-equity) assistance to 
women entrepreneurs. The scheme till recently operated through the agency of SFCsltwin­
function SID has since been extended to all public and private sector banks as also 
scheduled urban co-operative banks which are eligible for direct refinance assistance from 
SIDBI with a view to further enlarging the reach and covering as many units as possible 
under the scheme. Assistance out of MUN is provided to women entrepreneurs to meet the 
gap in the equity for setting up new industrial projects in Small Scale Sector. 
(iii) MAHILA VIKAS NIDHI (MVN) SCHEME 
While small industrial ventures of individual women entrepreneurs are supported out of 
MUN, a special development fund called Mahila Vikas Nidhi (MVN) was created to extend 
support to specific proposals· for income generating programmes of accredited voluntary 
organisations with strong support amongst poor at the grassroot level and proven track 
record of performance in. managing economic programmes. The basic objectives of this 
programmes is to bring about economic upliftment of women, especially the poor, by 
providing them avenues for taking up self/wage employment activities in the industrial 
sphere. Activities such as setting up of Training-cum-Production Centres, skill upgradation 
programmes, extension of marketing assistance and such other income generating pursuits as 

12 
' would improve the economic status of women are eligible for support under MVN. 
Assistance by way of grant and/or loan is provided out of the fund to accredited voluntary 
organisations for taking up activities which would ensure that the needy women are provided 
with training and employment opportunities. 
(iv) SAVING-CUM-CREDIT SCHEME ON INFORMAL BANKING 
Recognising the fact that the regular banking channel has its own constraints in 
extending small credit to the poor women, the bank has taken the initiative for encouraging 
informal lending channels for meeting such credit requirements. The informal channel 
envisages support to well managed NGOs to on lend to the rural women for setting up th~r 
own micro enterprises. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee no.tes that the Government are seized of the matter and they are 
encouraging women entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee however, would like Government to 
give more impetus to its activities/programmes. 
21. RECOMMENDATION 
Research and developmental activities in SSI sector 
The official encouragement and assistance should be provided to research and 
developmental activities aimed specifically for the traditional and Small Scale Sector. 
Appropriate measures may also be taken for wider dissemination of results of research 
undertaken by scientific and technological agencies under the direct auspices of the Council of 
the Scientific and Industrial Research and other such institutions so that the Small Scale 
Sector could directly benefit. 
Action Taken 
With a view to develop and disseminate information on technologies suitable for 
traditional and Small Scale Sector, Small Industries Development Organisation (SIDO) has 
set up Process and Product Development Centres an other institutions in the specified 
production areas viz. Fragrance & Flavour Development Centre, Kannauj for essential oils, 
fragrance and flavours; Process & Product Development Centre, Meerut for supports goods 
and leisure time equipments; Process and Product Development Centre (PPDC), Agra (UP) 
for foundry and forging; Centre for Development of Glass Industry (CDGI), Firozabad (UP) 
for glass industry; IDEM!, Bombay for electrical" instruments and ESTC, Ramanagar (UP) 
for electronic industries. 
The focus of the activities of these Centres is to develop/scale up the processes and 
technologies, study their techno-economic viability and arrange for their transfer to small 
scale units. The Centres also conduct regular training programmes both in the production 
technologies as well as in quality control and standardisation for the benefit of existing units 
as well as the new entrepreneurs. These Centres work in close co-operation with the other 
scientific and technological organisations/agencies viz. CSIR laboratories in the relevant field 
and act as interface between R&L organisations and Small Scale Industries. Besides 
providing information about the technologies available with CSIR laboratories, SIDC 
through its headquarters as well as through its field offices also arrange discussions/dialogues 
of a particular industry group with the concerned CSIR institutions both for general 
information of the technologies available in that area of activity or in relevance to some 
specific problem viz. pollution control, waste minimisation, etc. Council of Scientific & 
Industrial Research (CSIR), National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), New Delhi and 

13 
Asia Pacific Centre for transfer of technology have formed a consortium for helping small 
scale units and they help SSI units in transfer of latest technology. 
SIDBI has also initiatives for development and transfer if technology for the benefit of 
SSI through industrial R&D organisation viz. CSIR. An MOU has been signed by SIDBI 
with CSIR in this regard to jointly offer viable technology-cum-financial package for industry 
specific programmes of SSI units. SIDBI will also consider assisting SSI units being set up 
with CSIR technologies with financial assistance including venture Capital SIDBI has also 
collaborated with Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) for setting 
up Technology Bureau for Small Entreprises {TBSE) with the objective of technology 
dissemination, finance, syndication and export promotion for Small & Medium Enterprises. 
SIDBI also gives training to various target groups for women with the objective that they 
have adequate information, motivation and guidance in setting up their own enterprises. 
With a view to bringing the technologies developed by national level labs to the 
entrepreneurs specific skill upgradation programmes are also being conducted through them. 
Agencies like Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Central Institute of Plastic 
Engineering and Technology, Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, National 
Metallurgical Laboratory, National botanical Research Institute, etc. have been retained by 
the bank to conduct programmes. The bank is also encouraging these labs in extension of 
their technologies to small and tiny industrial units. A compendium of hi-tech SSI prdjects 
based on technologies developed by NRDC. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry in 
response to the Committee's recommendation. 

SUB-COMMITTEE-I 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-I 

1. REC0!\1!\IENDA TION 
Simplification of labour laws 
The Industry Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, was critical of the present labour 
laws which according to him needed to be simplified. An entrepreneur, particularly who was 
willing to set up a small unit, found the labour laws very difficult to be tackled with. He 
mentioned specifically about the Factories Act which at present was applicable to industries/ 
units employing more than ten persons. He suggested that in order to mitigate the 
difficulties of entrepreneurs and persuading them to set up industries in backward areas it 
was important that industries employing less than fifty persons should be kept out of the 
Factories Act. (Page 42) 
Action Taken 
The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Labour. Ministry of Labour is uf the 
opinion that the Factories Act stipulates minimum standards for safety, health and welfare of 
workers while at work and lays down measures to be taken to ensure protection from bodily 
harm and occupational diseases. Withdrawing the application of this Act or any measure to 
reduce its coverage would be a retrograde measure. The eligibility for getting protection in 
respect of safety and heahh requirements should not be linked with the number of 'Vorkers 
working in an establishment.- Withdrawing the safety and health protection given to· a worker 
under the Factories Act simply for the reason that a number of workers is less than a 
prescribed limit would not at all be proper. 
As· regards simplification of labour legislation, in so far as it relates to reducing the · 
number of returns and registers to be maintained by the concerned units, Labour Ministry is 
in full agreement with the view that such simplification needs to be brought about. On its 
part the Ministry has taken appropriate steps in this regard such as enacting the ''Exemption 
from furnishing returns and maintaining register by certain establishment Act-1998'. 
However, the Ministry does not agree with the proposed need for separate legislation 
for small scale entrepreneurs as this wiii disturb the uniformity in the law on safety and 
health of workers in the manufacturing sector presently prevalent throughout the country; 
This will not be conducive to the safety and well-being of workers. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Labour is in agreement 
with the recominendation of the Committee regarding simplification of the Labour Laws. 
The Sub-Committee hopes that such simplification would mitigate the difficulties of 
entrepreneurs.-. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
Environmental clearances 
Certain environmental clearance requirements were also coming on the way- of dispersal 
of industries. Entrepreneurs interested in setting up industries in backward or far off areas 
find it extremely difficult to get green signal as they had to pass through many agencies. The 
Central Government should give clear out instructions/guidelines on pollution issue. The 
Ministry _of Environment should review its policy to delegate powers in setting up of 
industries. (Page 42) ~ 
~535 IRS I F--1-Aa 17 

18 
Actioa Taken 
Environmental clearance procedure for SSis bas been. rationalised and·. ·simplified. 
Except for 17 categories of heavily polluting industries, a mere acknowledgement of the 
application by the State Pollution Control Board would be sufficient for the purpose. 
Ministry of Environment and Forests, in consultation with the Central Pollution Control 
Board is working out to bring out. the list of Small Scale •ndustries which could be exempted 
from the consent procedure. However, the recommendation has been referred to Secretary, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Wildlife for examination and necessazy action. 
eo-entstObsenatioas 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Government have rationalised and simplified the 
environmental clearance procedure for SSis. It hopes that its good effect would be felt by 
entrepreneurs, interested in ~tting up new industries. 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
Slmplifkatioa ol labour laws and environmental ~ 
The Sub-Committee also feels that the Government should appreciate the pos!tive 
suaestions put forth by the State Government of Maharashtra with regard to simplification 
of labour JCpslation and aced for separate legislation for small scale entrepreneurs. The Sub­
Committee also feels that the sugestions reprcling the need for clear cut guidelines by the 
~nt Ministry oa pollution and also the need for decontrol of non core sector are 
~ examinina. 11lis would certaiDJy strengthen the single window system for industries. 
~43) 
Actlt• Takea Jtepert 
(a) Ministry of Environment, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendations. 
(b) 1be views of the Ministry of Labour who were addressed in regard to the suggestion 
fOr • pJifieltiollo-of labour legislation and the need for separate legislation for small scale 
- -eatrepreneurs are as follows:-
'"The lactories Act stipulates minimum standards for safety, health and welfare of 
workers while at work and lays down measures to be taken to ensure protection from 
bodily harm and occupational diseases. With(irawing the application of this Act or 
any measure to reduce its coverage would be a retrograde measure. The eligibility or 
aetting protectiOn in respect of safety and health requirements should not be linked 
with the number of workers working in an establishment. Withdrawing the safety and 
health protection pven to a worker under the Factories Act simply for the reason 
that a number of workers is less than a prescribed limit would not at all be proper. 
As regards simplifiCBtion of labour legislation, in so far as it relates to reducing the 
number of returns and registers to be maintained by the concerned units, this 
Ministry is in full agreement with the view that such simplification needs to be 
brought about •. On its part, this Ministry has taken appropriate steps in this regard 
such as enacting the 'Exemption from furnishing returns and maintaining registers by 
certain establishments Act-1988' However, we do not agree with the proposed need 
for separate legislation for small scale entrepreneurs as this will disturb the 
uniformity in the law on safety and health of workers in the manufacturing sector 
4535 IRS I F-4-B 

19 
presently prevalent throughout the country. This will DDt be conducive to the safety 
and well-beinJ of workers." 
Comments/Observatloat 
The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction that Government are in agreement with the 
Committee's recommendation regarding the simplification of Labour Laws. Tlae Sub­
Committee also notes the view point of Ministry of Labour on the Committee's 
recommendation regarding separate legislation for small scale entrepreneurs. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
New law for protectioa of small ·scale entrepreaeun 
The Government should consider enacting new legislation for the protection of small 
scale . .entrepreneur who was under pressure from different directions. (Page 43) 
Action Taken 
'fl.lere already exists a number of provisions under IDR Act like ll(b) and 29(b) 
concerning Definition of SSI and Reservation Policy for reserved items for exclusive 
manufacture in Small Scale Sector. There also exists an Act namely 'The Interest on 
Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993' which 
protects to a large extent the interest of small scale entrepreneurs. There is no proposal to 
enact new legislation for the protection of small scale entrepreneurs. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that there are several enactments including 'The Interest on 
Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993' which 
protect to a large extent the interests of small scale entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee 
further notes that certain amendments in this Act are under consideration in order to make 
it more meaningful. The Sub-Committee hopes that these amendments would be fmalised 
expeditiously. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
Decline in production in SSI sector 
The Secretary mentioned that production of items reserved for SSI sector declined after 
reservation of certain items. He said that the experience indicates that subsidy beyond a 
point was not a sustainable step. (Page 43) 
Action Taken 
As per second All India Census of Registered Small Scale Industries, small scale sector 
was producing about 7500 items out of which only 836 items are reserved· for exclusive 
manufacture in SSI sector. Reserved items which are 11.3% of total items produced in Small 
Scale Sector account for 36% of SSI working units and 28.3% of the production. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry in 
response to the Committee's recommendation. 

20 
SA. RECOMMENDATION 
De-controlling of non-core sector 
Secretary, Government of Maharashtra also emphasised that non-core sector should be 
de-controlled which otherwise had become a den of corrupt practices. According (o him, 
Coal Control Order should be dispensed with., (Page 43) 
Action Taken 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion have noted the suggestion rega'rcfihg de-
controlling the non-core· sector. .· ·.:.'~.' 
The issue of dispensing with the Coal Control Order has been referred to :Ministry of 
Coal. 
~ ... -· ' 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Industry has -~im.piy 
1
noted 
the Committee's recommendation regarding de-control of non-core sector and have not spelt 
out the steps taken by them in pursuance thereof. The Sub-Committee further notes with 
regret that it has not been apprised of the action taken by the Ministry of Coal on its 
recommendation to dispense with the Coal Control Order despite reminder from the 
Mipistry of Industry. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Reorientation of SSI sector 
Small Scale Sector needed to be totally re-oriented as the speed of decision making was 
to slow for this sector which was producing 40% of the total turnover of the country with 
only 11% credit available. It would also be desirable to have ·separate banks for industrial 
financing. (P,age 43) 
Action Taken 
Reserve Bank has issued detailed guidelines to commercial banks on various aspects of 
credit to SSI sector. Banks have been instructed to adhere to the time limit for disposal of 
loan applications. They have been advised that all loan applications upto a credit limit of 
Rs. 25,000/-should be disposed of within 2 weeks while those for over R-s. 25.000/-within 8 
to 9 weeks and . that requests for increase in limits should be considered expeditiously and 
decisions should be taken promptly. A sample study carried out by Reserve Bank in 
October, 1994, in 14 States (including Maharashtra) revealed that about 79% of the loan 
. applications were disposed of within the prescribed time frame. In respect of delayed cases, 
'main reasons were· non-compliance of formalities and non-submission of required 
documents/information. The outstanding credit from the Public Sector Banks to SSI sector is 
.around 16% of the Net Bank Credit. 
With regard to the observation that it would be desirable to have separate banks for 
industrial financing, it may be noted that there are 6 All India Development Financial 
Institutions (including SIDBI) as of now to take care of the long term industrial financing 
needs of industri~s.. and a large number of commercial banks/branches taking care of 
working capital reqUirements. With regard to meeting the needs of the SSis in particular, 
SIDBI was set t1p by an Act of Parliament for promotion, financing and development of 
industries in the small scale sector and commenced its operations six years ago on April 2, 
1990. Over the six years, assistance from SIDBI to the small scale sector has been growing 

21 
considerably. Cumulative sanctions by SIDBI have been Rs. 22,272 crores and 
di1-;bursements of Rs. 16,864 crores, between 1990-91 and 1995-96. Besides, SIDBI as the 
apex financial institution for SSis at the national level, regional development banks such as 
SFCs, SIDCs etc. are also functioning at the State level to cater to the needs of SSI sector at 
large. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee nott:s that financial institutions like SIDBI exist for the 
development of Small Scale Sector and RBI is also concerned over disbursal of credit to this 
sector, but, it feels that there is much scope for improvement in this behalf. The Small Scale 
Sector still seriously complaints about lack of adequate a11d timely finance. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
Pl\1RY 
As regards PMR Y, the banks were not interested in more cases~ The Secretary wanted 
that banks should scrutinise double cases than what had been fixed as the target so that the 
target of disbursement was achieved. (Page 43) 
. : 1 .Action Taken 
I.. 
Liaison is maintained with banks to see that PMRY is implemented effectively. With 
regard to sponsoring by DIC, task force to banks till 1995-96, States had been asked to 
sponsor applications equal to double their targets to the banks. This, however, led t0 higher 
,.,rejection by banks. In view of improved scrutiny by the DIC task forces for the current year~ .­
States/UTs have been asked to sponsor applications equal to one and half of their targets 
for the current year so that while rejections are limited, banks do get an adequate number of 
applications to scrutinise and sanction. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the States/Union Territories have been asked to sponsor 
applications equal to one half of the targets so that the rejections are limited and the Banks 
also get fair number of applications for scrutiny and sanction. 
8. RECOMMENDATION 
Processing of applications for new indu'stries 
Tbe representatives of Trade and Industry in Maharashtra were critical of the delay in 
the present procedure of processing applications. They wanted that the procedure should be 
reviewed and efforts should be made. to arrange· applications for clearance from different 
agencies for setting up industries, particularly in backward areas. They suggested that as far 
as possible all projects shotild be certified by private agencies. (Page 45) 
The Sub-Committee endorses the views of the representatives about the need for 
development of infrastructure and feels tbafthe Government should take the opportunity of 
utilising their ·experience in the field. The Sub-Committee recommends that the Government 
should also review the procedural issues for processing applications and formulate new 
guidelines tuned to the requirement of the industry. . 
Action Taken 
Government of Mah,arashtra, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 

22 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes with regret that it has not been apprised of the action being 
taken by Government of Maharashtra on the Committee's recommendation. 
9. RECOMMENDATION 
State ot affairs ia MSTC and Manganese Ore India Limited 
On t)te basis of evidence of th• management and the papers/documents submitted 
before it ~e Sub-Committee feels that though it would be difficult to extend full monopoly 
to the Metal Scrap Trading Corporatio~ in the field of importing scrap but Government may 
still help <Jut MSTC by rationalising tht duty structure for raw materials and Semis to· enable 
it to compete with private sector. tt should also be well within the consideration of 
Governme~t of India to expedite cleatance of the diversification proposal of the company. 
Ministry ot Railways and Defence may also ~ persuaded to prefer MSTC in respect of 
disposal of their scrap. (Page 45) 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the pedormance of Manganese Ore India Limited irt 
achieving the production targets in respect of both manganese ore and EMD. The 
Committee is equally happy that the company has equipped itself to meet the chalienges 
from private sector and fully geared t6 the tune of liberalised economy. The Sub-Committee 
would, however, urge upon the Government to accommodate the suggestions of the 
management. regarding amendment in mining laws or regulations so that the company could 
perform better in the inteest of the natien. (Page 51) 
Action Takeil 
Ministry. of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendations. 
Comments/OQ)servations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation regarding MSTC and MOIL. 
10. RECOMMENDATION 
Power S~ituation in Goa 
The Sub-Committee had a meeting with Goa Mineral Ore Exporters Association and 
have made the following rccommendations:-
On the basis of evidence the SuJ>-Committee feels that as in other States power crunch 
has also adversely affected the pred~inant mining industry in Goa. Since Goa is declared 
as industrially backward State the power problem needs immediate attention of the State 
Government for its redressal. The Sub-Committee obeserves that it should also be well 
within Union Government consideration .to examine the possibility of permission for 
blending of low grade reject of Bellari Hospet to improve the quality 6 of ore. (Page 54) 
Comments of Ministry of Power 
The requirement of Goa is fully met from the power supply from Central Sector in the 
Western Region and also f~om Southern Region although it does not draw its full share. 
There are no statutory power cuts/restrictions in Goa. There is no direct transmission line 
from these projects. The shares are delivered by displacement from neighbouring systems 
through inter-state lines. The· shares from Central Sector stations located in Western Region 

23 
are being received over Kolhapur-Ponda 220 KV D/C line and Negjhari-Ponda 220 KV D/C 
from Karnataka system. A 400 KV sub-stati(Jl at Kolhapur is under constr"ction as State 
sector project by MSEB. Completion of this sub-station would improve ~"'wer supply 
position to Goa from Western region. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the 400 KWs sub-station which is under construction at 
Kolhapur would be commissioned soon so that t\te power supply position of Ooa improves 
further. 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
Power crunch being faced by mining industry in Goa 
On the basis of evidence the Sub-Committee feels that as in other States power crunch 
has also adversely affected the predominant. mining industry in Goa. Since Goa is declared 
as industrially backward State the power problem needs immediate att~ntion of the · State 
Government for its redressal. The Sub-Committee observes that it should also be well within 
Union Governments consideration to examine the possibility of permission for blending of 
low gtade reject of Bellari Hospet to improve the quality of ore. (P~,tge 54) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Mines and Government of Goa who are concerned with 
the subject, have been addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up actio~ on the 
above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that action is being taken to improve the po"' ~. situaUon in 
Goa. The Sub-Committee is, however, unhappy to note that it has not been appri~d of the 
action taken by the Ministry of Mines on the Committee's recommendation regarding 
blending of low grade reject of Bellari Hospet to improve the quality of ore. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
Time limit for granting loans 
The granting of limits in principle should be done in full recognition of the 
entrepreneurs optimism and within a week's time. A limit for bills arid book debts should be 
extended without hesitation as the unit can utilise these limits only on actual terformance. 
(Page 55) 
Action Taken 
Reserve Bank has issued detaile.d guidelines to Commercial Banks on various aspects of 
finance of SSI sector. Regarding time limit banks have been advised by RBI that all loan 
applications up to a credit limit of Rs. 25,000/-should be disposed of within 2 weeks while 
those for over Rs. 25 ,000/-should be disposed of within 8 to 9 weeks. 
Regarding limit to be sanctioned against bills and book debts, Reserve Bank of India is 
of the opinion that it should be left to the commercial judgement of Banks. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that RBI has issued detailed guidelines reg? ~ding speedy 
disposal of loan applications. It hopes that RBI would strictly monitor the implementation of 
its guidelines. 

.~· .. 
24 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
Arrest of sickness at inception stage 
It should be made compulsory on the part of the bank to recognise sickness in a unit by 
coordinating with the term lending institution on a quarterly basis. Whenever the unit 
defaults for two successive quarters by way of interst, repayment of irregularity to either of 
them, it should be recognised as the onset of sickness and a rehabilitation or a call up plan 
should be drawn up to be effective within six months from the date. (Page 55) 
Action Taken 
At the instance of Government of India, RBI had constituted a Committee under the 
chairmanship of the then Deputy Governor of RBI for examining the issue of adequate and 
timely credit to SSis. The issue of the sickness was also looked into by the Coinmittee. The 
Committee had given several recommendations for rehabilitation of sick SSI units such as 
modification in the definition of sick SSI unit, incipient sickness, viability norms and the 
reliefs· and concessions from banks and financial ·institutions for implementation of 
rehabilitation for potentially viable sick units. For incipient sickness, the Committee 
recommended that unit showing signs of incipient sickness should be kept under close watch 
and, whenever necessary, additional finance may be provided if such a course is warranted 
Units should be classified as sick once they satisfy the definition of sickness, as stipulated 
and viability study and nursing programmes should be taken up within the prescribed time 
frame. 
The recommendations of Nayak Committee have been accepted by RBI and guidelines 
have been issued to banks including steps to be taken by banks to arrest sickness among SSI 
units at the incipient stage itself. Banks have also been advised by Reserve Bank of India 
vide their circular dated 3.7.1993 that viability studies and nursing programmes should be 
taken up within three months and six months, respectively from the identifications of the 
units as sick. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes with satisfaction that guidelines have been issued to the 
Banks to arrest sickness among SSI units at the inception stage itself. The Sub-Committee 
hopes that RBI would ensure strict compliance of the guidelines. 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Dysfunction of SLIIC Committee 
As regards the SLIIC Committee dysfunction, concerned circular of the Hon'ble 
Minister for Industries Mr. Karunakaran, should be immediately implemented. (Page 55) 
Action Taken 
The State Governments were advised to pay special attention to the problems of 
sickness in the SSI sector and to ensure participation in the forum of SLIIC in the right 
earnest so that it emerges as an effective forum to arrest incipient sickness. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 

25 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
Action against large scale industries 
The law enacted by Parliament providing for action against the large scale industries for 
utilising credit from small scale industries beyond sixty days needed to be amended because the 
small scale industrialist was afraid to complain. The large scale industry was required by law to: 
(i) Classify its· suppliers into small & large units; 
(ii) Certify that all its supplies in small scale sector were paid within sixty days of credit 
period. 
Inability to produce the above duly classified and certified suppliers should lead to 
prosecution. (Page·· 55) 
Action Taken 
In order to safeguard the payments due to SSI units against the supply of goods and services 
to the buyers there exists an Act. "The Interest on Delayed Payment to Small Scale & Ancillary 
Undertakings Act, 1993" according to which a buyer is required to make payments on or before 
the date agreed upon between him and the supplier or within a period 
of 30 days from the date of acceptance of services and goods. Wherein, if the buyer fails 
to make payment in time, he is liable to pay interest to the supplier on the amount from the 
appointed date or as the case may be at such rate which is 5% points above the floor rates for 
comparable lending. The buyer is also required to specify the amount due together with the 
interest in his annual statement of accounts as remains unpaid to any supplier at the end of each 
accounting year. Moreover, in accordance with the provision of the cited Act, amount of 
interest payable/paid, shall not, for the purpose of computation of income tax under the 
Income Tax Act, 1961, be allowed for deduction. 
There are suggestions (rom different quarters to make the Act more meaningful by affecting 
certain amendments like constitution of District level Tribunals, extending the coverage of the 
Act to NSIC & SSIDCs who are. marketing the products of SSI units. These suggestions are 
under consideration. 
Comments I Observations 
h 
The Sub-Committee notes that there is a central legislation to safeguard the payment of 
dues to the SSI units and certain amendments therein are under consideration of Government 
so as to make it more meaningful. The Sub-Committee recommends that Government should 
finalise the amendments in the said Act expeditiously. 
· 16. RECOMMENDATION 
Enhancement of excise exemption limit 
Enhancing excise exemption limit to small scale industry to Rs. 75 lakhs. (Page 55) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Industry has been recommending to Ministry of Finance for the last 3-4 years to 
4535/ RS/F--5-A 

26 
enhance the exemption limit for central excise from Rs. 30 lakbs to Rs. 50 lakhs, but the· 
same have not been accepted by Ministry of Finance because: 
(i) only 2% of the 25 lakh SSI units .are registered with Central Excise; 
(ii) 90% of the SSI units have turnover less than Rs. 30 lakhs and all such units are 
exempted from excise duty; 
(iii) loss of excise revenue of large magnitude cannot be affOrded when there is a big 
budget deficit. 
Co~~~a~ents I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that in the budget 1997-98 the SSI Exemption Scheme has 
been simplified and concessionallimit of excise has been raised from Rs. 75 lakbs toRs. 100 
lakhs turnover. The Sub-Committee further notes that the MODVAT facility has been made 
available to SSI units alongwith concession excise duty in the specified manner. 
17. RECOMMENDATION 
IDeome Tax .exemption ·to SSI units 
IJicome Tax exeraption to small scale industry UDits in Goa upto ten years from the 
dsting period of five years. (Paae 55) 
Adllll T*-
ln 1993-94 Budpt, the Finance MiDiltet 8ltllOUJlCIHI Ave Year Tax Holiday for new . 
industrial undertakinp conunencinc dicit producdoa ill States specified in the Eighth 
Schedule of Income Tax Act. 'I'here are 16 States ol wbk:h Gdl is one. 
In 1994-95 Budaet, the Fi~ Miailter ........... Chat with a view to providing fiscal 
support for industrialisation of the industrially backw-' -..nets in the country, Five Year 
Tax Holiday UDder ~ 80 lA wiD also be av...._ to new industrial undertakings 
located in other backwan:l districts nodfied by '" Ceatrll Government on the basis of the 
guidelines to be prescribed. The Five Year Tax Holiday wiU be available to undertakings 
which begin productioa after 1.10.94 but before 31.).1999. 
The above amen~nt has takei'J effect from ).4.1995 and will accordingly apply in 
relation to Assessment yeir 1995-96 ud subsequent years. 
In the Budpt 1995-96, a sub-clause (d) has beera illserted in clause (iv) of sub-section 
(2) by Finance Act 1995 to be applicable w.o.(. 1.4.1996 on those small scale industrial 
~altinp which beJin to manufacture or proc1uces adicles or things or to operate its cold 
storap plant at any time durinc the period becinnina on the 1st day of April, 1995 and 
~ ending the 31st day of March, 1995. An amount of 2S,.o of the porfits and ·gains derived 
from such industrial undertakings will be allowed as deduction for 10 years. Further~ a sub­
section 4A has been inserted in Finance Act, 1996 to be applicable w.e.f. 1.4.1996 givinJ 
Five Year Tax Holiday to enterprise carrying on the business of developing, maintaining, 
operating and infrastructure facility. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes. the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry in 
resp<>nse to the Committee's recommendations. · 
4535/RS/F-5-8 

SUB-COMMITTEE-II 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-II ., 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

29 
1. RECOMMENDATION 
Indian Iron & Steel Co., Burnpur 
The company submitted no less than 12 proposals but there is no response from the 
Government. The production cost of hot metal at the plant is one of the lowest in the 
country 'but the cost jumps up drastically in the steel making stage due to outdated 
technology and old plant equipments. This cost could be reduced by almost Rs. 200<Y~ per 
tonne by introducing new technology. The SAIL has not given free hand to modernise 
liSCO. The representatives stressed that liSCO can earn profit and repeat history of its 
golden era by its modernisation within the framework of SAIL. The most of mills are out­
dated and need replacement or modernisation. The company can earn a good amount of 
foreign exchange after modernisation as the company will be able to stand in the 
international competitive market. The Committee was informed that due to the fear of 
closure, the work culture has gone up. 'The workers are ready to help and sacrifice for the 
cause of revial of the plant. The company needs Rs. llO<Y- crores for modernisation. etc. 
o:ver a period of five years for the sake of lakhs of people indirectly associated with the gi-ant 
organisation. (Page 61) · 
Alloy Steel Plant, Durgapur 
The plant has the best of sophisticated technological facilities for productiOH of 400 
grades of special steels, alloy steels and stainless steels. ASP is operating in a fiercely 
competitive market where the private sector producers have a slight edge. The plant needs 
modernisation, ·modification and replacement of obsolete machines. The manpower of the 
plant as an austerity measure has been reduced from 8000 plus to the level of 5000 plus. In 
the preceding years, the company was searching for customers but now the customers have 
been chasing the company. The Committee was informed that the market positiop is better 
now. The Committee was requested for immediate sanction of necessary funds for 
modernisation, modification and replacement of obsolete machines. (Page 61) · 
Salem Steel Plant 
The Salem Steel Plant is the youngest member of SAIL. It is the first SAIL plant to 
have ISO 9002 certification from Ws. TU-CERT Germany, in 1993. The sale of the plant 
has gone up from 547 tonnes in 1981-82 to 59352 in 1994-95. The company has earned a 
profit of Rs. 21.14 crores during 1994-95. (Page 61) 
The Committee is of the view that most of these units are perennially sick units with 
obsolete plant an~ machinery. These units could not be revived due to paucity of funds. 
There has been mismanagment at the top level of some of these companies. The 
modernisation and replacement of obsolete part is not done regularly. Before takeover by 
the Government these companies were making profit. The Committee is of the view thaJ the 
work culture now has changed and there is a maximum cooperation between the workers 
and the management and it has started yielding results. Towards this change in work culture, 
support and cooperation has been fortlico~!ng from all sectors-be it unions, employees, 
State and local administration, The workers have realised that their existence is linked with 
the survival of these companies. The Sub-Committee is of the view that the Government 
should make use of this change in work culture and their cooperation with the managment at 
this hour of need and sanction the necessary financial assistanc~ for the revival of these 
companies. The Government should not lose this opportunity. The Sub-Committee feels that 
the enthusiasm among the .workers for a new wg{k culture for the survival of the sick units;-

30 
particularly liSCO in Burnpur, Alloy Steel Plant, Durgapur needs to be promoted further 
and for this the Government should make all sincere efforts to the addressing of the 
problems which presently beset the workers. The Government should arrange additional 
financial resources to provide budgetary support to these units so that they become 
commercially viable and profit earning. The Committee is of the opinion that the workers at 
present are ready to fully cooperate and thi$ naturally indicates towards the possibility of 
reviving these industries provided Government is determined to help. (Page 62-63) 
It is observed by the Committee that Government orders are not given to the public 
sector companies. Moreover these companies have also to compete with private sector to get 
orders and that sometimes it so happens that for want of Government orders as in the case 
of Bum Standard, which is manufacturing wagon, these companies have suffered. The 
Committee is of the opinion that some mechanism should be devised at a high level to 
protect the public sector undertakings which are capable and the quality goods can be 
produced with certain preferential treatment for giving of orders. (Page 63) 
I 
The Committee has also noticed that the post of Chief Executive of many of the public 
sector undertakings, including Director level position have been lying vacant for months and 
these undertakings are being looked after by the Joint Secretaries of the Ministry as 
additional charge. The perception of the experts and skilled professionals and tha~ of the 
bureaucrats is always different, as a result of the growth of the companies and their 
competitiveness is being compromised. If the public sector has to be made commercially 
viable and strive towards excellence it is necessary that immediate step,~should be taken· to 
delink the bureaucracy from the professional jobs. (Page 63) 
Action Taken Report 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendations. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been informed of the action 
taken by the Ministry of Steel on the recommendation of the Committee. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
HPF Limited 
The company was making profit till 1991-92. The workers informed that due to 
mismanagement at the top, the company has· gone sick. The company is having fully 
integrated black and white technology. The obsolete technology is to be changed. The 
current assets of the company are less than the liability. The multinationals have entered 
into the market. This has affected the company's prospects. The losses of the company as on 
31.3.1995 are to the tune of Rs. 218 crores. The company is annually Iossing 8.10 crores. 
The company has already reduced the manpower from 4000 to 3100. The company resorted 
to diversification without the approval of the Central Government·. This has resulted sickness 
in the Company. The company . could not operate to the required level because of lack of 
finances. For o.peninl' of LC, the company has to provide 100% margin money. The 
Committee was requested to help for the release of Rs. 35 cr<;>res for the company to 
come into operation. Another Rs. 60 crores are required for lOOcyo operation of the 
company. (Page 61) , 

31 
Action Taken 
Hindustan Photo Films Mfg. Co. LTd (HPF) was incorporated in November, 1960 for 
achieving self reliance in the photosensitised products and commenced commercial 
production in 1967. Initially the company sustained losses till 1974-75. With diverst"fication 
into colour products by setting up a conversion unit in 1975, the company started earning 
profit till 1991-92 when even the past accumulat~ losses were wiped out by 1983-84. 
Company further started diversification into (1) manufacture of state-of-art technology of 
Polyester base Medical X-ray, Graphic Art and Industrial . X-ray film in collaboration with 
M Is Du Pont of USA in March 1986. Tilis project was originally approved by the 
Government in March '86 with at an estimated cost of 168.12 crores with the commissioning 
date as October '91. However, cost o~ the project was revised toRs. 290.62 crore in May '89 
an~ further revised to Rs. 534.37 crore in January '96. It is now expected to be 
commissioned by Jan. I April '97 (2) Manufacture of Magnetic Medical products in 
collaboration with Mls Magna Tontraget Productions, Berlin, Germany. This project was 
approved by the Government in July '85 at a cost of Rs. 9.25 crore. It was taken up in Nov. 
'86 and completed in May '89 at cost of Rs. 35.22 crore. The company did not seek Govt. 
approval to the excess expenditure of Rs. 25.97 crore. (3) Production of Photo dispenser 
products under technical collaboration with Mls Photo-Me International, UK. A technical 
collaboration agreement was entered into with Mls Photo-Me in Nov. '85 with the approval 
of the Government for manufacture of photo dispenser systems, photoii'phic reversal 
papers and developer chemicals. 
In November' 8S itself the company entered into a separate asrcement with M Is 
Photo-Me for purchase of Photo Dispenser Booths, Against this 187 booths were received by 
tbe company during 1987-89. 
RBASONS FOR LOSSES 
- Unable to face competition from small confectioners and imports. 
- Bad investments in Mapetic Tape Plant Automatic Photo Booths. 
- Tune and cost overrun in new project. 
- Diversion of funds frpm old to new plant. 
- Heavy interest burden on excessive loss. 
- High overheads and manpower. 
-Malpractices. 
- Management and Government inability to respond quickly to the crises facing the 
company. 
A High Level Committee looked into the reasons for time and cost overrun of new X­
ray Polyester project. Committee found that fautly initial feasibility report, seeking 
premature approval, deficiencies in physical and financial management .including the 
performance of the contractors, incorrect appreciation of the cost and time required to 
complete the project, variation on account of exchange rates, taxes and duties, inflation 
against the background of. non provision of price contingencies and procedural delays on part 
of the management are some of the reasons for time and cost overrun of the project. 
The losses of the company as on 31.3.96 have gone upto Rs. 290.54 crore, with the 
accumulated losses of Rs. 159.58 crore upto 31.3.94 the net worth of the company became 

32 
negative and HPF was referred to BIFR in Nov. '95, on 23.1.96 the company was declared as 
a sick company be BIFR under SICA and ICICI was appointed as Operating Agency (OA) to·· 
formulate a revival plan. The present work force of the company was 3061 as on 31.3:96.:-' · 
During 1994-95 the total budgetary provision of Rs. 40 crore was released to HPF. Out· ~­
of this amount, Rs. 19 crore were released to honour the interest on bonds and redumption · 
of bonds, held by individuals to maintain the credibility of the company. · 
In April '95 GOM approved release of Rs. 35 crore for completion and commissioning 
of the new Polyester X-ray project from DHI's 1995-96 Crucial Balancing Investment Plan 
Fund. Against this a sum of Rs. 28.84 crore was released and the balance of Rs. 6.16 crore 
was adjusted against outstanding dues as per the direction of Ministry of Finance. Action on 
this short release and the requirment of working capital for 1996-97 of Rs. 20 crore is being 
taken up with the competent authority. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government for the revival of HPF 
limited. 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
Vacancies at higher level in PSUs 
The Committee has also noticed that post of Chief Executive in many of the PSUs 
including Director ·level posts have been lying vacant for months and these undertakings are 
being looked after by the Joint Secretaries of the Ministry has additional charge. The 
perspection of the experts and skilled professionals and that of the bureaucrats is always 
different, as a result, growth of the companies and their competitiveness is being 
compromised. If the public sector has to be made commercially viable and strive towards 
excellence, it is necessary that immediate steps should be taken to delink the bureaucracy 
from professionaL jobs. (Page 63) 
Reply of the Government 
The Government have accepted the recommendations and suitable instructions have 
been issued to the concerned administrative Ministries/Departments vide OM No. 18(5)195-
GM dated lOth October, 1996 (copy enclosed). 
Ministry of Industry (Department of Public Enterprises O.M. No. 18(5)196-GM dated 
the 11.10.1996. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that necessary instructions have been issued to the concerned 
Administrative Ministries/Departments in pursuance of the Committee's recommendation 
regarding filling up of the posts of Chief Executives in various PSUs. The Sub-Committee 
hopes that Ministry of Industry would ensure strict compliance of its instructions. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
State of affairs in Jessop & Co. Ltd. and Burn Standard Co. 
The Sub-Committee feels that enthusiasm among the workers for a new work culture 
for the revival of sick unit like Jessop & Co. arid Burn Standard Co. Ltd. needs to be 
promoted further and for this the Government should make sincere efforts to solve the 
problems which presently beset the workers. The Governmem should arrange additional 

33 
financial resources to provide budgetary support to these units, so that they become 
commercially viable and profit earning. It is observed by the Committee that Government 
orders are not given to the Public Sector Companies. The Committee has also noticed that , 
post of Chief Executives of many of the Public Sector Undertakings, including Director level 
position, having lying vacant for months and these Undertakings are being looked after by 
the Joint Secretary of the Ministry as additional charge. (Page 63) 
Action Taken 
Government has provided various financial reliefs and concessions both to Burn 
Standard and Jessop & Co. Ltd. at the time of nationalisation and also in 1986. The 
Government has been providing plan loan for renewal and replacement of existing plant and 
machinery and also for conversion of technical know-how to these companies. The 
Government has released Rs. 9.85 crores as non-plan support and Rs. 2 crore as plan 
support to Jessop during 1995-96. A sum of Rs. 6.30 crores was released to Burn Standard 
as non-plan suppoprt during 1995-96. In addition, the Government provided counter 
guarantee to the bankers of Jessop of Rs. 10 crores and to the Bankers of. BSCL Rs. 49.50 
crores for providing working capital. 
Department of Heavy Industry has been continuously taking up the issue of securing 
orders for these Companies with various PSUs/Departments!Ministries. ' 
BSCL and JESSOP are currently before BIFR and their revival schemes· are being · 
drawn up. All requirements for renewal and replacement as well as new plant and machinery 
will be taken into account in the revival scheme. The Government would examine all 
possible ways for the economic revival of these Companies. The Government will also 
ensure that legitimate interests of the workers are given due protection. 
All functional Directors in these two companies are in position. Joint Secretary of this 
Department is holding the additional charge of Chairman of BBUNL which is holding 
Company of ten subsidiaries including these two companies pending the finalisation of the 
appointment of CMD, BBUNL. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of Industry in order to 
improve the state of affairs of J~ssop & Company Ltd. and Burns Standard Company Ltd. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
Losses being suffered by Burn Standard Co. 
The company is suffering a lot due to slash of orders of wagon from the Railway Board. 
The huge stock of finished !terns made by the company on the orders of Railways is lying 
there and the same is not being lifted by the Railways. The Offshore Division of the 
company is totally crippled due to lack of orders from ONGC. The refractory units have also 
been fac~ng serious problems due to inadequate orders from SAIL besides chronic shortage 
of coal and working capital problems, the representatives of the company requested for (I) 
non-plan support of .Rs~ 37 crores to meet working capital requirement and to Uquidate · 
statutory dues. The Railways and ONGC may place orders with the company. The SAIL may 
place order on the Refractory units for atleast 25,000 tonnes per annum. (Page '60) 
Action Taken 
Burn Standard Co. Ltd. was incorporated as Government company on 1st Dec., 1976, 
after nationalisation of Burn & Company Ltd. and Indian Standard Wagon Comp~ny. These 
4535 IRS I F-6-A 

34 
companies were taken over by the Government in Dec., 1973 and subsequently nationalised 
w.e.f. 1st April, 1975. BSCL has two wagon manufacturing units viz. Burnpur and Howrah. 
BSCL is primarily a wagon/wagon components manufacturing company. The 
performance of BSCL is critically dependent on wagon orders. The Ministry of Railways 
drastically reduced wagon orders during 1993-94 and 1994-95. As a result the performance of 
BSCL deteriorated during these 2 years. The Ministry of Railways have since enhanced 
orders for wagons. 
The company has reported that Railway Board had placed order for manufacture of 
sleepers. Ministry of Railways has not lifted sleepers so far. The company has taken up the 
matter with Railway Board either to lift these sleepers or to pay the cost of the sleepers. It 
is expected that this issue will be resolved shortly. 
The company had set up an offshore division in 1985 to manufacture offshore platforms 
to meet the requirement of ONGC. The company got orders 'till 1989. No orders were 
received from ONGC from 1990 to 1994. The Offshore Di~ision has been lying idle after the 
completion of balance order in Nov., 1993. In order to ensure the order from ONGC, a 
meeting was held at the level of the Industry Minister in Sept., 1995. As a result, BSCL has 
got an order for Rs. 7 crores from ONGC. · 
Prior to nationalisation of BSCL, the R&C Unit of BSCL were captive unit of IIS~O. 
After the nationalisation of BSCL, R&C Units came under the Deptt. of Heavy Industry 
and liSCO 'Yas put under the Deptt. of Steel. As a result, these R&C Units of BSCL lost 
the status of captive units. Since then, these R&C Units have been incurring losses. As 
regarding orders for refractories, as explained in the above para, a meeting was convened by 
the then I.M. and representative of SAIL also attended the meeting. The then 1M also 
requested to SAIL to place order on BSCL for refractories. No orders however have been 
placed by SAIL so far. 
As regards non-plan support to BSCL for working capital requirement, it is submitted 
here that Government has already given Government counter quarantee of Rs. 49.50 Crores 
. to• UBI for providing working capital. Since the performance of the company deteriorated 
duimg 1993-94 and 1994-95 due to drastic reduction of wagon orders, the Government 
provided Rs. 6.30 crores to BSCL as non-plan assistance during 1995-96. BSCL is presently 
before BIFR and its revival scheme is under preparation. The issue of statutory dues will be 
taken into account in the revival scheme. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Ministry of Railways as well as ONGC have 
enhanced orders for wagon manufactured by Bum Standard Company Ltd. The Sub­
Committee further notes that the' Company has been provided with a Government counter 
guarantee of Rs. 49.50 crores. The Sub-Committee hopes that SAIL would also place orders 
on BSCL. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
State of affairs in Jessop & Co. 
Plant and machinery of Jessop & Co. Ltd. are obsolete and. could not be renewed/ 
replaced due to paucity of funds. There has been mismanagement at the top level of the 
management. The workers have not been paid for the last two months. Work culture has 
changed and they are prepared to sacrifice for the revival of the company. The Government 
should not lose this opportunity. Management of Jessop is responsible for the present crises. 
. 4!i35 IRS I F-6-B 

35 
The Holding Company, BBUNL has not been asked to explain its role for the present state of 
affairs of the company. The Committee desired that a meeting of the Holding Company may 
be called for the purpose. (Page 63) 
Action Taken 
Ws. Jessop & Company was established in the year 1788. The company was taken over 
in 1958 under ID Act. Subsequently, Jessop became a Government undertaking from 1st 
April, 1973 after purchasing its majority shares. When it became a Govt. company, the 
accumulated loss was Rs. 9.87 crores and company's net worth was negative. It became a 
subsidiary of BBUNL in 1986 after the formation of the holding company. The company has 
been incurring losses from 1991-92 onwards due to decline in sales, high employment cost, 
high financial charges and shortage of working capital. Due to continuous losses, the 
company has not been able to pay gratuity and arovident fund to its retired employees. Fpr 
the last two years the company has not been abfe to pay wages and salary in time. In order 
to reduce fixed cost, a Voluntary Retirement Scheme has been introduced in JSP and 
Government has been paying VRS funds to settle the dues to employees retired under VRS. 
During 1995-96, the company was paid Rs. 9.85 crores as non-plan support from 
Government of India for payment of wages and salary. In addition, the Government has 
been releasing funds of JSP for renewal and replacement of its existing plant and machinery. 
Rs. 2 crores was released in 1995-96 for this purpose. The Government has also provided 
counter guarantee to SBI for Rs. 10 crores for meeting working capital requirement. 
After the amendment of SICA Act, the company has been referred to BIFR, &nd SBI 
has been appointed as the Operating Agency for preparing a revival scheme of JSP. The 
revival scheme is expected within 3 months. The dues of retired employees will be taken into 
account in the revival scheme. 
After the formation of the holding company, BBUNL has been assisting JSP in solving 
their problems regarding wagon orders wage revision, implementation of VRS Scheme, 
finalisation of plan requirement, recruitment in senior posts and manpower rationalisation. 
The holding company had also taken up the matter with SBI for conversion of SBI's pre­
take over working capital loan into term loan to reduce interest rate. The holding company 
also prepared capital restructuring proposal of some of the subsidiaries of BBUNL including 
JSP for consideration of Government Besides, BBUNL provides HRD support at senior 
levels and advises on intricate issues relating to industrial relations. Therefore, it is not 
correct to say that holding company has not played any role for the improvement of the 
performance of Jessop & Company Ltd. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that efforts are being made by Government to improve the 
condition of Jessop & Company Ltd. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
State of Affairs in MAMC 
The Committee has also noted that MAMC at Durgapur which was incurring huge 
losses about a year back• has now drastically reduced its losses and surviving only on the 
orders it is getting without the support of any financial institutions. The Committee notes the 
fact that this Company in the public sector was created for manufacturing of underground 
coal mining equipments but at a later stage Government policy w~s changed from 
underground mining to open cast mining. This naturally led to the reduction of orders 

36 
received by the company ..... MAMC was set up mainly to cater to the equipment needs of 
Coal India Limited and other undertakings but these undertakings did not place the 
sufficient orders with MAMC. 
Action Taken 
M.A.M.C. 
I. Analysis of Losses 
The followings are the main reasons for losses : 
1. Excessiye manpower. 
2. High Overheads and High interest burden. 
3. Acute shortage of working capital. 
4. Fierce competition in the market. 
5. High Social overheads. 
6. Non operation of cash credit account (because of heavy borrowings). 
7. Issue of closure notice by BIFR affected the morale of the employees and ~lso the 
production. 
II~ Revival Efforts 
MAMC was referred to BIFR in 1992 and was declared sick.· In the first hearing held on 
14.10.92, IFCI was appointed as Operating Agency to consider the revival of MAMC. A 
study was carried out by IFCI on the directions of BIFR. Mls. Raiji & Company who were 
entrusted with the study by IFCit suggested a very significant fund infusion for the 
rehabilitation of the company. The study suggested cash infusion of Rs. 142.16 crores 
besides financial restructuring. In addition to t~se funds, the SBI as well as State 
Government of West Bengal were also expected to make sacrifices. The SBI did not agree 
to the concessions envisaged in the revival plan. The Government considered the various 
alternatives, including the revival of MAMC as per IFCI's Report which had found the 
comp3ny to' be technically sound. The Department submitted before the BIFR that the 
Government would have no objection to take over of the company by a private investor and 
the financial restructuring would be considered on merits of the offers received. 
, There was no offer in res~nse to the advertisement for privatisation. BIFR after 
he,aring all concerned, came to the conclusion that it will be difficult to make the net worth 
of the company positive within a re~sonable period. It therefore decided to issue show cause 
aotice for ctos,.re of the company. The show cause notice was issued on.12.1.9S. The further 
proceedings of BIFR have however been stayed by an order of the Calcutta High Court. The 
stay still continues. 
Ill. Order Booking 
The order booking is primarily the responsibility of the company, However, whenever 
r~quests are received from the company for procuring a particular order, the matter is taken 
by this Department with the concerned Agency/Organisation to help MAMC in getting the 
orders, It may also be added that in the liberalised economic enviornment, MAMC will have 
to compete with other PSUs on their own and not depend much on the preferencial 
·~treatment. 
'· 

37 
IV. Vacancy position at Top Level 
CMD, MAMC is in position. The post of Director (Finance) is presently vacant but the 
action tQ fill the same is already in progress. The proposal has been sent to the competent 
authority for approval. The post of Director (Marketing) and Director (P&P) have been 
kept in abeyance till the finalisation of the BIFR decision regarding revival of the company. 
V. V.R.S. 
In order to reduce the surplus manpower, a VRS was launched in 1989. Under this 
scheme, 2128 persons have been relieved. This scheme has however, been discontinued 
consequent to issue of notice for winding up by BIFR. 
VI. Government Assistance 
(i) Government is providing financial assistance to the company under non-plan within 
!ts budgetary constraints. 
(ii) the following funds have been released to the company during the last five years: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Plan Non-plan VRS 
1991-92 3.80 8.85 12.00 
1992-93 1.00 10.05 17.12 
1993-94 0.50 15.00 24.45 
1994-95 19.52 2.25 
1995-96 20.66 
(iii) Government has given counter guarantee to the tune of Rs. 65.09 crotes to SBI and 
Andhra Bank for allowing banking facilities to the company. 
Comments/Observations 
7. The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation regarding revival of MAMC. It hopes that Government's 
plans in this regard would be implemented expeditiously. 
8. RECOMMENDATION 
Orrisa 
The Committee is of the view that· as the State has been declared as backward State the 
SSI units with an investment below 20 lakhs be treated as a special category for the purposes 
of taxation. The Committee has also come to understand that as there is no forum for 
rederssal of justice for SSI sector, a Tribunal may be set up for the purpose. The followinp 
are the recommendations of the Committee for the State:- (Page 71) 
(1) infrastructure facilities in the fietd of transport and communication may be 
improved; · 
(2) Being a rich State so far as the-availability of mineral and other natural wealth is 
concerned, the resources have not been exploited to the desired level. The 
Government may take concrete steps in this regard. Adequate power supply may 
be made available for the purpose; 

38 
(3} the limit of small scale sector be raised from Rs. 60 lakh to Rs. 2 crore; 
(4} the growth centres may be established by declaring the State as 'no industry 
district'; 
(5) BIFR may be introduced to revive the SSI units; 
(6} SIDBI may sanction loans to SSI units below Rs. 30 lakh also to help the sector; 
(7) The lSI, an export promotion council and DGS&D may be established in the 
State; 
(8) the banks may provide sufficient support to the SSI units; 
(9) the place near Hirakund dam may be developed for tourism on the pattern of 
Vrindavan Garden; 
(10) the air-strip at Sambalpur may be improved; 
{11) the special stress may be laid in the field of agro-based and handloom sector; 
{12} the State Government may take steps to reduce the theft of electricity which is 
38% now; 
(13} the Central Government may introduce special norms for the development of the 
under-developed States like Orissa; 
{14} the central excise rate may be enhanced from Rs. 30 lakh to Rs. 60 lakh; 
{15) the important rail links may be provided for speedy transportation; and 
{16} the work culture in the State may be improved. 
Action Taken 
The State Government of Orissa has been requested to take appropriate necessary 
action and also take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments of the 
Central Government, wherever necessary, on the above observations/recommendations in 
regard to industrial backwardness in Orissa. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of Orissa on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
desires the Ministry of Industry to pursue the Committee's recommendation with the 
Government of Orissa. 
9. RECOMMENDATION 
West Bengal 
{1) telecommunications and road net,-work may be improved; (Page 71) 
{2} the Calcutta port may be restructed and may be made cost-effective and trouble­
free. The Calcutta-H~ldia Port comp~ex may also be developed; {Page 71) 
.• \. ,•<t 
(3} the banks and financial institutions may play a positive role in the development of 
SSI units; (Page 71) 

39 
(4) all the industries in the Bardhaman District are sick due to Mafia Raj there. The 
SSI units are suffering due to delayed payment by the medium & large scale 
industries. The State Government may take necessary steps in this regard and the 
work culture may be improved; and (Page 72) 
(5) the State Government may pay a special attention for providing of infrastructure 
facilities i.e., water, metal road, power and communication etc. In the Bankura 
District as this District is the most backward one because it is situated on a laterite 
and rocky soil and cannot retain water; and idle man-power may be absorbed by 
setting up of cottage and small scale industries; the District is famous for 
"Baluchari" saree. The State Government may, therefore, not lose the opportunity 
for the development of handloom industries. The agricultural reserves and 
industrial raw. material may be utilised fully. (Page 72) 
Action Taken 
The State Government of West Bengal has been requested to take appropriate 
necessary action and also take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments of 
the Central Government, wherever necessary, on the above observations/recommendations 
in regard to industrial backwardness in West Bengal. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of West Bengal on the Committee's recommendations. The Sub­
Committee desires the Ministry of Industry to pursue the Committee's recommendations 
with the Government of West Bengal. 
10. RECOMMENDATION 
Pondicherry 
(1) the licensing procedure in the UT may be simplified; 
(2) the tax benefits to SSI units may be enhanced keeping m view the benefits 
available in Goa and Silvasa; 
(3) suitable roads may be provided in the Sadarapet Industrial Estate and special steps 
may be taken to provide power to the Estates; 
(4) the SAIL may provide steel to SSI units less than 30 MT at a time also; 
(5) the small and medium scale industries may be brought under the single window 
system; 
(6) the UT administration may formulate the industrial policy; 
(7) the Sales Tax Exemption may be extended further being a backward area and the 
transport subsidy may also be provided; 
(8) at present one person is holding charge of three or four departments resulting in 
inefficiency and neglect of important issues, sufficient staff may be provided in this 
regard; 
(9) the rate of interest for development of industries may be reduced further as the 
area has been classified as Backward 'A'; and 

40 
(10) The Ministry of Railways may convert the metre gauge lines into broad gauge as 
requested by the UT administration for speedy movement of passenger and goods 
traffic. (Page-72) 
Action Taken 
The Government of Pondicherry has been requested to take appropriate necessary 
action and also take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments of the 
Central Government. wherever necessary, on the above observations/recommendations in 
regard to industrial backwardness in Pondicherry. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of Pondicherry on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee desires the Ministry of Industry to pursue the Committee's recommendation with 
the Government of Pondicherry. 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
Tamil Na&~u 
(1) the Committee is of the view that by and large the industrial development in the 
State is reasonable; (Page-72) 
(2) the Madras Port which is congested may be modernised; a cargo handling complex 
may also be provided; (Page-72) 
(3) the four State industries which are under BIFR ·may be revived; (Page-72) 
(4) the building plans for the ind\istry and licences, etc. may be cleared by the S~ngle 
Window Commit~ee itself; (Page-72) 
(5) the units proposed to be started in the developed· industrial areas may be freed 
from licensing policies; (Page-72) 
(6) in Erode twenty-two sanctions are required. to start a new industry; it is a 
frustration for the new entrepreneurs. This may be simplified. In the District 11 
lakh women are engaged. The State Government may take spedal efforts for the 
development of agro-based, EOU and termeric industries. The Committee is glad 
to know that "Shakti Masala" bas won the President of India award, for 
excellence; (Page-72) 
(7) the Salem Airport may be inade functional; (Page-73) 
(8) the Government may provide necessary help in the field of agro-based and power­
loom industries for export. The marketing facilities may also be created; (Page-73) 
(9) the Bangalore-Salem and Salem-Karur railway lines may be converted into B.G. 
line; and (Page-73) 
(10) the National Highway from Bangalore to Kanyakumari may be widened. 
(Page-73) 
Action Taken 
The State GovernntEmt of Tamil Nadu has been requested to take appropriate 
necessary action and also take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments of 
,•· 

41 
the Central Government, wherever necessary, on the above observations/recommendations 
in regard to industrial backwardness in Tamil Nadu. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action 
taken by the Government of Tamil Nadu on the Committee's recommendations. The Sub­
Committee 9esires the Ministry of Industry to pursue the Committee's recommendation with 
the Government of Tamil Nadu. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
The Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
(1) the Central Government may consider the proposal of UT to operate its sertices to 
Bangkok and Singapore to improve the financial position; 
0) the water sport facilities may be created in the Island to at~act more tourists; 
(3) the runway of Port Blair airport may be increased so that aircrafts with higher 
capacity load may also land; 
(4) the Central Government may take steps to ensure that the tourists do not face any 
difficulty in getting bookings for the Islands; 
(5) a free port may be established; 
(6) the ferry services may be improved by investing more therein; 
(7) a modern ship building yard may be set up to cater more employment to the 
people; 
(8) the Island may also develop house boats on the pattern of J&K to attract more 
tourists; 
(9) there should not be any restriction on the foreign tourists for visiting the various 
Islands; 
(10) the sufficient containers may be provided so that the finished goods may be 
transported to the main land without keeping it further in the Islands; 
(11) the ANIIDCO may provided all type of loans to the entrepreneurs; 
{12) the preference may be given to the local SSI units for Government purchases; · 
{13) the excise duty may be lowered from 20% to 10% and the tax holiday may be 
extended for the existing industries also; 
(14) the Central Government may accord approval to the Capital Investment and Island 
Transport Subsidy Scheme 1005; 
(15) the export permit system for shipment of saw timber to the mainland may be 
abolished; 
(16) the infrastructure facilities like water, uninterrupted power, drainage and pucca 
roads may be provided in the ~nc;lustrial Estate, Garacharma; 
(17) the ANIIDCO may undertake th~ job of construction of Buses' \>odies in the 
Island to create more jobs for the people living in the Islands; 
(18) the forest extraction is being done on selective basis and hence timber available for 
the UT is less than the requirement. The Central Government may take necessary 
steps in this regard; (Page-73) 
4535/RS/F-7-A 

42 
(19) some big patches are available in the Island, the Government may use these 
patches for plantation. The Wasteland Board may provide the necessary funds for 
the same; and 
(20) the Islands situated in the UT are in the same line of Malaysia. The Government 
may use the Malaysian seeds for plantation, to increase the output thereof. 
(Page-74) 
Action Taken 
The Government of Andaman & Nicobar Islands has been requested to take 
appropriate necessary action and also take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments of the Central Government, wherever necessary, on the above observations/ 
recommendations in regard to industrial backwardness in Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It is, however, unhappy to note 
the fact that the Andaman & Nicobar administration have been able to utilise only about the 
half of the out-lay under the Village and Small Industries Scheme in the year 1995-96. The 
out-lay for the subsequent year on this account stands reduced by ·about 30%. The Sub­
Committee recommends that Government should give special emphasis on the industrial 
development in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands and the developmentaLschemes etc. drawn 
up ·for these areas should be strictly implemented within the prescribed timeframe. 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
Raising of family income ceiling for PMRY 
The restriction on family income may be raised from Rs. 24,000/- to Rs~ 30.000/- per 
annum. The restriction of 30 per cent on business activities may be removed. (Page-75) 
Action Taken 
Raising of family income under PMRY from Rs. 24,000/- toRs. 40,000/- and raising of 
ceiling on business enterprises from 30% to 50% in industrially backward States/UTs and 
the districts (as and when notified) are under consideration of the Government. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that Government would take an early decision over raising 
of family income norm under PMRY. 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Raising of training fund for PMRY 
The amount of training fund may be raised from Rs. 1,0001- to Rs. 1,2001- per 
beneficiary. (Page-75) ,. 
Action Taken 
On the basis of consultations with implementing agencies, the norms and period training 
under PMRY were recently reviewed. It was decided that the expenditure for training, for 
industrial ventures may be kept at Rs. 1000 per trainee (Rs. 300 for stipend and Rs. 700 for 
training expenses) with a provision of 15 to 20 working days training. For business and 
service ventures it was decided to reduce the expenditure for training to Rs. 500 per trainee 
4535/RS/F-7-B 

43 
(Rs. 150 as stipend and Rs. 350 for training expenses) with a provision of 7 to 10 working 
days training. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
Task Force Committee for loan applications 
The Task Force Committee may be constituted to process the application and it may 
meet fortnightly. 30 days time may be given to the banks in sanctioning of the case after its 
submission by the Task Force Committee. The training may be completed in four weeks. 
(Page-75) 
Action Taken 
Instructions have been issued to all the State Govts. that the Task Force Committee 
constituted for processing the loan applications should meet regularly (twice in a month). To 
further facilitate processing of applications quickly and effectively, States/UTs in 
consultation with Convener Banks have been authorised to constitute sub-divisional/block 
level Task Forces. RBI guidelines stipulate a period of 8-9 weeks for processing cases Where 
projects are for amounts over Rs. 25,000/-. The matter, however, has been referred to RBI. 
The training is for a period of 7-10 working days for service/business enterprises and· 
15-20 days for industrial ventures. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation regarding setting up of Task Force Committee for processing 
of loan applications. 
16. RECOMMENDATION 
Disbursement of loan by banks 
Maximum 3 months time be taken by the banks in the disbursement of the loan and in 
reviewing cases one month more may be taken. (Page-75) 
Action Taken 
RBI has already issued instructions to Chairman and Managing Directors of All 
Scheduled Commercial Banks to dispose of the applications under PMRY expeditiously. At 
times, completion of formalities, arrangement of premises for the enterprise may take time. 
However, this has again been taken up with the RBI and Banking Division, Government of 
India. 
Comments/Observations 
16. The Sub-Committee notes that the Committee's recommendation for fixing of time 
limit for disbursement of lpan is under consideration of RBI and the Banking Division. The 
Sub-Committee .reiterates the Committee's recommendation . 
• 17. RECOMMENDATION 
Co-operative Banks and PMRY 
The Co-operative Banks may also be associated with the Scheme. (Page-75) 

44 
Action Taken 
Reserve Bank of India did not agree to associate Co-operative Banks with the 
implementation of PMRY in view of their weak financial position. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes Government's view on the Committee's recommendation. 
18. RECOMMENDATION 
Orientation courses for ente.,reneurs 
The applicants may be educated about the scheme and the formalities to be completed. 
The applicants may be asked to furnish information at one time and not in piece-meal. 
(Page-75) 
The orientation courses may be started for the entrepreneurs. (Page-75) 
Action Taken 
The State Governments have been requested to initiate action on these points. 
Remarks 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
19. RECOMMENDATION 
Role of banks under PMRY 
- The fear may be removed from the minds of the bank officials that they will not be 
hauled up in case of non-recovery of the loan advanced by them under the scheme. 
(Page-75) 
-. The bank may not insist for collateral security for the grant of loan under PMRY. 
The State administration may stand for collateral security. In Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, ANIIDCO had agreed to stand for guarantee. (Page-75) 
- The banks may be given the target under the scheme and if they do not complete it, 
the entries may be made in the C.Rs of the concerned officer. 
- The bank official~ who understand the scheme and are trained enough in the field 
may be posted for the purpose. (Page-75) 
- The lead banks in the respective StatesiUTs may coordinate the work relating to the 
sanctioning of loans under the scheme and watch their performance and issue 
instructions from time to time in regard thereto. (Page-76) 
- In the circular issued by the State Bank of India, Calcutta, on 30-11-1993, it has 
been indicated that if a member of the family is a defaulter to a bank/financial 
institution, other. member of the same family will not be eligible for assistance under 
the scheme. The Committee feel that in case the father is a defaulter and the son is 
doing his business separetely and not dependent upoJ;I his father, the said restriction 
may not come in his way. (Page-76) 

45 
Action Taken 
The guidelines pertaining to the PMR Y Scheme had been issued to Secretary/Director 
of Industries, all States/Union Territories wherein it is clearly mentioned not to ask 
collateral security from the PMRY beneficiary under the scheme. The RBI has also issued 
instructions to banks accordingly. 
However, some complaints have been received regarding insistance on collateral security 
by banks for grant of PMRY loan. The matter has been taken up with Finance Ministry and 
RBI by the Minister of Industry, Secretary {SSI & ARI) and at other appropriate levels. 
The other issues are also being ta~en up with the RBI. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by the Ministry of Industry on the 
recommendation of the Committee. 

SUB-COMMITTEE-III 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE-III 

49 
1. BCOMMENDATION 
Jbpert of handicrafts 
On tfte basis of the evidence teftdered in Varanati, Ute Sub-Committee observed that 
Yaranasi has a vast potential of exportlag its handicrafts such as Silk Sarees, Zari embroidery 
aad Carpek. 
Accortlingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that incentives may be given to promote 
eKport of these handicrafts items besides modernisationlupgradation of the technology in this 
Wd. (Paae-98) 
Aetion Taken 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), who is concerned with the subject, have been 
addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
CommMtt!IObservations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), would 
take necessary action on the Committee's recommendation. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
BHEL's Heavy Equipment Repair Plant, Varanasi 
On the functioning of BHEL's Heavy Equipment Repair Plant, Varanasi, the Sub~ 
Committee observed that this plant of BHEL is not working according to the reputation of 
BHEL and presently facing competition due to similar companies in the field. The Sub­
Committee therefore, felt that BHEL must increase its activities to stay in the race. The 
Sub-Committee further observed that BHEL Varanasi has three phases and e'(en after 10 
years of its establishment only one phase is working. The Sub-Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the viability of the second phase may be studied and it may be started at 
the earliest. (Page. 90-91) 
Action Taken 
Even though BHEL's Heavy Equipment Repair Plant at Varanasi has been facing 
competition from several smaller firms in that region for similar jobs it has been able to 
maintain its growth over the years. The performance of the Plant during the last five years is 
as under. 
Turnover 
Value Added Per Employee 
1990-91 
784 
3.06 
91-92 
870 
3.14 
. ' 
92-93 
981 
3.51 
93-94 
1043 
4.16 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
94-95 
1088 
4.21 
95-96 
1111 
4.27 
To sustain its growth and competitive edge, BHEL has already taken up its second 
phase of expansion. Under this phase an investment of Rs. 3.5 Crores bas been made for 
manufacturing medium technology items and spares required for repairs. As a result the 
turnover of the Plant h&s shot up from Rs. 7.84 Crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 11.11 Crores in 
1M5-96 and is expected to increase further in coming years. 
4651 N> I F-~-A 

50 
·Comments/Observations 
2. The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by Government for the growth of 
the BHEL's Heavy Equipment Repair Plant at Varanasi. 
3. RECO~NDATION 
Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd., Naini 
On Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Naini the Sub-Committee observed that 
the executive employees ratio is very high in the company which is counter productive and 
therefore should be brought down by VRS. (Page 91) 
Action Taken 
Against the total manpower of 1762 as on 31.3.1996, there are 525 executives. The high 
ratio of executives has been built-up mainly due to the following: 
(i) Yearly promotions from unionised workmen to supervisor which is non-unionised 
and executive category in BPCL. 
(ii) Restricted filling of the resultant vacancies. 
The Company has already implemented VRS for all category of employees since the 
financial year 1991-92. The total strength has also reduced from 1937 in 1990-91 to ·1762 
numbers in 1995-96, i.e. a reduction of 175 by implementing VRS and also by not filling up 
the vacancies against natural retirement/resignations. The company has to further implement 
VRS as part of BIER rehabilitation scheme approved for the company. 
The company will make all out efforts to reduce the manpower including executive 
category through VRS as recommended by the Committee. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the recommendation of the Committee is being acted 
upon. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
Delay in fulfilling the orders by company 
The Sub-Committee further observed that delay in supply affect the reputation of a 
company. Accordingly, every effort may be made to fulfill the order in time. (Page 91) 
The company has initiated suitable action to qvercome the problem and to reduce the 
delays in delivery. However, non-availability of matching materials, limited capacity of 
vendors for supply of castings/forgings, rejections of casting and recycling of the same, also 
led to delays in deliveries. However, by vendor development and constant follow-up with 
suppliers, all efforts would be made to reduce delays. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by the Government on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
BHEL, Jhansi · 
The Sub-Committee feels that the role of BHEL, Jhansi, one of the premier 
organisations of the country, in developing small scale and ancillary units, has not been very 
encouraging. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee feels that there may be an agreement 
4535 IRS I F-8-B 

51 
between the State Government and BHEL for assured supply orders to local enterpreneurs. 
(Page-91) 
Action Taken 
From the inception of the Transformer Plant at Jhansi in 1974, BHEL's management, 
besides laying emphasis on production activities, encouraged development of small scale 
industrial units. As a result, the Plant has shown good growth and an Industrial Complex has 
also come up in Bijoli-adjoining BHEL's Plant. A large number of Units from Bijoli 
industrial area are getting regular business from BHEL's Plant at Jhansi. Keeping in view 
the nature of facilities available with small scale industries there, work load is being given to 
these Units. Business to the tune of Rs. S Crores approx, was given to these small scale Units 
in 1995-96 by BHEL's Jhansi Plant. 
· While BHEL is encouraging these industrial units to expand their facilities to enable 
them take up bigger jobs, it is also in touch with U.P. State Industrial Development 
Corporation (UPSIDC) and District Industry Centre Jhansi for giving necessary assistance/ 
support for further development and growth of small scale industries in Jhansi. BHEL has 
also indicated certain areas which have the potential of providing business to small scale 
industries. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Growth Centre for Jhansi 
For Jhansi the Sub-Committee observed that a Growth Centre under Growth Centre 
Scheme was sanctioned in 1989 but due to change in the policy, the State Government 
decided to shift it. In this regard the Sub-Committee recommends that 1here is an urgent 
need for developing a Growth Centre at Jhansi. Accordingly, the State Government may be 
asked to review its decisions on shifting Growth Centre from Jhansi. (Page-91) 
Action Taken 
The request of the Government of Uttar Pradesh for shifting the Growth Centre from 
Jhansi to somewhere else has not been acceded to the earlier decision of setting up of a 
Growth Centre at Jhansi stand on, and is in consonance with this recommendation. 
Comments/Recommendations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Committee's recommendation has been accepted. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
Sick units in Allahabad 
The Sub-Committee expressed its concern over the high percentage (46%) of sick small 
scale units in Allahabad and recommended that elaborate plan may be chalked out to revive 
them. (Page-91) , 
Action Taken 
The matter was taken up with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh. It may be 
clarified that 46% of sickness reported for Allahabad region is actually the number of units 
reported closed at the time of 2nd All India Census of Small Scale Units registered with 

52 
Industries Department upto 31st March, 1988. It may11lso be stated that the information 0111 
the units which were food closed at the time of Census had to be mostly ascertained frem 
the knowledgeable neipbours in the absence of the owner. The limitation with the 
information collected from the neighbours was that they could furnish the information oHly 
to the extent of their awareness. Important reasons for closing of the SSI units were: 
(i) labour problems; (ii) dispute among owners; (iii) natural calamities; (iv) finaacial 
problems; (v) marketiag problem; and (vi) raw. material problem. 
Position with reprd to tlie small scale units in the tluee~:l!Mritts of Allahabad region a 
on 1.1.1996 is giveR below: · 
Sl. Name of the District Total No. Working Sick o/oageof 
No. of units sickuu 
registered 
1 Allahabad 9806 8766 1040 10.~ 
2 Fatehpur 5217 4543 674 12.9 
3 Pratapgarh 3070 2261 809 26.3 
Source: Office of Joint Director of Industries, Allahabad 
Office of DC(SSI) through its subordinate office, Small Industries Service Institute, 
Allahabad has suggested to the Joint Director of lpdustries, Allahabad and Commissioner & 
Director of Industries, Uttar Pradesh, that a Committee be constituted to study the 
measures necessary for revival of sick units in Allahabad so as to bring down the incidence 
of sickness in Allahabad division to a minimum. The matter has also been taken up with the 
financial institutions and banks who would have to bear the cost of revival of sick units. ,, 
Office of the Joint Director of Industries of Uttar Pradesh government has informed 
that they are seriously considering action to be taken for the revival of the sick units. 
presently, the State Government organises Udyog Bandh.u meetings and the cases of units 
bringing their problems in this meeting, are taken up by them with financial institutions. 
To deal with the issue of sickness in small scale sector in its entireity, i.e., right from 
the appraisal of the project with respect to the technical feasibility, competency of the 
management/entrepreneur, marketing potentiality of the product, adequacy of the working 
capital and term loan and upto early detection of sickness in the unit apart from regular 
monitoring of sickness and periodical revision of guidelines for reliefs and concessions to be 
made available by the various agencies involved in the rehabilitation of sick SSis etc., views 
have been sought from Industries Departments of all StatesiUTs, Public Sector Banks and 
Banking Division of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. The department 
would, thereafter conve11e a meeting of all concerned to take a view on the schemes! 
pmgrammes for solviq tke PfOblem of sickaess. 
The Sub-Committ<ee notes the actK. bei~t~ taken by Government of Uttar P,~ on. 
the C0.1tUIIitt..e's re~ndali.oa. 

53 
I. RECOMMENDATION 
Settinc up of retail outlets by BLC 
(a) The Sub-Committee felt that there is an urgent need to establish emporia and other 
retail outlets in various cities. (Page-91-92) 
Adioa Taken 
BLC had closed down five loss making retail outlets located at Ahmedabad, Jaipur, 
Saharanpur, Bhilai and Secunderabad during the year 1989-90. BLC had further closed down 
three more loss making retail outlets located at Chandigarh, Calcutta and Jabalpur du:dn1 
the year 1990-91. BLC is making losses. It may not be advisable to open additional outlets at 
this stage till such time Company turns around. 
C0111ments/Observations 
Tlie Sub-Committee notes that the Committee's recommendation is being acted upon. 
9. RECOMMENDATION 
Purc;hase preference for BLC 
The Sub-Committee felt that a policy may be formulated wherein aU the Central and 
State Government Departments and PSUs may be directed to purchase a fixed percentage of 
safety and uniform shoes from BLC. (Page-91-92) 
Action Taken 
General policy of purchase preference is formulated by OPE. The matter has been 
taken up with OPE for taking appropriate action on the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
Comme.u/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the action is being taken on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
10. RECOMMENDATION 
Child labour problem at Mirzapur·-
On child labour problem in Mirza pur, the Sub-Committee understood that one of the 
main factor accounting for child labour is the abject poverty and economic backwardness of 
this region. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that steps may be taken to impart 
education to as many children as possible. It also recommends that schemes for training and 
employment generation formulated by the CentraVState Government in this regard may be 
implemented in right earnest and working hours of children may be reduced. (Page-91) 
Adion Taken 
Ministry of Human Resource Development and Ministry of Labour, who are concerned 
with the subject, have been addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on 
tile above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations --
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of H.R.D. on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
rilt~rates the Committee's recommendation. 

54 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
Fixing of minimum wages 
The Sub-Committee felt that carpet industry is the. main industry of Mirza pur and 
therefore there is an urgent need for fixing minimum wages in this field. (Page-91) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Labour, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Labour on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
Air linking of Allahabad 
It also feels that Allahabad may be brought on the air map of India and flight to at least, 
New Delhi may be started. (Page-91) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
Supply of gas and electricity to industry at Firozabad 
The Sub-Committee obs·~rves that air pollution by smoke emitting from chimneys of 
foundries in Firo~abad are giving sleepless nights to the entrepreneurs of Firozabad since 
under th;1 Taj Trepezium Zone most of the area of Firozabad has been declared as air 
pollution protected area. The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends that for preventing air 
pollution sufticient electricity and gas may be provided to this area in order to switch them to 
better technology. (Page-92) 
Action Taken 
Government of Uttar Pradesh, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Govt. of U.P. on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 

55 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Uniform Sales Tax rates in country 
The Sub-Committee also feels that many bordering areas in Uttar Pradesh are being 
affected due to different sales tax in other States. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends 
that the Government may consider introducing a uniform sales tax system throughout the 
country. The Sub-Committee also recommends that another important reason for 
backwardness in the State is the under developed infrastructure. Accordingly, there is a need 
to set up an Infrastructure Development· Fund with the help of Central Government for 
developing infrastructure in the State. (Page-92) 
Action Taken 
Government of Uttar Pradesh, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the entire recommendation has been 
referred for necessary action to the Government of Uttar Pradesh although some aspects of 
the recommendation need to be addressed at the Central Government's level. The Sub­
Committee has also not been informed of the action taken by the Government on 
Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates the Committee's 
recommendation. 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
Power supply in U.P. 
The Sub-Committee observes that the power supply position is pathetic in most of the 
areas of Uttar Pradesh and needs to be improved. (Page-92) 
Action Taken 
Government of Uttar Pradesh, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed· 
in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of U.P. on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
16. RECOMMENDATION 
Single Window Scheme 
The Sub-Committee is of the view that Single Window Scheme may be initiated in its 
right earnest and t~ere should be simplified bye laws and administrative procedure for giving 
a boost to the industrial process in Uttar Pradesh. (Page-92) 
Action Taken 
Government ot Uttar Pradesh, who are concerned with the subject, have been 
addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 

56 
C~vations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it hti not been appri..O of the action taltft 
by the Government of U.P. on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Co....&.ttec 
reiterates the Committee's ~commendation. 
17. RECOMMENDATION 
Power supply in Ranchi 
The Sub-Committee observed that erratic po"~\'81" supply is contrlltutlng to PM liNe ,..._ 
in the industrial units in Ranchi and therefore nee4s to be imporved. (Page-91) 
Action Taken 
Government of Bihar, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed IR ttJe 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Govt. of Bihar on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 
18. RECOMMENDATION 
Prices of soda-ash 
"The Centre/State Government make plan to exercise some control over the companies 
which are supplying soda-ash to glass industry so. that 'the rise in prices can be checked." 
(Page-92) 
Action Taken 
The item soda-ash falls within the Administrative jurisdiction of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petro-Chemicals. That Department has been consulted in the matter. The 
price of sod~-ash is not administered by the Government but determiRed by tile IRM"ket 
forces. The prices of inpnts required for the manufacture of soda-ash have increased 
considerably in the h1st few years. There is no mechanism to off-set the increased cost of the 
inputs. Therefore, any control on the price of s<;>da-ash is not possible under t.he existisg 
market dispensation. However, customs duty on the import of soda-ash was reduced from 
50% to 40% in the. Union Budget of 1995-96 and has further been reduced to 30% in the 
Union Budget of 1996-97, thus putting pressure on the prices of domestic maaufacturers of 
soda-ash. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by Government to contaiR tke prieet; 
of soda-ash in the domestic market. 
19. RECOMMENDATIQN 
Glass industry at Ferozabad 
Glass industry of Ferozabad is facing problem due to short supply and inferior quality of 
coal. The Committee recommends that the steps may be initiated to make sood quality coal 
available in Ferozabad., (Page-92) · · 

S1 
Action Taken 
As regards supply of inferior quality of coal, it is stated that Government has already 
taken a policy decision not to encourage coal based industry in Ferozabad. However, in 
respect of supply of coal to the existing industries, the matter has already been taken up 
with the appropriate authority. 
On intervention of Supreme Court of India, Gas Authority of l,ndia Ltd. (GAIL) has 
already completed preliminary work for laying down the gas pipe line and has informed this 
office that they will complete the action for the allotment of gas by December'% and it is 
expected that the Natural Gas will be available to Ferozabad some time in January '97. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that action has been taken by Government in respect of 
supply of coal to the existing industries regarding short supply or supply of inferior quality of 
coal and that GAIL has also earmarked gas for this industry. 
20. RECOMMENDATION 
Glass Industry Development Centre 
The Glass Industry Development Centre is not functioning satisfactorily in the field of 
development of glass industry. The Centre has to activate its activities to make its presence 
felt in the region. (Page-92) 
Action Taken 
So far the functioning and strengthening of Centre for the development of Glass 
Industry, Ferozabad is concerned, it is stated that the Centre has already implemented its 
first phase activities by setting up necessary testing and training facilities. The second phase 
activities for setting up PTDU is under progress. Government of India has alreaC:ly recruited 
necessary senior officers to further enhance the level of its activities so as to make its 
presence felt in the region. 
Ct>mments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee hopes that the second phase of activity for setting up PTDU will be 
accomplished expeditiously. 
21. RECOMMENDATION 
UniforPt Tax structure 
The entrepreneurs are also suffering due to different tax structure in different States. 
Accordingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that there should be a uniform tax structure 
throughout the country. (Page-95) 
Action Taken 
Government of Bihar, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed h1 the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Industry has forwarded the 
recommendation to Government of Bihar for necessary action without caring that Central 
Government's initiative is also relevant in the matter of uniform tax structure in the country. 
4535 IRS/ F-9-A 

58 
22. RECOMMENDJ\TION 
Ranchi Industrial , Area Development Authority 
On the functioning of the Ranchi Industrial Area Development Authority the Sub­
CommUtee observed that it should help the entrepreneurs instead of engaging them in 
procedure wrangles. For this the Sub-Committee recommends tll8t administrative procedure 
may be simplified and the visit of Government ofracials may be redpced to once in a year. 
(Page-95) 
Action Taken 
Government of Bihar, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of Bihar on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
23. RECOMMENDATION 
HEC 
"The Sub-Committee recommended that Government should intervene in the matter 
and restrict SBI in negating Government efforts to revive HEC. The Sub-Committee further 
recommends that right now HEC is in financial crunch therefore the balance amount of 
Rs. 62.61 crores sanctioned for the year 1995-96 may be released immediately so that revised 
performance targets for 1995-96 can be achieved". (Page-98) 
Action Taken 
A meeting at the level of Secretary (Banking) was convened in middle of Feb. '96 
where all issues related to State Bank of India's support to revival of HEC was 
discussed. 
The Bank has agreed to adjust 15% of all deposits made by HEC towards the interest 
payable by it, as well as to refund the penal interest charged by it as envisaged in the 
revival package of the company. 
The amount of cash credit to be converted in Working Capital Term Loan (WCTL) is 
being finalised· by the Bank. 
Government have released a total sum of Rs. 58.07 crore during 1995-96 towards the 
payment of salary & wages and bonus in instalments. This has eased the financial 
situation of the company to a great extent. 
The company could achieve the revised net sale target for.1995-96 as projected in the 
revival plan .. It .could also reduce the losses to. the extent of Rs. 80 crore compared to 
the previous year i.e. 1994-95. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 

24. RECOMMENDATION 
VRS in HEC 
59 
"The Sub-Committee also felt that ratio of officers and workers in HEC is on higher side 
which is counter productive to the company's financial health. Accordingly, the Sub­
Committee recommends that the ratio may be brought down by way of VRS". (Page-98) 
Action Taken 
"It was also mentioned by the committee that 6000 people out of 11,000 consisted on 
non-technical workmen and hence the ratio of officers and workmen worked out to be 
1:2". 
The Present position about the ratio of workmen to executives as on 1.7.96 is given 
below: 
(Qty. in nos.) 
Executive Supervisor Worker Total % 
Technical 2152 655 4810 7617 67.9 
Non. Tech. 657 440 519 1636 14.6 
Doctors 53 53 0.5 
Unskilled 1905 1905 17.0 
TOTAL: 2862 1095 7254 11211 100.0 
The strength of 2862 executives include 596 Jr. Manager Working in trade and 758 Jr. 
Managers working as supervisors. Out of 1095 nos. of supervisory strength, 1057 nos. are 
working in trade. Therefore on accounting tlrem as workers, ratio of executive to workmen 
comes to be 1:6.43. 
This ratio would further decline to 1:9 with more retirement and VR in future. 
Voluntary Retirement SchefiJe 
The primary objectives with which VRS has been introduced in HEC is to reduce 
surplus manpower. Since VRS was implemented, the manpower strength of HEC has 
reduced by 5285. Manpower reduced in % under VRS is 28.08%. 

60 
Category-wise persons rt!leared under VRS is ar under: 
Total % 
Executives 1793 33.9 
Supervisors 624 11.8 
Workers 2868 54.3 
TOTAL: 5285 100.0 
It may be seen from the above that no. of officers released under Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme constitutes more than one-third of the total no. of persons released, and is subject to 
professional abilities and company's needs. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
25. RECOMMENDATION 
Recruitment policy In HEC 
"The Sub-Committee observed that in recruitment and promotion of SCs, STs & OBCs, 
the ·Government policies are not strictly adhered to. Accordingly there must be close 
monitoring of these policies by Government and the management may be asked to 
explain the reasons for this and keeping backlog of vacancies." (Page-98) 
Action Taken 
HEC is following the Reservation Policy for SC & ST in recruitment since March, 1971. 
To look after the interest of SCIST in the matter of recruitment and proper implementation 
of Presic;lential Directives, a Liaison Cell has also been constituted at the Corporate level, 
which is functioning under a Liaison Officer, who is a ST. All the provisions laid down in 
the Presidential Directives for SCIST are being scrupulously followed in different types of 
recruitment and a Roster to that effect is maintained in the Liaison Cell. 
In order to wipe ouVreduce the backlog vacancies for SCIST, an advertisement was 
issued exclusively for SCIST in 1994 for the intake of Executive Trainees in Group-A post. 
As a result of this effort, 43 nos. of SC candidates and 14 nos. of ST condidates were 
appointed against backlog vacancies. 
For reducing backlog vacancies in Group-C & D posts, a special recruitment drive was 
launched in 1989 and 204 SC candidates and 230 ST candidates were provided with 
employment in the company. There have been difficulties in recruitment in the recent past 
due to over staffing and financial constraints. Government pOlicies with regard to SCIST/ 
OBCs are being closely monitored. 

61 
Reservation PoliCJ tor SCIST in Promotion 
It may be submitted that HEC follows time-Bound Promotion Scheme, which is in 
conformity witb the reservation policy. 
Reservation PolicJ tor OBC 
The Government directive regarding reservation policy for OBC, was received only in 
the month of December' 93 vide ref. no. 36012122193-Estt. (SCI') dt. 8.9.93 and provision 
for reservation were implemented w.e.f. the year 1994. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
26. RECOMMENDATION 
Revival of HEC 
"The Sub-Committee felt that reference to HEC to BIFR has adversely affected its 
reputation which has resulted in constant down-fall in the work order. Accordingly to 
improve its reputation the HEC may be taken out from BIFR as soon as possible." 
(Page-98, 99) 
Action Taken 
The present status with BIFR is as under: 
The company was referred to BIFR in February'92 under SICA (special Provision) 
Act, 1985. 
BIFR appointed lOBI as on operating Agency to examine the Turn Around Plan 
of the Company. 
The TAP formulated by the company was accepted by the Group of Ministers in 
June'95. 
BIFR has finalised its rehabilitation scheme and the same has been circulated to all 
0 ' 
concerned agencies. 
SBI has already sent its consent on reliefs and concessions to BIFR, Government 
of Bihar and BSEB are expected to send their consents to BIFR, in a week's time. 
Consent of Government of India on the revised financial restructuring is also 
expected shortly. 
The next hearing of BIFR has been fixed for 26.8.96 when the rehabilitation plan 
is expected to be approved by the bench. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 

27. RECOMMENDATION 
SISI, Ranchi 
62 
The Sub-Committee observed that functioning of SISI, Ranchi is not satisfactory and 
therefore, recommends that it must aggravate its activities to help out the entrepreneurs. 
(Page - 95) 
Action Taken 
In addition to the activities currently being undertaken by SISI, Ranchi, the Institute 
has also been asked to undertake the following activities: 
(i) SISI, Ranchi has been asked to give wide publicity to the new programmes such as 
NEF and TDMF and report on the impact of these programmes to the 
headquarters. 
(ii) They have also been asked to interact with the officials of bank branches dedicated 
to serve small scale industries and also generally regarding the credit flow to SSI 
sector. 
(iii) To conduct modernisation studies in as~ociation with banks to ensure their 
acceptance for funding small units and laying greater stress on implementation of 
cluster study reports at unit level. They have been asked to undertake rigorous 
follow up to illustrate impact of modernisation, energy conservation, pollution 
control and quality upgradation programmes. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. The Sub-Committee hopes that SISI, Ranchi would comply with the 
directions of the Ministry. 
28. RECOMMENDATION 
Bokaro Steel Plant 
The Sub-Committee had discussion with trade and industry representatives, Bokaro and 
with the management of Bokaro Steel Plant and recommends as follows. (Page-103) 
(i) Reservation of jobs/orders may be annually fixed for the BIADA units. 
(ii) A high level technical and bureaucratic Committee may be formed to study the 
basic hindrances in the path of development of BIADA units and to monitor their 
functioning. 
(iii) A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between BSL, BIADA units and 
Government of Bihar may be signed on an annual basis for procurement of orders. 
(iv) Existing units could be encouraged for enhancing their capacity and diversifying 
into manufacture of other related items; required by BSL and which presently are 
being supplied from outside BIADA. 
(v) A technical cell for development, improvement and monitoring of the manufacturing 
process and quality control may be formulated. 

63 
(vi) Training may be imparted to entrepreneurs and employees of BIADA units for 
enhancement of productivity, quality improvement and Human Resource 
Development by BSL training Department. 
In addition to above, the Sub-Committee also feels that implementation of the decision 
taken by Plant Level Committee (PLC) is also necessary for the development of BIADA units. 
The Sub-Committee further feels that steps may be expedited to stop incidents of theft in 
BSL. 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the matter 
to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterjltes 
the Committee's recommendation. 
29. RECOMMENDATION 
Industrial DVP in Sitamarhi, Bihar 
On the basis of its meeting with the worker union representatives of the Trade and 
Industry Department the Sub-Committee observed that Sitamarhi district of North Bihar has 
a large potential for development of Sugar and Khandsari Mills but there is only one big 
sugar industry i.e. Riga Sugar Mill. Therefore, the Sub-Committee recommends that some 
concrete steps need to be taken to promote more such mills in the area. Keeping in view the 
good harvest of vegetable and fruits, the Sub-Committee also recommends that incenthes may 
be given for starting food processing units in the area. 
In the field of developing infrastructure the Sub-Committee felt that there is long pending 
genuine demand for broad gauge railway line from Dharbhanga Narkatiyaganj and new line 
from Muzaffarpur to Sitamarhi which may be acceded to give a boost to increased trade 
activities in the area. The road condition may also be improved for the purpose and the road 
to Sitamarhi may be declared as National Highway. 
On the attitude of Riga Sugar Mill the Sub-Committee showed its concern on the 
conditions of sugarcane growing farmers of Sonbarsa, Parihar, Susand, Pupsi Hajpats, 
Naupur and Runi Saidpur which are under Riga Sugar Mill's reserve area and from whom it 
is not purchasing sugarcane. The Sub-Committee therefore recommends that either these 
farmers may be freed from the reserved area of Riga Sugar Mill or the Riga Sugar Mill 
should buy sugarcane from these farmers. The Sub-Committee further felt that Riga Sugar 
Mill must take other routine welfare measures like Kisan Bhavan etc. for the benefits of 
farmer who are supplying them sugarcane. 
The Sub-Committee further recommended that subsidy in certain industries may be given 

64 
by the State Government to invite . entrepreneun in the area. The Sub-Committee also 
suggested that iD PMRY providiDg loan to a group of person instead of individual may be 
considered to make it competitive and preference in loan may be given for establishing variety 
of enterprises rather than same type of enterprise. (Page 107-108) 
Action Taken 
Government of Bihar, w .. o .are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Government of .Bi~ar on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's .recommendation. 
30. RECOMMENDATION 
BWEL 
On the basis of the evidence tendered the Sub-Committee observed that B.W.E.L. is 
capable of produciJl& good quality wagons provided regular supply order of wagons is given 
to it. The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the fact that there is 
shortage of wagons in the country;, . regular supply order of wagons may be given to 
B.W.E.L. which is otherwise necessary, to save the Company from drifting towards sickness. 
The Sub-Committee also observed that some information asked for from B.W.E.L. has not 
been received and accordingly, recommendation on. those matters will be given after the 
same has been received. (Page 105) 
Action . Taken 
Government of India took over two e~twhile private sick companies viz. Arthur Butler 
& Company Limited and Britannia Engineering Company, Wagon Division located. at 
Muzaffarpur and Mokameh on 7.5.1973 and 15.2.~·974 respectively. In December, 1978, 
Bharat Wagon & Engineering Company w~s formed . by amalgamation of these two units. 
The two units, of BWEL, viz. Muzaffarpur and Mokameh, are mainly engaged in the 
manufacture of Railway Wagons. In. fact Railway Wagon constitutes 97% of the total· 
turnover of the Company. BWEL was a ···profit making company till 1993-94. The 
performance of the Company critically depends on the size of Wagon orders. Ministry of 
Railways had drastically reduced the wagon orders during 1993-94 and 1994-95. As'· a result, 
the Company's profit reduced: to Rs. 11 lakhs only during 1993-94 and Company incurred a 
loss of Rs. 4.94 crore during 1994-95. It is ·also a fact that during the rarst four months of 
1995-96, the Company did no~ have adequate work load as the wagon orders were placed in 
July, 1995 only. Ministry of Railways released 100% wagqn order through Wagon India Ltd. 
till 1993-94. Ministry of Railways, however, changed the procurement policy in . 1993-94 itself 
by inviting open tenders for 10% of wagon orders. In subsequent year, they enh~nced orders 
under open tender to 50%. During 1995-96, Railways pla~ed order against this open tender 
on L-1 price, which was ·Rs. 68,000/· iess per Wagon· as compared to the prices quoted by 
Wagon India Ltd. on behalf of wagon builders. Ministry of Industry has been taking up the 

65 
matter from time to time with Ministry of Railways for procurement of the entire requirement 
of wagons through WIL. BWEL was not getting any subsidy and therefore, there is no 
question about withdrawal of the same. BWEL faced financial difficulties. due to non­
placement of adequate wagon orders by Railway Board. Installation of shot blasting 
equipment was made mendatory by the Railways and was financed by internal generation of 
funds even during difficult years. The shot blasting equipment at Muzaffarpur Unit was in 
operation at the time of visit of the Sub-Committee. It is a fact that Company regularly 
suffered due to erratic power supply position of Bihar State Electricity Board (BSEB). 
BWEL has its own DO sets so as to ensure that there is no loss to the production. However, 
there is a loss due to higher cost of power generation through D. G. sets. 
There is no new recruitment in the Company as there is no need for fresh recruitment 
on the basis of their operational needs. The Company has a number of Welfare Schemes 
which have been launched during the last few years, viz. housing colony for employees, 
canteen facilities for workers, credit-co-operative society for employees, consumer co­
operative society for employees, provision of school bus for the children of employees etc. 
The· Company entered a wage agreement with workers w.e.f. 1.1.92. Arrears have not 
been paid till date. In fact, it had been agreed by the Management and the Representatives 
of the recognised unions of BWEL that the wage arrears will be paid to them after financial 
situation improves. Company is expecting to pay arrears during the current year. It is not a 
fact that the workmen are against any sort of production linked wage agreement. In fact 
production linked incentive schemes are successfully operating in BWEL. 
BWEL was earning profit regularly from 1988-89 to 1993-94. But duo to drastic 
reduction in wagon orders during 1994-95 the Company suffered a loss of Rs. 4.94 crores as 
the wagon production for 1994-95 came down to only 1222 FWUs as against 3150 FWUs 
during 1992-93. 
BWEL incurred loss in 1995-96 also due to reduction in wagon orders. The installed 
capacity of both the units of BWEL in 4000 FWUs. There were no order for Railway 
wagons during the first four months of the year 1995-96. Orders were received only in July, 
1995. 
The Company has now informed that they have already furnished all other information 
as desired by the Sub-Committee. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Committee's recommendation has not been strictly 
implemented by the Ministry of Railways. The Sub-Committee recorrup.ends that there 
should be consistency in the supply orders for wagons placed upon BWEi.. in order to save 
the Company. · 
31. RECOMMENDATION 
Condition of Industrial Units In Bihar 
On the basis of the evidence tendered, the Sub-Committee observed that the conditions of 
industrial units In Bihar Is •In bad shape due to scores of reasons, main being the shortage of 
funds and erratic power supply position in the State. 
The Sub-Committee observed that the other reason for backwardness in the region is the 
deteriorated conditions of big industries on which many small and medium industries were 
4535/ RS/F-lO·A 

66 
dependant. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee recommends that banks must increase their 
finance in the State to give a new lease to the industries. The Sub-Committee also feels that 
im()rovement in the power supply position is.equally ir~portant alongwith the finance. The Sub­
"'Committee further observed that the various industrial· area development authorities which 
were created for acquisition of land and development of infrastructure of respective areas have 
not worked up to the expectation. Accordingly the Sub-Committee recommends that instead of 
having oftices at different places these authorities may be monitored from one place which will 
also reclua! the establishment cost. TheSe authorities must shed their bureaucratic attitude and 
help in _developing an environment conducive to industrial growth in the State. 
The. Sub-Committee ieels that there is urgent need to consider enacting a uniform tax 
structure throughout the country since in many parts of the country entrepreneurs are suffering 
due to different tax structure in different States. 
\ 
The Sub-Committee further recommended that the head of a public sector undertaking 
must be for a .full term and there should not be any time gap arrangement since it is not good 
for the health of that public sector undertaking. 
On observing the conditions of sick public sector undertakings that the control of the State 
Government, the Sub!'Committee recommends that some amount of NRF may also be provided 
for workers of these public sector undertakings. · · · 
Lastly the Sub-Committee recommends that to improve disbursement of loan under PMRY 
performance of bank particularly B.ranch Manager performance may be entered in their annual 
performance report since this would encourage them to work harder. Secondly, the Bran~ 
Manager of banks fear that if loan under PMRY is given without security, recovery will not ~· 
made and they will face problem •. Hence, the Sub-Committee feels that this accountability\ 
procedure about fixing responsibility needs to be modified and if they follow RBI guidelines and 
thea a loan is not recovered, personal responsibility should not be fixed. (Page • 112) 
Action Taken 
.Government of Bihar, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Coaunents/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the entire recommendation has been 
forwarded to the Government of Bihar for necessary action though some portions of it were 
the concern, if the Central Government also and that it has not been apprised of any action 
being taken thereon. The recommendation of the Committee is reiterated. 
32. RECOMMENDATION 
Growth Centres for Bihar 
. . 
The Sub-Committee was informed that of t~ six Growth Centres allotted to the State, 
two (Begusarai and Hazaribagh) have been sanctioned and a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs each have 
been released by the Central Government for the two centres. For the three centres 
{Bhagalpur, Chhapra and Muzaffarpur) apprai~als reports have been received from IFCI and 
Ministry of Industry has sought clarifications on c~rtain points from the St.ate Governments. 
The Sub-Committee impressed upon the State Government officials to expedite the.ir replies 
to objections raised by IFCI. The Sub-Committee strongly recommends that JV~ch awaited 
appraisal report from IFCI regarding Growth Centre at Darbhanga may be expedited on an 
urgent basis. (Page-114) 
4535/RS/F-10-B 

67 
Action Taken 
The three Growth Centres in Bihar, namely, Bhagalpur, Chhapra and Muzaffarpur have 
been approved by the Government on 30.9.96 and an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs for each of the 
three Centres has been released as a part of Central assistance. Comments of the State 
Government have been called for on the deficiencies pointed out by Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India (IFCI) in respect of Darbhanga Growth Centre. 
For the two Growth Centres of Begusarai and Hazaribagh which were approved by the 
Government of India in May, 1995, an amount of Rs. 300 lakhs and Rs. 200 lakhs has 
respectively been released so far as a part of the Central assistance. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
33. RECOMMENDATION 
liD Centres in Bihar 
The Sub-Committee noted that Government of India has been communicating with 
State Government on the issue of setting up liD Centres but no response is coming foqh. 
The Sub-Committee further noted that the State Government has not even sent its report on 
the liD Centre for Sitamarhi to Government of India. The Sub-Committee urges up-on State 
Government to explore the possibilities of setting up of more liD Centres in the State in the 
interest of overall industrial development of the State. (Page-115) • 
Action Taken 
Integrated Infrastructural Development (liD) Scheme was launched in March, 1994. 
The scheme is partly financed by Central Government by way of grant and partly by Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) by way of loan. Proposals for setting up liD 
Centres are approved by the Central Government after these are appraised by SIDBI. 
However, if the State agencies implementing the scheme has its own funds for financing the· 
SIDBI component or can arrange loan for an agency other than SIDBI, appraisal from 
SIDBI if not necessary. · .. ; 
Soon after launching the liD Scheme State Governments including Bihar ~fl C 
requested to send proposals through SIDBI. For a long time no proposal was received f . :, · 
the State of Bihar. The State Government prepared 4 project reports. However, SIDBI had 
some reservations about the implementing agency for these projects. Both the State 
Government and SIDBI were requested to sort out the issue regarding implementing agency 
for liD projects in Bihar and to send the proposals for setting.}Jp an liD Centre. SIDBI has 
informed that the issue was discussed by them with Industriaf;Development Commissioner, 
Govt. of Bihar and Managing Dire(;tor, Patna Industrifll·~ AJ'~a Development Authority 
(PIADA) and a consensus has been reaclted for proceeding ahead with the liD proposals of 
Bihar Government. PIADA has agreed to update the project report and submit it to SIDBI 
with relevant financiaJ statements. SIDBI has also advised its Patna Branch Officer to 
coordinate with PIADA and firm up the proposal quickly. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government· on the Committee't­
recommendation. 

68 
34. RECOMMENDATION 
HSWCL 
On the basis of the evidence of the management of Bindustan Steel Works Construction 
Llmlted and the papers/document submitted before It, the Sub-Committee has come to the 
conclusion that the Company Is faced with the problems such as (1) lack of adequate orders, 
(2) lack of strong technology base, (3) Low Equity base and huge burden of Government loan 
and Interest and (4) vlrtueJ withdrawal of purchase & price preference. The Sub-Committee 
hopes that the Government of India would sympathetically look Into these problems and come 
to the help of the Company as far as possible keeping In view the contribution of the 
Company In the steel sector of the country. The Committee also urge upon Government to 
ensure orders for the Company so that It may be able to strengthen Its technological base. It 
should also be well within the consideration of Government of India to restore the purchase 
and price preference of the Company. SAIL may perhaps be In a better position to work out 
some solution for revival of the Company. (Page-117-118) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed In the matter 
to take appropriate foUow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 
3S. RECOMMENDATION 
BIFR 
The Sub-Committee takes note of Immense contribution of Bhant Refractories In growth 
of steel sector over the years. It Is somewhat unusual that Inordinate delay In proceedings of 
BIFR In respect of companies like BRL leads to demotlvatlon amongst the workers. The Sub· 
Committee would urae upon Government of India to expedite the revival of the company on 
the basis of suggestions put forth by the IDBI. (Page-118) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed In the matter 
to take appropriate foUow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 

SUB-COMMITTEE· V 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE· V 

1. RECOMMENDATION 
Power Projects 
71 
On the basis of submissions made by the Principal Secretary {Industries & Commerce), 
the Federation of Steel Small Industries and the management of Bharat Heavy Plates and 
Vessels during its visit in Andhra Pradesh, the Sub-Committee is of the opinion that power 
was most crucial factor for the industrial development of any area/State. While the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh was making all possible efforts within its resources for 
power availability, it was the Central Government which should come to the help of State 
Government in augmenting power generation. The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommends 
that ciearance of power projects proposed by the State Government should be expedited on 
priority basis by the Central Government. The private parties may be allowed to enter in 
power sector as the State Government had no hitch on that score. {Page No.-180) 
Action · Taken 
Ministry of Power, who are concemed with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Power on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-COmmittee 
reiterates the co·mmittee's recommendation. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
Development of Gangavaram Port 
The Sub-Committee has observed that development of more ports can definitely 
increase the base of industrialisation in Andhra Pradesh. The Sub-Committee recommends 
that the Surface Transport Ministry should take urgent initiatives in developing Gangavaram 
Port and declare it a major port. {Page 181) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Surface Transport, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
in .the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
·The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Surface Transport on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. · 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
-Development of Civil Aviation in Hyderabad 
The representatives· of Federation of Andhra Pradesh Chamber of . Commerce . and 
Industry highlighted the problems of cargo facilities for products meant for export. 
According to· them Air India should shoulder the responsibility of carrying export goods as 
ships were not· available easily and also the demurrage charges take a major chunk of their 
capital. Hyderabad Airport should be declared as an International Airport for export 
purposes. The Sub-Committee feels that Government may sympathetically consider this 
positive suggestion. (Page-182) 

72 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
Vizaa Steel Plant 
There were certain issues linked with the railways which came to the notice of the Sub­
Committee. For instance the workers of the Vizagapatnam Steel Plant deposed before the 
Sub-Committee that only 65 wagons per day available for transportation against total 
requirement of 135 wagons. The Sub-Committee feels that shortages of wagons should not 
come in the way of production capacity of the plant and urges the Government to solve the 
problem of wagons on urgent basis. The Sub-Committee would also like the Railway 
Ministry to rationalise the special tariff levied for steel products in Vizagapatnam Steel Plant 
for overall development of steel sector. (Page 182) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
Railway bridge between Gajapathlnagaram and Dattlra 
The district authorities in Vizianagaram pointed out the problem connected with the 
railw~ys. According to them the movement of coal to the State was very tardy. In their 
view, the railway link facilities could be improyed by constructing a railway bridge between 
Gajapathinagaram and Dattira Jeru. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government will take 
care of this suggestion. (Page 182) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Railways, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Railways on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 

73 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Mining in Andhra Pradesh 
The Government of Andhra Pradesh informed the Sub-Committee that the State had 
plenty of raw material resources. The main raw materials were coal, iron ore, oil and natural 
gas, manganese ore, copper ore, dolamite, limestone, lead and zinc ore. There was plenty of 
scope for diamond mining in the State for which permission of proper aerial survey was 
required. The present provision regarding aerial survey up to 25 square kilometres only had 
restricted mining of raw material. The Sub-Committee feels that such restrictions could 
adversely affect the prospects of mining in the country in general and the State of Andhra 
Pradesh in particular. The Sub-Committee would urge upon the Government to lift such 
restrictions and promote the mining facilities to conduct the survey. The Sub-Committee 
would further suggest to make best use of satellite survey facilities in locating the prospective 
areas of mining in the State. (Page 183) 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Mines, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Mines on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
National Mineral Development Corporation 
The Sub-Committee was informed by the management of National Mineral 
Development Corporation that wherever possible finished product instead of raw material 
should be exported. However, they pointed out that the export of raw material to Japan 
have been done on the basis of MOU after getting clearance from the Government of India. 
They further informed that their total production was 9.5 million torines and they had a l'Ong 
term contract with Vizagapatnam Steel Plant and ESSAR Steel Plant in terms of supply of 
raw material. Since they had to export raw material they were keeping in stock with them 
iron ore for the purpose. Therefore, they were unable to meet the requirement (1.2 million 
tonnes) of Vizagapatnam Steel Plant. The Sub-Committee appreciates the performance of 
the Corporatiqn in the Iron Ore Mining and recommends that more emphasis should be 
given to meet the requirements of indigenous steel plant as regards the supply of iron ore is 
concerned. (Page 184 and 185) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 

74 
8. RECO~NDATION 
Diamond mining 
. In regard to diamond mining, the National Mineral ~~opment Corporation informed 
that in order to increase the sphere of activities in diamonl:f :mining "auto magnetic survey" 
needed to be. conducted. The cost of the survey would bp; around Rs. 515 crores and the 
areas involved will be about 25,000 square,Kilnmetres. At f»'esent, Government permits to 
conduct survey in 25 sq. Km. and there was proposal to inclease it to 46 square Kilometres 
which was again not &ufficient for the purpose of conducting ''auto magnetic survey". In this 
connection, they sought the assistance of the Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee hopes 
that the Government would take positive step in this matter (Page 185) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel, who are co~rned with the subject, have been .addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the ~hove recommendation. 
·comment$/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it h~s pot been apprised of the a~ion taken 
by· the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
· ~e Committee's recommendation. .~ 
9. RECO~NDATION 
Acquisition of captive mines by NMDC . / 
After some deliberations, the Sub-Committee· ,1athered from the National Mjm{r~l 
Development Corporation that they were pleading with the State Government of ~ataka 
and the Government of India to hand over the captive mines in J{a~1Ca .namely 
"Kumaraswami Mines" to them. They were pleading for this because the _,IYonamalai mines 
in Kamataka where at present they were doing mining was likely to be eXhausted.in the next 
7-8 years and the task force engaged there would have no work in hand. The Sub­
Committee feels that apparently the pleading of NMDC fot getting captive mines in 
Karnataka sounds logical and the Government should consider their case on merit. The Sub­
Committee further observes that the development of J3.ailadilla mines should also help supply 
to Vizagapatnam Steel Plant. (Page 185) 
1 Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel, who ar~.-e6ncerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate f,911oW up action :.On the above re.9ommendation. 
Conunentsl0bserva'.i9JIS/ 
The Sub-PJmmittee is unhappy to rtote that i(lias not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Mi~istiy of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee -reiterates 
the Conmtitte~'s rec::_Qmmendation. 
/ . 
10. ,,RECOMMENDATION 
Sponge Iron India Limited 
The management of Sponge Iron India Limited had detailed discussion with the Sub­
Committee about the working of the company. On the basis of the discussion the Sub­
Committee recomm~nds that the company should be given financial assistance ~o execute its 
installed capacity. The supply of good quality coal with less ash content from M/s. Singareni 

) 
75 
Collieries Company Limited may be ensured. The $!J~idy should be given. ~ the 
company to purchase coal. For R&D activity the Central~Goverhment should also- ~nd 
financial assistance to the company. There was also ne~d ·t~ review and rationallk the 
import duty on melting scrap so that indigenous prodUctfon of sponge iron coulcl· aet 
proper boost. (Page 187) ·• ' I 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel who are concerned with the subject have been addressed in ~ 
matter to take appropriate follow-up action on the above recommendation. ·· · 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised ·of the action 
taken by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub--Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
ViSakhapatnam Steel Plant 
The Sub-Committee observes that the Visakhapatnam Steel Plant needs to be 
suitably nourished for it being an upcoming steel plant, in spite of several constraints was 
making. cash profit. The Sub--Committee appreciates the problem faced by the plant on 
account of non-availability of requisite good quality iro,n.~()Je and recommends that it 
should be solved by the agencies supplying it. The · Sub--Committee feels that more 
wagons should be made available to the VSP to transport niw material from the VPT te 
the plant. The Government should give freight subsidy to the steel plant. VSP should · 
also be permitted to set up its own captive jetty in the upcoming Gangavaram Port and 
the clearance for the purpose should be given as early as possible. (Page 189) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of t}le action 
taken by the Ministry of Steel on the Committe~'s recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
Approval of proposals at . DIC level 
The Sub-Committee urges the Central Government to formulate certain guidelines on 
procedural matters in such a manner so that entrepreneurs get their problem solved at 
District Industries Centre level itself. This would prove to be the biggest incentive and 
the entrepreneurs would also not be forced to run from pillar to post to get their 
proposals approved. The Sub-Committee would further suggest for a centralised· data 
system for information on investment for the convenience of investors. (Page 182) 
Action Taken 
The main purpose of creation of DICs was to work under Single Window Schemes 
wherein the entrepreneur is able to get all sort of guidance and assistance under a single 
roof. All the central schemes and other ones are being mostly executed through DICs so 
that the entrepreneurs have to approach DICs only. · 
As the primary r~sponsibility of development of small scale industries is the 
responsibility of State Government, all the State Governments have been requested to 
take suitable necess.ary actioll at their end. Some of the State Governments, namely,\ 
Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Maharashtra, Himachal 

76 
Pradesh, Kerala, Andaman & Nicobar have informed that they have formulated guidelines 
or taken measures so that entrepreneurs can get their proposals approved at District level 
itself. 
A scheme for computerising DICs in the country is currently under progress. This will 
help in having centralised data on investment which will be of use for the investors. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Ministry of Industry have taken action on 
Committee's recommendation and many State Governments as specified by the Ministry 
have formulated guidelines or taken measures so as to ensure that the proposals are 
approved at District level itself. The Sub-Committee hopes that other States would also take 
similar action. 
13. RECOMMENDATION 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
The management of BHEL pointed out that they had to face problem when they had to 
compete with General Electric, ABB, Siemens, etc. The problem as pointed out by the 
management was in the area of taxation. They informed the Sub-Committee that BHEL had 
to bear with the policy of double taxation. On being a~ked by the Sub-Committee to 
elaborate on the point, it was clarified that when BHEL imported any particular material, it 
had to pay import duty. Thereafter, on the finished product, sales-tax had also .to be paid. 
This problem they informed the Committee~as not being faced by Companies like General 
Electric, etc. These companies when they import any machinery for their plant they do not 
have to pay any duty. They therefore urged the Sub-Committee that CVD is required to be 
abolished. They also informed that the World Bank bidding process should be adopted and 
BHEL should be permitted to participate in open competition bidding. They also emphasised 
the need to introduce "credit insurance scheme" and that the Government should also stand 
as a guarantor. The Sub-Committee recommends that the problems of this premier 
undertaking should be solved on priority basis with regard to adjustment in duty structure 
and the question of allowing the company to participate in bidding including financial 
bidding. Rationalisation of sales-tax may also help the company a lot (Page 184) 
Action Taken 
Department of Heavy Industry agrees with all the observations/recommend<fiions of the 
Committee except the part where Sub-Committee has mentioned about the abolition of 
CVD while the BHEL has been requesting all along for the imposition of the CVD on the 
imported equipments. All these observations/recommendations relate to the Ministry of 
Finance/Ministry of Power, and have been forwarded to them for taking appropriate action 
in the matter. 
Comments/Observations , 
The Sub-Comniihee notes that the Ministry of Industry are in agreement with the 
Committee's recdinmendations. The Sub-Committee notes the action being taken by 
Government on the recommendations of the Committee. 
14. RECOMMENDATION 
Sponge Iron India Limited 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Company should be given financial assistance 
to increase its installed capacity. The Supply of good quality coal with less ash content from 
M1i, Singareni Colleries Company Ltd. may be ensured. Subsidy should be given to the 
• 

77 
company to purchase coal. For R&D activity the Central Government should also extend 
fimmcial assistance to the Company. There was also need to review and rationalise the 
import duty on melting scrap so that indigenous production of sponge iron got proper 
boost. (Page 187) 
Action Taken 
The Sponge Iron India Limited (SilL) has plans to double its existing capacity for 
production of sponge iron from 60,000 tonnes per annum to 1,20,000 tonnes per annum by 
setting up a third kilm of the capacity of 60,000 tonnes. In fact, the proposal is part of a 
comprehensive Turn Around Plan being prepared by the Company. As soon as the proposal 
is received in the Government, the same can be considered for providing financial assistance, 
as .jn the previous years. 
Thet Company is linked with .Mt. Singareni Collieries Company Limited for its coal 
requirement. Accordingly, the Company has been securing all its coal requirements for 
SCCL since its inception i.e., 1980. It is a fact that the quality of coal supplied fr.om the 
mine has deteriorated over the years which, in turn, had affected the operations of the plant 
with respect to capacity utilisation as also the quality of the product. However, with certain 
special arrangements that effected by the Company during the year 1995-96, it has been 
possible to obtain reasonably good quality of coal without much fluctuations in quality, 
particularly the ash content. As a result of this, the production during the year has shown 
considerable improvement (55,605 tonnes) in comparison with the preceeding few years. On 
account of such high production, the operations of the Company, despite adverse market 
conditions, have been satisfactory and, in fact the Company has made a small net profit of 
about Rs. 30 lakhs (provisional) during the year 1995-96 after incurring heavy losses for the 
previous two years. 
As stated above, the Government has been providing budgetary support to the 
Company to enable it to meet capital expenditure including expenditure on R&D Schemes. 
Details of budgetary. support provided during the last two years as also the proposed 
budgetary support are as under:-
(Rs. in crores) 
S.No. Name of the Scheme Budgetary support provided 
1994-95 1995-96 1996-97 
(Proposed) 
1. Continuing Schemes 2.93 3.02 
2. New Schemes 1.25 4.50 
3. AMR Schemes 1.30 0.03 0.57 
4. Township 0.37 
5. R&D and Feasibility Studies 0.20 0.20 0.20 
1TOTAL: 4.80 4.50 5.27 
As regards the recommendations of the Committee relating to the need to review and 
rationalise the import duty on melting scrap, it is clarified that steel melting scrap is not a 
manufactured commodity. While examining the duty structure on steel melting scrap and 
sponge iron, the interest of secondary steel producers and sponge iron producers is kept in 
mind. Steel melting scrap is the main feedstock for steel production through the Electric Arc 

78 
Furnace (EAF) route and is about 70% of the cost of production. From the perusal of the 
import figures and the domestic production of sponge iron, it can be observed that lowering 
of the import duty on steel melting scrap has neither led to substantial increase in the import 
of steel melting scrap not reduced the production of sponge iron in the country. On the 
other hand, import of steel melting scrap has been gradually decreasing while sponge iron 
production has recorded a steep increase in the past two years. 
19 view of the above facts, no review of duty on steel melting scrap is considered 
necessary at this stage. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes. the i:nfonnation furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recoml1)elldation. · 
I 
15. RECOMMENDATION 
State of affairs of Praga Tools Limited 
The Sub-Committee was satisfied with the performance of Praga Tools Limited and felt 
that the Company was capable enough to compete with others in the wake of liberalisation. 
The proposal submitted by the Company to enter into technical collaboration with 
Mitusubishi Company which was awaiting clearance from Central Government should 
th~refore be expedited. If possible, the Company should be transferred back to the Ministry 
of Defence to facilitate more effective utilisation of the available capacity for production of 
defence items. (Page No. 187). 
Action Taken 
Praga TQols Limited was established in the year 1943 as a Public Limited Company in 
the Private Sector. Initially the Company started manufacture of High Speed Cotting Tools 
and precision Measuring Instruments. In March, 1959 Government of India acquired 
majority of shares. of the Company and placed it under the Administrative control of 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. In December, 1963 the Company was taken over by 
the Ministry of Defence. In April, 1986 the Company was transferred from the Ministry of 
Defence to the Ministry of Industry, Department of Heavy Industry and the Company 
~became a subsidiary of HMT Limited, Bangalore with effect from 25.2.1988. Government 
'bas not received any proposal from PTL to enter into collaboration with Mitusubishi 
Company. The proposal for transfer of the administrative control of the, PTL to Ministry of 
Defence was taken up by the Department of Heavy Industry. It was however turned down by 
them due to the following reason-'The reasons which prompted the CCP A to transfer PTL 
to the Department of Heavy Industry in 1986 are ·still valid and Ministry of Defence does 
not favour transfer of PTL back to itself. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
16. RECOMMENDATION 
State of Bfrairs of BHPV 
BHPV a profit making company should be delinked from BYNL the holding company. 
The forming of companies like BYNL should be avoided as it is likely to harm the interest 
of the profit making units of the public sectors. 

79 
The requisite budgetary resources for the investment be extended to BHPV. The 
Company should be relieved of the burden of works contract tax levied by various State 
Governments. (Page 188). 
Action Taken 
The holding company was formed on the basis of the recommendations of a Committee 
headed by Dr. Arjun Sengupta. The pros and cons· of de-linking have to be gone into in 
detail again through a Committee before taking such a vital decision. 
BHPV has been . generating internal resources for meeting its requirement towards 
capital investment. For growth in future, the requirement Of\ funds for capital investments 
will be met from internal resource generation. In case the generation of resources is not 
sufficient, the gap will be met by commercial borrowings. The contract tax is being levied by 
the State Governments. 
CoDHri(mts/Observations 
.. 1 ··~· ' / 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry on tbe f · 
Committee's recommendation. 
17. RECQMMENDATION 
··.:· 
Dev.elop111e~t of Gangavaram Port . 
The.Sil't>-cOmmit}~~.~.thatthe Visakhapatnam Port Trust which is managing the job 
of cargo handling in spite'·of .several operational constraints may be entrusted with the ,job of 
developing the Gangavaram Port. (Page 190). · 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Surface Transport, who are concerned with the subject, have been. addressed 
m the matter to take. appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Surface Transport on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
18. RECOMMENDATION 
State of affairs . of Hindustan Shipyard 
The Sub-Committee observes that the problems of Hindustan Shipyard such as waving 
sales tax by the State Government could be examined sympathetically. The Sub-Committee 
would urge the Central Government to treat Hindustan Shipyard as export oriented unit in 
ship building acti~ities in order to enable it to get sales ta)!: relief; Capital restructuring 
proposal of the Shipyard should alsobe taken care of without further delay. This would help 
the shipy,ard to-~meet the challenges from the multinational companies in the ship building 
activitie~. 'It might also be desirable to consider conversion of loans given to 1shipya~ into· 
equity. (Page 190) : / y ' 
Action Taken / 
/ 
Ministry of Surface Transport, wh~ are concerned with the subject, have been addressed 
m the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
' ' . ' 
.·',' 

80 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Sudace Transport on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
19.' RECOMMENDATION 
Resurrection of Bharat Electronics Ltd. 
The Sub-Committee feels that Bharat Electronics Limited has got requisite talent and 
resources t<;» be exploited to meet the international challenges. Being the only premier public 
undertaking in the field of electronics the Government should ensure orders for the company 
in the national interest. This would definitely motivate the workforce to attain the capacity 
utilisation. The Sub-Committee recommends that experts, the management, officers from 
0 Ministries of Defence, Communication and Information & Broadcasting and workers should 
sit together and find out some radical solution to bring back this premier company on the 
track on priority basis. 
That the Sub-Committee suggest that the company should be encouraged to execute its 
specific action plans to enable it to meet the challenges it was facing from private and 
multinational sectors. 
The Sub-Committee urges the Ministry of Finance to sympathetically consider reduction 
of customs duty on raw material and components from 5% to zero. The Sub-Committee 
recommends that requisite financial support with low interest rates be extended to BEL for 
investment in capital equipment and for technical upgradation . 
. ; The Sub-Committee appreciates the status of BEL as a capital goods industry. It, 
therefore, underlines the imperative need to waive customs duty on capital goods required 
particularly in micro electronic industry. (Page 193, 194). 
Action Taken 
Department of Electronics, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in 
the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Department of Electronics on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
20. RECOMMENDATION 
Works in memory of late Shri Visvesraya 
The Sub-Committee observes that the role of late Shri Visvesraya in the development of 
industries in the country in general and· in his home state in particular becomes quite 
relevant in the present context. The Sub-Committee recommends that a training ·centre 
should be set up at Mudanhalli in the memory of the scientist. A museum should be 
developed in recognition of his contribution. Any proposal from the State Government in 
this regard should therefore be favourably considered by the Central Government. 
(Page 196) 
\ 

81 
Action Taken 
Department of Industries, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore, who are concerned 
with the subject, have been addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on 
the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the action taken by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
21. RECOMMENDATION 
Revival of sick industries 
The Government of India should urgently undertake a survey of all sick industries in the 
country and evolve a package to provide assistance particularly for reviving viable sick 
industries. (Page 197). 
Action Taken 
The Office of the DC(SSI) launched a Diagnostic Survey on Sickness in all StatesltJTs 
covering 30,000 units. The survey work has been completed. The report on the same is likely 
to be available in the current year. Package of assistance will be considered on the receipt of 
the report of the Diagnostic Survey. 
At the instance of Government of India, RBI had constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of the then Deputy Governor of RBI, Shri P.R. Nayak, for examining the 
issue of adequate and timely credit to SSis. The issue of the sickness was also looked into by 
the Committee. The Committee had given several recommendations for rehabilitation of sick 
SSI units such as modification in the definition of sick SSI unit, incipient sickness, viability 
norms and the reliefs and concessions from banks and financial institutions for 
implementation of rehabilitation for potentially viable sick units. The recommendations of 
Nayak Committee have been accepted by RBI and guidelines have been issued to banks on 
modified definition of sick SSI units, reduced rate of interest for rehabilitation, prompt 
viability studies/nursing programmes of identified sick units, setting up of cells at imtJortant 
regional centres besides the cell at Head Office to deal with sick industrial. units and 
provision of expert staff, including technical personnel to look into technical aspects. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Government are already seized of the matter. 
22. RECOMMENDATION 
Implementation of legislation on SSI 
The Small Scale Industries were suffering due to delay in the release of payment by 
large and medium scale industries for purchases made from them in spite of a legislation 
passed by Parliament which provided for prompt payment. The Sub-Committee was 
constrained to express its anguish over the ignorance of legislation and impress upon the 
Government to monitor the implementation of legislation, so passed, in letter and spirit in 
the interest of small scale industries. (Page 198). 
Action Taken 
In order to safeguard the payments due to SSI units against the supply of goods and 
services to the buyers there exists an Act-"The Interest on Delayed Payment to Small Scale 

82 
& Ancillary Undertakings Act, 1993", according to which a buyer is required to make 
payments on or before the date agreed upon between him and the supplier or within a 
period of 30 days from the date of acceptance of services and goods. \\_'herein, if the buyer 
fails to make payment in time, he is liable to pay interest to the supplier on the amount 
from the appointed date or as the case may be at such rate which is 5% points above the 
floor rates for comparable lending. The buyer is also required to specify the amount due 
together with the interest in his annual statement of accounts as remains unpaid to any 
supplier at the end of each accounting year. Moreover, in accordance with the provision of 
the cited Act, amount of interest payable/paid, shall not, for the purpose of computation of 
Income Tax under the Income Tax Act, 1961, be allowed for deduction. 
There are suggestions from different quarters to make the Act more meaningful by 
affecting certain amendments like constitution of District level Tribunals, extending the 
coverage of the Act to NSIC & SSIDCs who are marketing the products of SSI units. These 
suggestions are under consideration. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that Government are considering to make the legislation 
more meaningful of the SSI. It hopes that the work would be accomplished expeditiously. 
23. RECOMMENDATION 
Rationalisation of interest on loans 
The interest on loans to small scale sector should be rationalised. (Page 198). 
Action Taken 
Interest rates are regulated by the RBI from time to time. According to RBI, the 
interest rates are now linked to the size of the loan and not to purpose of the loan. The 
matter was taken up with RBI. RBI has stated that it is not possible to formulate separate 
interest rate policy for SSis. Nevertheless, borrowers upto Rs. 25,000 and between 
Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2 lakhs, the interest rates are continued to be administered by RBI at 12% 
and 13.5% respectively. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Ministry of Industry on the 
Committee's recommendation. 
24. RECOMMENDATION 
Comprehensive policy on small and medium units 
The Sub-Committee observed that it may be necessary to come out with a 
comprehensive policy so that large and medium scale industries obtain components sub­
assemblies etc. from small scale industries and also develop the area around this facility. 
(Page 198). 
Action Taken 
Government is aware of the need to promote ancillarisation in a big way for the 
development and growth of SSis. A Working Group for the Ninth Five Year Plan for Small 
Scale Sector had set up a Sub-Group on Ancillarisation and Sub-Contracting "to review the 
growth of ancillary units over the Eighth Plan and to make recommendations for the Ninth 
Plan with a 10 year perspective." The major recommendations by the Sub-Group are:-

83 
1. Setting up of National Level Forum. 
2. Setting up of 20· State Level Forums to give further boost to Ancillary Industries/ 
Sub-Contracting. 
3. Promote and establish 100 Nos. marketing consortia by different sectors of industry 
in the country. 
4. HRD Training Programme for SIDO officers as well as office bearers of private 
SCXs and ISO 9000. Ancillary Development Modernisation for vendor rating and 
registration. 
5. To organise 3 to 5 days exhibitions/workshops in close association with PSUs such 
as Telecommunication, Railways, P&T and Automobile for promoting new 
Vendors. 
6. Participation in the National and International Trade Fairs, Exhibitions at Pragati 
Maidan and abroad. 
7. Setting up of 100 SCXs by NGOs/Industry Associations. 
8. Strengthening and revamping of the 16 existing SCXs run by SIDO. 
9. Establishment of National SCX. 
10. To conduct studies on the subject of Ancillarisation!VDP and preparation of 10 
films covering successful story of alliances between small scale and large scale units. 
11. To take suitable steps for increasing the equity participation limit from 24% to 49%. 
12. To take suitable step for revising the definition of the Ancillary Industry. 
13. To conduct Vendor Development Programmes for giving marketing support to 
Ancillary/Sub-Contr&ctors through SISis. 
14. Rewards and Recognitions. 
The recommendations of the Sub-Group are under consideration of the Working Group. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
25. RECOMMENDATION 
Increase in SSI limit 
To increase the SSI limit. from the present Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 1 crore on plant and 
machinery. (Page No. 202) 
Action Taken 
There are arguments both for and against this proposal. In favour of this proposal, it is 
argued that it will facilitate investment in technology and quality, improve exports and offset 
of inflation and devaluation. The argument against is that even now there is no bar on 
increased investment in SSI except for reserved items. In the case of unreserved item, it is 
for the unit to decide whether it wants to continue as small scale unit within its prescribed 
investment ceiling or corss the limit. In the case of reserved item, if it crosses the limit, it 
will have to accept the condition of exporting minimum 75% of the output. Further, if the 

84 
objective of small scale industries is promotion of employment and industrial growth in rural 
and backward areas, there should be emphasis on tiny and village units. The proposal for 
increasing the investment limit is under co~sideration and the decision on this will be taken 
after receiving recommendations of the Expert Committee headed by Abid Hussain. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
26. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to VISL 
,. The Sub-Committee had discussion with the management of Visversraya Iron & Steel 
Limited and have observed/recommended: as regards the help required from the 
Government of India namely excise duty relief for pig iron produced from its newly built 530 
MW blast furnace for next five years, allocation of grant from National Renewal Fund, 
allocation of blast furnace grade ore from Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, extending budgetary 
support to fund modernisation efforts of VISL and equity participation by defence units, the 
Sub-Committee recommends that the respective ministeries of the Government of India 
should look into the demands of the VISL and do the needful so that the oldest steel plant 
~ntinues to ·have a pride of place in the steel sector. (Page 201). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Ministry of Steel on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
27. RECOMMENDATION 
Increase in excise exemption limit 
Increasing the exemption limit for central excise from the present Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 70 
lakhs. (Pagl 202). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Industry has been recommending to Ministry of Finance for the last 3-4 
yearS to enhance the exemption limit for central excise from Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs, 
but the same have not been accepted by Ministry of Finance because: 
(i) Only 2% of the 25 lakh SSI units are registered with Central Excise; 
(ii) 90% of the SSI units have turnover less than Rs. 30 lakhs and all such units are 
exempted from excise duty; 
(iii) Loss of excise revenue of large magnitude cannot be afforded when there is a big 
budget deficit. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 

85 
28. RECOMMENDATION 
Uniform taxation policy for. SSis 
To have uniform Taxation Policy for SSis throughout the country. (Page 202) 
Action Taken 
The responsibilities of developing SSI in their areas of jurisdiction lies with the State 
Government and they have their own policies for their promotion. 
The Central taxes levied by the Union are uniform for the whole country. In the present 
federal system of Government, the States are allowed to levy State taxes. For the 
development of industries, in their States a wide range of facilities, concessions and 
ii1centives like Sales Tax deferment/exemption are provided by the States. There is however, 
no uniformity of approach between the States in this regard as the conditions differ from 
State to State. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee not~S; th,llt the Central Taxes are uniform throughout the country 
and that the State taxes, how~ver~ vary from State to State, their conditions being different. 
29. RECOMMENDATION 
Uniform banking policy for SSis 
Uniform policy on banking to help SSis viz., inadequate funding by banks, heavy 
interest burden etc. {Page 202). 
Action Taken 
Nayak Committee set up by the Reserve Bank of India in December, 1991 (Report 
came in september, 1992) dealt with aspects of adequacy and timeliness or credit to SSis. 
1~) Nayak Cor:nmittee found that sm~ll scale sector was getting work~ng capit~l to the extent of 
'·· 8.1% of ats annual output whach was less than the normatave requarement of 20%. 
Accrodingly, Nayak Committee recommended that SSI sector should obtain 20% of its 
annual projected turnover by way of working capital. Based on these as well other 
recommendations of Nayak Committee, RBI issued a number of circulars advising the banks 
to grant working capital to the extent of 20% of the projected annual turnover, timely 
disposal of loan applications and setting up of specialised bank branches for SSI loaning in 
areas of higher SSI concentration. 
As a follow up of the Nayak Committee recommendations, a 7 Point Action Plan was 
initiated in 1995-96 to improve the flow of credit to SSI sector. The seven points of the Plan 
are: 
(i) Time bound action for setting up specialised SSI branches in 85 identified districts; 
at least 100 such dedicated branches to be opened before the end of 1995-96. 
(ii) Adequate delegation of powers at the branch and regional level. 
(iii) Banks to conduct sample surveys of their performing SSI accounts to find out 
whether they 4re getting adequate credit. 
(iv) Steps to be taken to see as far a'S ·possible composite loans (covering both term 
loan and working capital) are· Sanctioned to SSI entrepreneurs. 
,,,; 
(v) Regular meetings by banks at. ZOillf and regional levels with SSI entrepreneurs. 

86 
(vi) Need to sensitise bank managers and reorient them regarding working of the SSI 
sector. 
(vii) Simplification of procedural formalities by banks for SSI entrepreneurs. 
RBI has issued instructions to bank vide their circular dated 30th March, 1995 for taking 
appropriate action for effective implementation of the above mentioned Seven Point Action 
Plan and to keep their respective boards, apprised of the progress and also forward to RBI a 
copy of the note put up to the Board. 
According to RBI, interest rates are now linked to size of the loan. Presently for 
borrowers upto Rs. 25,000 and between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2 lakhs, the interest rates are 
being administered by RBI at 12% and 13.5% respectively. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee desires that Government should monitor the strict implementation 
of the Action Plan to improve the flow of credit to SSis. 
30. RECOMMENDATION 
Improvement in Telecommunications 
Improving the telecom network and restoring the priority telephone connections to SSis. 
(Page 202). 
Action Taken 
The matter was taken up with Department of Telecommunication. Department of 
Telecommunication vide their order No. 2-32193/PHA dated 20.9.1996 has allowed the 
facility of Registration of Telephone under N-OYT/Spl. Category to all permanent units 
under the following categories-
(i) Tiny enterprises (Tiny); 
(ii) SSI Ancillary Industrial. Undertakings (ANC); 
(iii) Small Scale Service & Business Enterprises (SSSBEs); 
(iv) Export Oriented Units (EOUs); and 
(v) Small Scale Industrial Undertakings (SSI). 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
31. RECOMMENDATION 
Privatisation of infrastructural facilities 
Privatisation of infrastructural facilities and formulation of policy by Government of 
India. (Page 202). 
Action Taken 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion has been requested to take necessary 
action on the above recommendation. 

87 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Industry have not reached 
to the Committee's recommendation. 
32. RECOMMENDATION 
Revival of sick SSI units 
Policy for revival of sick SSis on the lines of BIFR. (Page 202). 
Action Taken 
The Nayak Committee had considered the demand for BIFR type of authority to deal 
with the cases of sick SSI units. It was felt by the Committee that the tribunals would not be 
able to deal with the cases of large number of sick units within the SSI sector as a whole and 
hence units above prescribed cut off point only should come under the purview of the 
tribunals. The Committee recommended expeditious setting up of tribunals which may deal 
to start with sick units with fund based working capital limits and term loaQ aggregating Rs. 
25 lakhs or more. The recommendation of the Committee was not accepted by Ministry of 
Finance for the reason of practical difficulties in implementing the recommendation. The 
existing machinery viz. SLIICs and RBI guidelines were considered adequate by t~em. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
33. RECOMMENDATION 
Enhancement of container depot facilities 
To enhance the container depot facilities. (Page 203). 
Action Taken 
For the enhancement of container depot facilities in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, 
Container Corporation of India Ltd. (CONCOR), A PSU under the Ministry of Railways is 
operating the following container terminals in: 
Andhra Pradesh 
(i) Sanatnagar (Hyderabad) 
(ii) Guntur 
(iii) Anaparti 
(iv) Chirala 
Karnataka 
Bangalore 
Further, the Inland Container Depot at Sanatnagar is being expanded and modernised 
with an investment of Rs. 9.90 crores to handle the increasing volume of containerised 
exports and imports and also to enhance the level of service to the users. 
At Inland Container DepoUBangalore, bonded warehousing facility for imports is being 
added to enable importers to plan their import clearance according to their requirements. 
Facilities at other container terminals will be augmented and even new container 
terminals set up according to the requirements of trade. 

88 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
34. RECOMMENDATION .. 
Streamlining the imports and exports 
To streamline the procedures for imports and exports. (Page 203) 
Action Tak.: •• 
The matter was taken up with Ministry of Commerce. They have stated that 
streamlining of procedures for imports and exports is a continuous process. Director General 
Foreign Trade (DGFT) consider suggestions made by trade and industry from time to time. 
In July 1991 are regarding (i) Introduction of Exim Scrip, (ii) Abolition of Supplementary 
Licences, (iii) Abolition of CCS. 
' 
Major changes brpught about 29.2.92 are regarding (i) Long term policy (ii) framing of 
negative list (iii) import of consumer items (iv) EPCG scheme (v) Duty exemption scheme 
(vi) deemed exports (vii) special import licences (viii) Export house/trading house/star 
trading house/super star trading house (ix) Diamond, Jem and Jewellery and (x) Foreign 
Trade (Development & Regulations) Act, 1992, No. 22 of 1992. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
35. RECOMMENDATION 
Improvement in railway network 
To improve the railway network for better transportation. (Page 203) 
Action Taken 
The matter was taken up with Ministry of Railways. They have informed that Railways 
have started several activities for improving its network, not only to sustain economic 
activity in developing areas but also to induce economic development in backward areas of 
the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka as well as other States. Some of the activities 
are as under:-
(i) Keeping in view the wide distribution of MG network over different under­
developed. areas in the two States, Phasewise conversion work bas been taken upto 
connect these areas directly to mainstream of development; 
(ii) A number of new lines have been constructed in two States; 
(iii) A number of single lines existing in these States have been taken up for doubling; 
(iv) A number of surveys are being taken up in the areas of the two States not covered 
by Railway network to activate economic development through rail transport; 
(v) A number of rail seP.tents in the two States' have been taken up for electrification; 
;... . ·.t: 
(vi) Amenities are being provided fo~· 'the benefit of passengers. Some of these are: 
(a) Opening of new stations. 
(b) Opening of several. b~ts and Town Booking Agencies. 

89 
(c) Increase in the number of Mail/Express, Passenger Trains and 
introduction of several Push - Pull Trains. 
(d) Remodelling of station buildings. 
(e) Extension and raising of platforms. 
(f) Construction of Foot Over Bridges. 
(g) Supply of drinking water, enquiry counters, public address systems, 
additional benches, fans, waiting halls, retiring rooms, cloack rooms, 
public telephone booths on platforms. 
(vii) To facilitate reservation/booking from anywhere to anywhere without delay, and 
to operate bank card facilities, several computer centres have been opened in 
various stations lying over the two States. 
Comments/Observations 
The. Sub-Committee may like Government to expedite its activities for expediting the 
improvement of Railway network. 
36. RECOMMENDATION 
Infrastructural assistance to EPIPs 
To provide infrastructural assistance for promotion of EPIPs (Export Promotion 
Industrial Parks). (Page 203). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Commerce is operating a centrally sponsored "Export Promotion Industrial 
Park" (EPIP) Scheme which was introduced in August 1994 with a view to involving the 
State Governments in the creation of infrastructural facilities for export oriented production. 
The scheme provides that 75% of the capital expenditure incurred towards creation of such 
facilities, ordinarily limited to Rs. 10 crores in each case, will be met from a central grant to 
the State Governments. In addition a maintenance grant equivalent to 2% of export 
turnover of each unit established therein will also be made available to State Governments 
for a period of 5 years from the date of commercial production of that unit. The Central 
Government have so far approved 18 proposals for establishment of EPIPs in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam, Madhya 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Orissa and Meghalaya. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
37. RECOMMENDATION 
Improvement in transport and communication infrastructure 
To improve the transport and communication infrastructure (Page 203). 
Action Taken 
The matter comes under the administrative purview of the Ministry of Surface 
Transport, Department of Telecommunication and Department of Post. The Concerned 
Ministries have been requested to take necessary action. 

·.~.· •• t 
90 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note th.at it has not been apprised of the -action taken 
by the Ministry of Surface Transport, Department of Telecommunications and Department 
of Posts on the Committee's recommenda.tion. The Sub-Committee reiterates the 
Committee's recommendation. 
38. RECOMMENDATION 
Regulation of high interest rates 
RBI to control and regulate the high rates of interest charged by banks to SSis. 
(Page 203). 
Action Taken 
This was taken up with RBI: The interest rates are now linked to the size of the loan 
and not to the purpose of the loan. Nevertheless, borrowers upto Rs. 25,000 and between 
Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2 lakhs, the interest rates are continued to be administered by RBI at 12% 
and 13.5% respectively. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
rec<?mmendation. 
39. RECOMMENDATION 
Sophisticated technology for watches 
Implementation of Sophisticated technology could have been resorted to in watches. 
(Page 206). 
Action Taken 
The gaps in technology with reference to state-of-the-art in the area of manufacture of 
Cases/Dials occured due to paucity of investible resources. However, it is proposed to be 
bridged through Joint Venture. Merchant Banker for identification, selection of Joint 
Venture partner is being appointed. 
In-house product design has been established which has brought out 57 new model's in 
1995-96. It is proposed to bring out 151 new models in 1996-97. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
40. RECOMMENDATION 
Disposal of stocks under GHIT system 
Though it was difficult to recover the losses incurred under GHIT Scheme but urgent 
steps were required to ensure that stocks, if any, might be suitably disposed of. (page 206) 
Action Taken 'r! 
The System of GHIT sale has been discontinued from 1993-94, and the entire 
transaction carried out under GHIT has been regularised. 

91 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
41. RECOMMENDATION 
Rationalisation of excise duty on tractors 
Excise Duty on Tractors may also be rationalised. (Page 206). 
Action Taken 
The levy of Excise Duty of 20% on the products which were earlier exempt such as 
Tractors below 30 HP has removed an anomaly which existed earlier. The Inputs to the 
Tractors below 30 HP could not avail the MODVAT Credit in the past, as the final product 
was exempt from Excise Duty. 
Comments/ObservatiOns 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
42. RECOMMENDATION 
Tightening of management of the company 
The maiUlgement is also required to gear up to meet the challenges by tightening its belt 
wherever desirable. (Page 206). 
Action Taken 
Economy measures have been imparted greater thrust. Economy in the use of 
consumables, electricity et~., restrictions on official travel and slashing of entertainment and 
advertisement and non-technical training expenditure to the barest minimum has been 
enforced. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
43. RECOMMENDATION 
Priority to customer satisfaction 
Customer satisfaction should be the uppermost for the experts devising strategies 
because in the present stage of stiff competition it is the customer who determines the 
market for a product. (Page 206). 
Action Taken 
Customer orientation has reigned supreme in all decisions relating to product 
positioning. In Watches, HMT has encashed its popularity in the medium price segment by 
repositioning and introduction of 'Lalit' brand Quartz Analog range and 'Shakti' in the 
mechanical range. In order to woo the high end market, 'Elegance', 'Roman' and 'Utsav' 
brands are being promoted. The positioning in the segment will be further supplemented 
with internationally reputed brands through Joint Venture route. 
In the area of Machine Tools, customer needs are being addressed through widening of 
marketing network, enhanced focus on SSis, competitive pricing and offering of total 
manufacturing solutions. The customer service, is improved through faster after Sales 

92 
Service, improved availability of spares and strengthening of application engineering. The 
delivery time is also reduced to meet the market needs. HMT is also addressing the needs of 
reconditioning for the customers. 
In the area of Industrial Machinery, servicing set up is strengthened by positioning 
engineers in regional offices to offer quick services and prompt supply of spare parts to the 
customers. Appointment of region-wise sales agencies will impart greater fillip to customer 
orientation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes ·the action taken by Government on. the Committee's 
recommendation. 
44. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to Bharat Earth Movers 
The Sub-Committee feels that the curtailment in the orders for railway coaches has 
proved to be greatest stumbling block in the growth of the Bharat Earth Movers. The Sub­
Committee recommends that the Government should ensure orders for the company to 
enable it to achieve capacity utilisatioeand help in generating employment in the. region. 
The Sub-Committee would also urge upon the State Government of Karnataka to ensure 
proper supply of power to the company. The Government of India should also help the 
company in setting up a captive power plant. The duty structure should also be rationalised 
to enable the company in meeting the market challenges it has been facing in the global 
tenders/market. (Page 208). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Defence, (Department of Defence Production & Supplies), who are 
concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the matter to take appropria~e follow up 
action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Defence on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
45. RECOMMENDATION 
Revival of BGML 
The Sub-Committee feels that much time has been taken for the revival of Bharat Gold 
Mines and the workforce has genuine fear psychosis. It would urge upon the Government to 
expedite the revival packaged for Bharat Gold Mines Limited so that this undertaking which 
·was once a premier once for gold extraction, could come back to its track and a scheme for 
its .. further development could be executed. (Page 209). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Mines, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the actipn taken 
by the Ministry of Mines on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Con:tmittee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 

93 
46. RECOMMENDATION 
Clearance to Coir Board Schemes 
After hearing the evidence of the Coir Board and going through the papers/documents 
submitted to it, the Sub-Committee feels that the prosperity of coir industry is based on the 
sweat and labour of poor ill paid coir workers. Various :schemes initiated by Coir Board for 
overall development of the Coir sector are pending with the Government of India. The Sub­
Committee urges upon the Government to appreciate the significance of these schemes and 
expedite clearance on priority basis in the interest of the coir industry. {Page 211). 
Action Taken 
Market Development Assistance Scheme submitted by the Coir Board had been 
examined in the light of the rebate scheme presently being followed by the Government. It 
has ,been decided that MDA scheme ~ill be taken up for consideration in the 9th Five Year 
Plan. In the meanwhile the Government have already announced the continuance of rebate 
scheme during 1996-97. 
(i) It may be mentioned that under, Annual Plan Scheme of Coir B,oard, provision is 
made for Export Promotion Programmes every year for participation in seminars, 
exhibitions, trade fair etc. The Export Promotion Assistance Scheme submitted this year by 
the Coir Board is a new scheme which is being examined in this department in consultation 
with Planning Commission, IFW etc. Certain clarifications have been asked for from Coir 
Board. 
(ii) EFC meeting for Integrated Coir Development Project of Kerala has been finalised 
and copies are being circulated to various scrutinising agencies. Meeting of EFC will be fixed 
at a time convenient to Secretary, Department of Expenditure. 
(iii) Coir Board's request for exempting excise duty on coir processing machinery is 
being examined in consultation with Ministry of Finance who have intimated that the matter 
is under their consideration. 
(iv) A Welfare Assistance Scheme for Coir Workers submitted by the Coir Board is 
. being examined. Coir Board has been asked for clarification of certain points. 
The report of the Committee also includes the points raised by the Workers Union of 
Coir Industry. As these points would require, views and comments of the Coir Board as well 
as the Government of Kerala, this Department has asked Coir Board to study these 
suggestions put forward by Workers Union of Coir Industry and send their as well as 
Government of Kerala's views/observations. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that some of the schemes put forward by the Coir Board are 
under the various stages of examination. It, however, hopes expeditious action· on the part 
of Government in the matter. 
47. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to HNL 
The Sub-Committee appreciates the efforts of committed workforce of HNL ·in 
achieving more than 100% capacity utilisation. Delinking of HNL from HPC could be a_ 
policy deCision but it has certainly got to be examined by the Government since some of 
subsidiaries like HNL which are performing well and earning profits generall}' ·tend to be 
exploited by holding company on account of loans incurred by other loss making 

94 
subsidiaries. The Sub-Committee recommends that as a short term measure more autonomy 
may be conferred on Hindustan Newsprint Limited, the only public sector undertaking even 
suffering after achieving 100% capacity utilisation. 
The Sub;Committee feels disturbed over the shortage of raw material in HNL. The Sub­
Committee is hfippy that the State Government has responded to HNL's request for the 
allotment of 'land for captive phmtation and also for the sufficient quantity of forest raw 
material. The State Government has so far allotted 1000 hectares of land against the demand 
of 10,000 hectares. The Sub-Committee hopes that the State Government would take care of 
the remaining demand. The Sub-Committee urges upon the Government of India to 
expedite clearance for instalation of de·linking plant. 
The Sub-Committee feels that the Company requires lot of support on marketing s!de. 
While it may not be advisable to revert back to pre-liberalisation stage and remove 
newsprint industry from OGL, . indigenous public sector mills like HNL need equal 
protection from present import criteria. The Government, therefore, should consider to 
make suitable modifications; in Newsprint Import Policy. Imposition of customs duty on 
newsprint could perhaps help the indigenous newsprint mills to survive and cater to the 
requirements of the country. (Page 213). 
Action Taken 
At present raw-material availability from the State Government sources for HNL is only 
to the extent of 60% of existing capacity of one lakh tonnes per annum. Balance needs are 
augmented from private sources, neighbouring States as well as by import of pulp. 
Government of K.erala was requested to allot 10,000 hectares of land for captive plantation. 
The State Government allotted 1,000 liactares of land and the Company has started captive 
plantation. The Company has also proposed to set up 100 TPD deinking plant. The 
Company has requested Government of Kerala for higher allocation of forest raw-material. 
Modernization Programme and Employees Strength 
Modernization programme was undertaken to technically upgrade existing plant and 
machinery to increase the efficiency and inbuilt capacity and the capacity was increased from 
80,000 tonnes to one lakh tonnes per annum. The HNL employees strength is quite 
adequate for the present capacity. Company is following the Ce'ntral Government guidelines 
with regard to the employment on compassionate grounds. 
Impact of Liberalisation 
The liberalised import policy for newsprint had its effect on the indigenous newsprint 
mills including HNL on account of the wide fluctuation and difference in the price of 
imported newsprint and the indigenous newsprint. The problem of indigenous industry has 
been taken up with the concerned authorities for appropriate corrective action to provide 
suitable protection to the industry. 
Diversification Plans 
The HNL had obtained 'Letter of Intent' for manufacture of 20,000 MT per annum of 
writing and printing paper. To tide over the problem of shortage of forest raw-material, 
HNL proposed for setting up a 200 TPD' deinking plant. While, this proposal is under the 
consideration of the Government, HNL, now, proposed to set up the 100 TPD de inking 
plant instead of 200 TPD deinking plant earlier. Taking into account, commitment for other 
plan scheme, power situation and other diversification plan and resources position. The 
revised proposal submitted recently is under the consideration of Govt. 

95 
More Autonomy to HNL 
HNL is having a Board of Directors of its own. For the purpose of wage revision and 
incentive scheme, HNL is now being treated differently from other subsidiaries of HPC 
(Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited), and it enjoys the same position as is the case of any 
profit making PSU. Further, being a MoU_ signing, the Company also enjoys additional 
powers. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
48. RECOMMENDATION 
No scheme to finance women 
The Sub-Committee has been giyen to understand that at present there is no system of 
collecting the figures pertaining to financing the woman under the scheme. The Sub~ 
Committee strongly recommends that such data should be maintained so as to encourage 
women entrepreneurs having skill and potential to set up industries. (Page 217) 
Action Taken 
The data is now being maintained. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee nc,tes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
49. RECOMMENDATION 
Monitoring of programme by banks 
The Sub-Committee further recommends that to achieve the targets banks should 
depute senior officials of their branches for closer monitoring of the implementations of the 
programme. It would also be appropriate if banks which show a better performance and 
cross the targets are suitably awarded. The officers of such banks could be given incentives. 
(Page 217) 
Action Taken 
This matter has been referred to the RBI/Department of Economic Affairs (Banking 
Division) for necessary action. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Department of Economics Affairs on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
50. RECOMMENDATION 
Proper functioning of PMRY 
The Sub-Committee expressed its utter displeasure on the manner in which the 
applicants are subjected to harassment under PMR Y scheme by different agencies in their 
respective area of functioning. These agencies viz. the Central Government, State 
Government and bank authorities do not seem to be coordinating amongst themselves and 
instead are confined to their own functioning. The Sub-Committee is anguished to learn that 
DICs and Task Forces do not bother to expedite applications. The ball then falls in the court 
of banking sector where collateral security is insisted, failing which applications are not · 
screened for disbursement. The Union Government has left everything to be settled by 
DICs, Task Forces and Banking authorities. The Sub-Committee feels that the scheme 

96 
cannot be implemented properly by simply issuing instructions for disciplinary action against 
officials demanding collateral security and by setting targets for banks for disbursement of 
loans. The Sub-Committee recommends that the guidelines framed for PMR Y needs to be 
overhauled. More sincere coordination is required for the success of the scheme. It is 
understood that RBI has deputed one representative at Trivandrum and similar 
representatives must be deputed at all State capitals. The Sub-Committ~e· appreciates that 
the scheme cannot be monitored from . .New Iilelhi directly but it is. 'equally important to 
empower RBI officers deputed in the States to strictly monitor the scheme there. 
Performance of private banks could also be monitored by these officers.· For this centralised 
data may be maintained. (Page 217). 
Action Taken ·· · 
It is the responsibility of the DICs to. monitor ahd '{Jnciw·tip· cases fo~arded to the 
banks for sanction. · .,,,, ·- '; · · 
·, \ •· t • 
However, complaints of bankers seeking collateral secutll,tY are at times received by the 
Office of the DC(SSI). These are referred to appropriate authorities for taking remedial 
action. . 
At the Central Government level, officers are depu,ted .. to various State Governments for 
\ ..... • ' 
carrying out field visits and inspections. Monitoring of the scheme by way of progress reports 
is regularly done. Reviews with the implementing agehcieS'·namely the banks and the State I 
UT Governments have been taken from time to timer..At the State/UT level, the States/ 
UTs reviewed the scheme with the bankers. 
The guidelines framed on PMRY are discussed in reviews with implementing agencies 
and have been modified from time to time for better·· implementation of the scheme. 
Industry Minister had convened a meeting of the StaUf·Industries Ministers in August 1996 
to discuss the various issues connected witp the implementation of PMRY. Industry Minister 
had requested State Industries Ministers. for' more vigilance and also to make the monitoring 
system more transparent. He had also reiterated that banks should not insist on collateral 
from PMRY applicants. RBI as a consequence, on 15th October, 1996, directed banks not 
to take collateral. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that issues such . as collateral security and representation of 
RBI in State capitals have been taken care or.: It however feels that the speedy disposal of 
applications and proper coordination among various agencies under PMRY have not 
received due attention. The Sub-Commi'ttee hopes that more attention would be paid to 
these aspects. 
51. RECOMMENDATION 
Review of PMRY guidelines 
The Sub-Committee recommends that the officers of the State Governments, Ministry 
of Finance, Ministry of Industry and bank officers should sit together and review the 
procedural issues including guidelines for PMRY to ensure that (i) no beneficiary be . 
compelled to accept a lower amount with the motive of limiting the loan (ii) viability of 
projects is examined in proper way and (iii) personnel having better experience be included' 
in the Task Forces. (Page 217). 

97 
Action Taken 
There exists District level, State level and National level Committees with 
appropriate representation from implementing agencies which sit together for reviews of 
the scheme. Guidelines are usually reviewed by the National level Committee or on the 
basis of other reviews I demands from implementing agencies. 
With regard to examination viability of projects and personnel having experience 
undertaking scrutiny at Task Force Ievett the 'States I UTs have been advised to 
constitute sub-divisional block level Task Forces in consultation with their convenor 
banks so that better scrutiny is possible in the Task Forces. StatesiUTs have also been 
given funds to organise workshops of officials and thus the expertise of officials is likely 
to. improve. 
It .is the aim of the scheme that beneficiaries are given appropriate financing. The 
recommendation has also been taken up with the :Sanking Division I RBI. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
52. RECOMMENDATION 
Better credit facilities to entrepreneurs 
Another item in the agenda during meeting with bank authorities was the credit 
facilities for small scale entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee brought to the notice of the 
banking authorities, the demand of small scale entrepreneurs for extending loans of 
about Rs. 2 lakhs with reduced rate of interest. Reacting to this, the General Manager, 
RBI clarified that at present banks are free to fix the rate of interest on the loans of 
above Rs. 2 lakhs. The Sub-Committee hopes that this genuine demand of small scale 
entrepreneurs will be examined by the ·Reserve Bank of India sympathetically. 
(Page 217, 218). 
Action Taken 
Interest rates are now linked to the size of the loan and not to the purpose of the 
loan. It is not possible to formulate separate interest rate policy for SSis. Nevertheless, 
for borrowers upto Rs. 25,000 and between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2 lakhs, interest rates are 
continued to be administered by RBI at 12% and 13.5% respectively. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
53. RECOMMENDATION 
Reluctance shown by banks in lending 
The Sub-Committee has been given to understand that there is a general reluctance 
on the part of the banks in lending and the credit-dqJosit ratio of the State has also 
been abysmally low. There are certain firms in the State were even though the 
production has been much higher the needed finance was not forthcoming from banks. 
The Sub-Committee noted that the matter has already been brought to the notice of 
the Finance Minister. The Sub-Committee hopes that Government of India will suitably 
address to this issue concerning the State of Kerala. (Page 218). 

98 
Action Taken 
Matter has been referred to the Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division) for 
necessary action. This office takes up specific complaints of individuals regarding 
inadequate or delayed lending with appropriate banking authorities. 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action 
taken by the Ministry of Finance on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
54. RECOMMENDATION 
Performance of Moder:n Food Industries 
The Sub-Committee had a meeting with the workers I management of Modern Food 
Industries at Cochin and was informed that the Cochin unit was not able to produce and 
meet the high demand because of capacity constraints since bread manufacture was 
reserved for the samll scale industry sector which does not allow the industry to open a 
new plant. (Page 219). 
Action Taken 
In this connection, it may be mentioned that, at present, manufacture of bread is 
reserved for exclusive development in the small scale sector. To address the need for 
reforms in the existing policies and design new policies for Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) development which will facilitate the growth of viable and efficient enterprises that 
can adjust to technological change and remain internationally competitive, Government has 
constituted and "Expert Committee on Small Enterprises" under the chairmanship of Shri 
Abid Hussain (Former Members of Planning Commission). 
One of the terms of reference of the Committee is "To examine the efficacy and 
desirability of the small industry reservation policy, assess its impact on the growth of small 
enterprises from the point of view of viability, competitiveness and exposure to technical 
change and progress and make appropriate recommendations." 
Comments I Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
55. RECOMMENDATION 
Growth centres in Kerala 
The Sub-Committee strongly recommends that in view of the high price of the land in 
Kerala, it should be well with in the consideration of Government of India to enhance its 
share of fund for the proposed growth centres in Kerala. (Page No. 220). 
Action Taken 
In Kerala 2 growth centres have been allotted in split locations. One growth centre 
has been split into 2 places namely, Alappuzha at an approved cost of Rs. 16.2 crores and 
the other at Pathanamthitta at an approved cost of Rs. 18.83 crores. 
The other growth centre has been split into 3 locations namely Kannur at an approved 
cost of Rs. 11.91 crores, Kozhikode at an approved cost of Rs.17.45 crores and 
Mallappuram at an approved cost of Rs. 14.91 crores. 

99 
The Central Government's contribution towards the two Growth Centre Complexes are 
limited to 10 crores per Growth Centre Complex. 
Depending upon the progress report submitted by the Government of Kerala, the 
Alleppey-Pathanamthitta Growth Centre Complex has been released Rs. 2.68 crores and 
Kannur-Kozhikode-Mallappuram Growth Centre Complex has been released Rs. 8.84 crores 
upto 31st March, 1996. Further release of Central assistance to the State Government will be 
taken up on receipt of their quarterly progress reports together with the utilisation 
certificates on dates due. 
CommentS'Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
56. RECOMMENDATION 
Performance of CCI 
The Sub-Committee met with workers and management of Kurkunta l,Jnit of Cement 
Corporation of India in Bangalore. The Sub-Committee was informed that CCI was the only 
Central public sector undertaking in the cement industry having an installed capacity of 42.2 
lakh mt. p.a. It had at present 11 units located at Mandhar, Nayagaon and Akaltara 1 in 
Madhya Pradesh, Adilabad, Yerraguntla and Tandur in Andhra Pradesh, Charkhi Dadri in 
Haryana, Kurkunta in Karnataka, Bokajan in Assam and Rajban in Himachal Pradesh and 
Delhi Unit. The Kurkunta Unit was the second oldest operating unit in Karnataka with an 
installed capacity 
1
tO produce 1.98 lakh tonnes of cement per annum. The Kurkunta plant 
was based on the wet process technology and this plant was commissioned in October, 1972, 
at a total cost of Rs. 12 crores. The Sub-Committee was informed that this plant had its own 
captive mine located about 4.5 km. from the unit and had its own wagon facility for 
transportation of the limestone to the factory. 
As regards the quality of cement, this plant had a full-fledged laboratory for the 
physical and chemical testing. Tests were conducted for raw materials as well as for final 
products and the testing was also done at different stages of manufacturing. At present this 
plant was producing ordinary portland cement of forty three grades. The Committee was 
informed that the unit was facing some problems which were as under:-
(i) The coal consumption was very high because the plant was very old and was 
based on wet process technology. The coal being used was also of very poor 
quality containing a large percentage of ash. 
(ii) The plant required frequent repairs and maintenance which required high stores 
and spares consumption. 
(iii) Due to infrastructural constraints like power, coal and wagons, production 
performance of the unit was adversely affected. 
(iv) Short supply of wagons against the fixed quota and directional restrictions 
affecting production and despatches. 
(v) The unit required funds for modernisation and expansion whereas the Cement 
Corporation of India did not get any budgetary support and its internal sources 
were also limited; and 
(vi) Due to a clustor of cement plants situated in the unit area, the plant was facing 
a stiff competition. 

100 
The Sub-Committee was also informed that some units of Cement Corporation of India 
were making a loss bacause of non-availability of limestone. Charkhi Dadri Unit was one of 
the loss making units because of non-availability of limestone and this plant had to procure 
limestone from Rajasthan which required extra budgetary support. 
On the basis of discussion held with the representatives of Cement Corporation of 
India, the Committee feels that most of the problems of the unit were self-created. There is 
lack of foresightedness on the part of the management. The Sub-Committee wonders as to 
why the new technology was not adopted for the last so many years. The Committee 
observes that either the management failed to convince the Government for replacing the 
technology or reluctant to apply the same. At a" time when the rapid advancement in 
technology is taking place and. the ·number of competitors increasing considerably, the 
Management has exhibited its inefficiency by managing with old technology/machinery at 
cost of nation. Whatever may the earlier circumstances, there is still time to awake. The 
Sub-Committee would caution the present management not to repeat the policies of their 
predecessors and also not to blame them entirely but to go ahead with a strong proposal for 
change in technology. The Government should also help the management in finding out the 
solution and extend the necessary budgetary resources to revive the units of Cement 
Corporation of India. The Government should also ensure orders for the units to ensure 
their survival. (Page 222, 223) 
Action Taken 
A feasibility report for expansion of Kurkunta Cement Factory was prepared by the 
Company in July, 1981. The expansion proposal envisaged adding a new dry process kiln 
with precalcinator and preheater having a capacity of 2000 TPD. Thus, after expansion, the 
total clinker capacity would have been 8.6 lakh tonnes per annum. Other equipments and 
balancing facilities matching with this expansion were also envisaged. As a second phase of 
this expansion, there was a proposal for converting the existing wet process kiln to a dry 
process one with a capacity of 1000 TPD which would have resulted in the total capacity of 
the plant being one million tonne. The project cost estimate (base October, 1980) was 
Rs. 70.92 crores. 
The feasibility report was revised in March, 1985, keeping the same scope as in the 
original an~ the project cost estimate (base December, 1984) came to Rs. 99.70 crores. 
However, the scheme was not included in the Plan Schemes primarily due to fund 
constraints. jfl 
Since CCI had been incurring continuous losses for the last several years and due to the 
overall fund constraints, the scheme for conversion of the existing wet process technology at 
Kurkunta to dry process one could not be taken up during these years. 
CCI's net worth has now become negative and, therefore, the Company was referred to 
the BIFR on 25.4.96 under the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special 
Provision) Act, 1985. BIFR is yet to consider the case. However, CCI has subsequently 
prepared a draft revival scheme which, inter-alia, envisages modernisation of Kurkunta Unit 
also. The implementation of the revival scheme will depend on its final clearance by the 
BIFR and availability of necessary budgetary resources. 
As far as the question of procuring orders for the CCI units is concerned, this Deptt. 
has been requesting various State Government from time to time to place orders for their 

101 
requirements on the CCI. Further, CCI has been advised to bring to the notice of this 
Department problems encountered, if any, in securing orders from the Government 
Departments-State Governments on open tender basis subject to fulfilment of other conditions so 
that the matter can be taken up by this Department with the concerned OrganisationS" 
Departments. 
Comments-Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
57. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to Indian Telephone Industries 
On the basis of the discussions the Sub-Committee came to the conclusion that Indian 
Telephone Industries was a victim of Department of Telecommunications, a department which 
was its only patron allowed it to become sick because of some of its wrong strategies and 
unhealthy, policies. Following recommendations were made by the Sub-Committee, and 
perhaps a positive attitude in this regard might be helpful in the revival of the company:-
a. The ITI should be given price preference while quoting the tender. 
b. There should be some reservation in order supply by DoT. 
c. At present ITI capac:ty utilisation is 80% so it should be provided more orders as per 
the MoU. .· 
d. Under the new policy, old agreement (with ITI and DoT) should be changed. 
{Page 221). 
Action Taken 
Department of Telecommunic~tions, who are concerned with the subject, have been 
addressed in the matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
CommentS'Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken by 
the Department of Telecommunications on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub­
Committee reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
58. RECOMMENDATION 
Problems faced by Growth Centres in Kerala 
The Sub-Committee has come to the conclusion that the growth centres particularly that at 
Hassan in Karnataka are facing some problems due to lack of funds, non-availability of water 
and power, absence of national highway, bypass and airport and recommends that the 
requirements of these growth cenves should be fulfilled by the Government so that these 
growth centres may start functioQing. 
(Page 225) 
Action Taken 
The State of Kama taka has been sanctioned 3 growth centres located at Dharwad, Raichur 
and Hassan. Central Government's contribution towards the growth centre is of the order of Rs. 
10 crores per growth centre. Upto 31st March, 1996 Dharwad Centre has been given Central 
assistance of Rs. 8 crores, Raichur Centre has been given Central assistance of Rs. 4.60 crores 
and Hassan Centre has b~en given Rs. 8 crores on the basis of progress reports submitted by _the 
State Government. Further Central assistance will be released to the centres on the basis of 
progress reports together with utilisation certificates furnished by the State Government. 

102 
CommentS'Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes that the Central Government are duly releasing their share of 
assistance for the development of Growth Centres in the State of Karnataka. 
59. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to MSTC 
On the basis of evidence of the management and the papers/documents submitted 
before it the Sub-Committee feels that though it would be difficult to extend full monopoly 
to the Company in the field of importing scrap but Government may still help out MSTC by 
rationalising the duty structure for raw materials and Semis to enable it to compete with 
private sector. It should also be well within the consideration of Government of India to 
expedite clearance of the diversification proposal of the Company. Ministry of Railways and 
Defence may also be persuaded to prefer MSTC in respect of disposal of their scrap. 
(Page 226, 227). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel is completely in agreement with the Committee that monopoly cannot 
be extended to MSTC Ltd. (formerly known as Metal Scrap Trade Corporation) in the 
matter of import of scrap. However, as suggested by the Committee, the Ministry has 
already sent its recommendations to Ministry of Finance regarding rationalisation of import 
duty on scrap. 
In so far as MSTC's diversification plans are concerned, the Company has already been 
permitted to participate in the equity of a joint venture Company, namely, Kudremukh Iron 
& 'Steel Company Limited alongwith two other Public Sector Undertakings of the Ministry 
of Steel, i.e. Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited (KIOCL) and Metallurgical and 
Engineering Consultants (India) Limited (MECON) for manufacture of "Low Phosphorous 
and Low Sulpher Pig Iron" and "Ductile Iron Spun Pioes". The Project is under 
implementation. Further, the Company's proposal for (i) participation in the equity of an 
integrated Steel plant being set up in Andhra Pradesh, and (ii) setting up of a joint venture 
company for manufacture of container corner castings with Ws. Calcutta Ferrous Ltd., 
Calcutta are under active consideration of the Government. The Ministry has already taken 
up the matter with Ministries of Defence and Railways for utilising the services of MSTC 
Ltd. for disposal of scrap arisings from their uni'ts. 
Comments-Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the action taken by Government on the Committee's 
recommendation. 
60. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to MSTC 
On the basis of evidence of the management and the papers/documents submitted 
before it the Sub-Committee feels that though it would be difficult to extend full monopoly 
to the Company in the field of importing scrap but the Government may still help out MSTC 

by rationalising the duty structure for raw materials and to enable it to compete with private 
se'Ctor. It should also be well within the consideration of the Government of India to 
expedite clearance of the diversification proposal of the Company. The Ministry of Railways 
and Defence may also be persuaded to prefer MSTC in respect of disposal of their scrap. 
(Page 226, 227). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Steel, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed in the matter 
to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendation. 
CommentS'Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Steel on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiterates 
the Committee's recommendation. 
103 

SUB-COMMITTEE- VI 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
SUB-COMMITTEE- VI 
' t 
,;·, 
• i .• 
!( •. 

1. RECOMMENDATION 
Purchase by Gove1=nment Departments 
On the basis of the discussion held with small entrepreneurs, the Committee 
recommends that it should be made compulsory that whatever products women 
entrepreneurs make in the small units some percentage of it must be purchased by the 
Government Departments. (Page 239). 
Action Taken 
Vide O.M. No. P. III-10(4)'87 dated 28th July, 1989, the then Department of Supply, 
Ministry of Commerce has issued instructions for helping women entrepreneurs in the 
marketing of their products. To provide the marketing support through Government 
purchases to organised groups of women artisans and skilled workers, industrial units under 
the State Women's Development Corporations and the organisations of women w~rkers 
identified by the Department of Women and Child Development are treated at par with 
KVIC for the purpose of purchase-price preference. 
409 items are presently reserved for exclusive purchase from the KVIOWomen's 
Development Corporations/small scale sector units. For these items, other things being 
equal, where KVIC and/or Women's Development Corporations are in a position to meet 
the requirements, purchases are to be made from KVIC or Women's Development 
Corporations or both taking into consideration any preference of the purchaser. 
In respect of unreserved items of stores purchase where large scale private sector unit is 
not competing the purchase preference is to be in favour of KVIOWomen's Development 
Corporation~mall scale sector units and public sector units in that order. To the extent the 
requirements can be met by KVIC or Women's Development Corporations etc. or both, 
purchases are to be made from them taking into consideration any preference indicated the 
purchaser. Where the large scale private sector unit is also competing, public sector unit 
have a price preference of upto 10% and KVIOWomen's Development Corporation~mall 
scale units upto 15% over the lowest acceptable offer from the large private sector units. In 
such a case, it has to be ensured that before utilising the capacity of the public sector unit or 
large scale private sector unit, all offers from KVIC!Women's Development Corporations, 
etc. and small scale units within the ceiling of price inclusive· of price preference indicated 
abo...:e have been utilised. 
As a further follow up of the recommendations of Standing Committee, all State 
Governments, the Department of Women and Child Development and Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission (KVIC) have also been requested to examine the recommendation 
and communicate the action taken thereon. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes the action taken by 
Government on Committee's recommendation. 
2. RECOMMENDATION 
Welfare of Workers 
Considering the problems of bidi workers, the Sub-Committee recommends that the 
housing problem of the bidi workers may be looked into sympathetically and more houses 
107 

108 
may be provided to them as early as possible. Their wages may be increased and disputes 
involving their demands may be settled. The working condition of the bidi workers in the 
factory are far from satisfactory and in most of the cases unhygienic. The Committee 
recommends that their working conditions· need to be considerably improved by the 
Government. (Page 239). 
2A. On the basis of the discussion held with social workers, the Committee has 
learnt that the daily wages workers are getting very little amount. Most of them are 
unrecognised workers and are being exploited by their employer. The Committee 
strongly feels that their condition should be improved by paying them minimum 
wages declared by the Government and special legislation may be brought forward to 
help them. (Page 241). 
2B. On the basis of the discussion held with Sugar Commissioner, Pune the Sub­
Committee felt that mobile creches should be provided to women workers during the 
working season. Literacy camp should also be started in the factory premises. The 
Sub-Committee recommends that the minimum wages of the women workers should 
be fixed strictly and the provisions relating to them should be implemented 
accordingly. (Page 241). 
2C. The Sub-Committee was also informed that women's work in the construction 
industry is not recognised. Most women fall in the category of unskilled workers and 
there is no effort to promote them as skilled workers and improve their earning 
capacity. 
The Committee suggests for removing disparity in wages between men and women 
employed in the industry as well as ensure minimum wage to women. The Sub-Committee 
further suggests for the compulsory registration of women workers, provision of creches, 
housing facilities, extension of ESI scheme and Provident Fund benefit, mobile medical 
service to non-ES! :;ategory of workers. The Sub-Committee feels that the facilities 
mentioned above should be provided to the women engaged in construction work. 
(Page 241). 
Action Taken 
Ministry of Labour, who are concerned with the subject, have been addressed m the 
matter to take appropriate follow up action on the above recommendations. 
CommentsQbservations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by the Ministry of Labour on the Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee 
reiterates the Committee's recommendation. 
3. RECOMMENDATION 
Financial Assistance to SSI Units 
The Sub-Committee also recommends that with a view to .;;;-,:ouring effective financial 
arrangement a scheme may be evolved for joint appraisal of projects "...,y financial institution 
and banks for the requirement of the small scale units for the fixed and the working capital 
as early a possible. For revival of sick units in Madhya Pradesh, which, at present, are 

109 
suffering from the paucity of finance, the Sub-Committee recommends that Madhya Pradesh 
Finance Corporation must initiate for providing finance after getting the viability examined 
by . the District Industries Centre. (Page 240). 
Action Taken 
In order to mitigate the hardships faced by the SSI units in obtaining both term loan 
and working capital credit from a single source in a co-ordinate manner, 85 dominant 
districts each with more than 2,000 registered SSI units in 1987-88 have been allocated by 
RBI amongst SFCs and banks. In each of these districts, SFCs or designated bank will 
function as the principal financing agency to provide both term loan and working capital 
under Single Window Scheme (SWS) of SIDBI. Under SIDBI's refinance scheme, with a 
view to providing for sanction of term loan for acquisition of fixed assets and working capital 
assistance by the same Primary Lending Institutions (PLis), SIDBI is operating Single 
Window ·Scheme (SWS). 
In 1995-96 Budget, the Finance Minister had proposed a 7-Point Action Plan for 
improving the flow of credit to SSI sector from banks. One of the points in the proposed 
7-Point Action Plan was that steps be taken to see that as far as possible composite loans 
(covering both term Joan and working capital) are sanctioned to SSI entrepreneurs. The 
reports received from the banks reveal that they have taken steps to sanction composite 
loans particularly for tiny, PMRY and artisans. 
In order to enable SSI sector to get both term loan and working capital, Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) has entered into Memorandum of 
Understanding with 18 banks all over the country for joint financing of projects in SSI sector 
costing Rs. 75 lakhs and above and term loan requirement of over Rs. 50 lakhs. Under this 
arrangement, there is sharing of assistance for term loan in respect of projects assisted by the 
commercial banks, even if the project cost is low say Rs. 30-40 lakhs in backward States like 
Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, etc., in addition to the 
above, wherever commercial bank is involved, SIDBI is exchanging their appraisal 
memorandum to enable the commercial banks to provide working capital on the basis of the 
appraisal note of SIDBI. 
Reserve Bank of India has also issued necessary guidelines to SFCs and commercial 
banks to give top priority for timely assistance to small scale sector to enable SSI sector to 
avhil of the assistance from the Single Window Scheme. Apart from this, periodical meetings 
are being conducted by the Reserve Bank of India whereby the problems relating to SSI for 
working capital, rehabilitation cases are discussed and remedial measures are taken. 
On the advice of the Government of India, Reserve Bank of India has set up State 
Level Inter Institutional Committees (SLIICs) in all States under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, Industries Department for working out a rehabilitation package for revival of 
viable sick small scale units. 
In order to tackle the problem the sickness among the SSI units expeditiously, RBI has 
advised banks that they sh~uld set up cells at important regional centres also, besides the 
cell at Head Office to deal with sick industrial units and provide expert staff, including 
technical personnel to look into the technical aspects. RBI has also issued instruction to 
charge a lower rate of interest (by 1.5 to 3%) for revival of sick units, it has also modified 
the definition of sick units based on the recommendations of the Nayak Committee. 

110 
Regarding action to be initiated by Madhya Pradesh Finance Corporation regarding 
finance after getting viability examined by District Industries Centre for revival of sick units 
which are suffering due to paucity of finance in Madhya Pradesh, the State Government has 
been requested to examine the proposal. According to RBI, there were 9,795 sick SSI units in 
Madhya Pradesh in March 1994, of which 248 units have been found potentially viable and 
161 units have been placed under nursing programme, SIDBI has also been extending 
resource support to Madhya Pradesh Financial Corporation against its eligible SSI proposals 
under its refinance scheme. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes the action being taken 
by Government on the Committee's recommendation. It, however, feels that the activities of 
Financial Institutions and Banks need to be monitored more closely because the Small Scale 
Sector is still aggrieved over non-availability of adequate and quick finance. 
4. RECOMMENDATION 
Women Co-operative Banks in Districts 
The Committee recommends that there should be woman co-operative banks in each 
district and SO% matching contribution be allocated by the Government for granting the 
loan to ladies who are small entrepreneurs. (Page 240). 
Action Taken 
All the State Governments and Banking Division, Ministry of Finance have been 
requested to examine the recommendation and communicate the action taken thereon. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information received from the Ministry of Finance and 
the various State Governments on the Committee's recommendation. 
5. RECOMMENDATION 
Share for Women under PMRY 
The Sub-Committee recommends that some percentage of Prime Minister's Rozgar 
Yojana (PMRY) may be fixed for women and their project must be sanctioned after due 
care so that the provision of reservation is not exploited so as to defeat the main objectives 
of the Yojana. (Page 240). 
ActiDn Taken 
While assigning the targets to all the States/UTs, the State Gqvernments have been 
asked to ensure that SCs!STs, OBCs, Women and Minorities get a fair share of assistance 
under PMRY scheme. They have further been advised that if it is felt necessary, the States/ 
UTs may conduct short duration motivational courses· for these categories of beneficiaries. 
While the percentage share for SCs/STs & OBCs is already mentioned in the PMRY scheme 
but the percentage of women is not specified. As recommended by the Standing Committee 
the matter of providing some fixed percentage to women is under examination. 

111 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes the information 
furnished by the Ministry of Industry in response to the Committee's recommendation. 
6. RECOMMENDATION 
Improvement in Working Conditions of Women 
With regard to the condition of working women, the Sub-Committee recommends that 
as has been done in the case of other industries, minimum wages for small scale industries 
may .also be fixed depending on the economic condition and viability of the SSI unit. The 
Sub-Committee further recommends that the question of enhancing the earning and 
improving the working conditions of the women workers may be dealt with sympathetically. 
(Page 240). 
Action Taken 
All the State Governments and the Ministry of Labour have been requested to examine 
the proposal and communicate the action taken thereon. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the information furnished by the Mi.1.!stry of Labour and 
some State Governments on the Committee's recommendation. 
7. RECOMMENDATION 
Support to Women Entrepreneurs 
On the basis of discussion with Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(Ladies Wing), the Sub-Committee is of the view that State Government must find ways to 
help the women engaged in mmmfacturing of home made product to get their product 
marketed. They should be provided business licences at their residential premises. The Sub­
Committee feels that for the first five years concession be given in electric tariff which. will 
definitely help the small entrepreneurs. Some concession should also be given to them with 
regard to sales tax, income tax etc. (Page 240). 
Action Taken 
All the State Governments, the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of 
Urban Development, Department of Rural Development and Employment Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) 
have been requested to examine the proposal and communicate the action taken thereon. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It notes the action taken by the 
Central Ministries and State Governments on the Committee's recommendation. 

112 
8. RECOMMENDATION 
Encouragement to Voluntary Organisations 
The Committee feels that the objectives of Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal 
(MA VIM) in Maharashtra have not come upto the mark and its working should be re­
organised. Voluntary organisations should be encouraged and helped by MAVIM like 
institutions in each State. Voluntary organisations should also be encouraged to give 
employment to needy women. The Committee also endorses the view of reservation of 
women in all vocational training courses to enhance their participation in industrial sector in 
the country. (Page 240). 
Action Taken 
The State Government of Maharashtra has been asked to reorganise the working of 
Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal (MA VIM) as recommended by the Standing Committee. 
The State Government of Maharashtra has also been requested to give us the details of 
MAVIM so that other State Government could be requested to set up MAVIM like 
institutions. 
The Ministry of Labour, Human Resource Development and State Governments have 
also been requested to examine the recommendations relating to employment to needy 
women by voluntary organisations and reservation for women in all vocational courses. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure- I). It notes the information 
furnished by the Ministry of Labour and the State Government on the tommittee's 
recommendation. 
9. RECOMMENDATION 
Assistance to Food Processing Units owned by Women 
The Committee recommends that food processing units run by women entrepreneurs 
should be provided special assistance by the Food Processing Ministry. (Page 241). 
Action Taken 
Action relates to Ministry of Food Processing Industries. They have been requested to 
communicate the action taken thereon on the above mentioned recommendations. 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!). It is unhappy to note that it has 
not been apprised of the action taken by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries on the 
Committee's recommendation. The Sub-Committee reiteriates the Committee's 
recommendation. 

113 
10. RECOMMENDATION 
Institutional support to women entrepreneurs 
The Sub-Committee feels that some institutional support for increasing their knowledge 
should be provided to women entrepreneurs who are engaged in making papad, pickles and 
mid-day meal work. They may also be provided some financial, technical and marketing 
support. (Page 241). 
Action Taken 
KVIC has been running a comprehensive scheme of assistance to women entrepreneurs 
engaged in making papad and pickles by providing technical and marketing support and 
finance through banks. KVIC has also been conducting training courses for papad and 
pickles. 
SIDO provides comprehensive range of extension services like providing economic 
information, conducting entrepreneurial development programmes, etc., for the prospective 
entrepreneurs including women entrepreneurs through its network of SISls and Branch SISis 
located in different parts of the country. 
Special emphasis ~as been given on product-cum-process development entrepreneurial 
training programmes, mod'ernisation and technology upgradation in different areas of food 
processing industries including pickles and chutneys, quality control through awareness 
programmes, preparation of plant guides and technology transfer documents for updating the 
knowledge of entrepreneurs including women and market surveys on food products to 
provide market information. Field officers of SIDO also visit food processing units in their 
areas from time to time to attend the problems of units and suggest suitable remedial 
measures. 
To provide the marketing support through government purchases to organised groups of 
women artisans and skilled workers, industrial units under the State Development 
Corporations and the organisations of women workers identified by the Department of 
Women and Child Development are treated at par with KVIC for the purpose of purchase/ 
price preference. 
Central Food Technology Research Institute (CFTRI) a Central Government 
organisation conducts research and development on food technology including papad and 
pickles. 
Comments/Observations 
The Committee hopes that existing training facilities as well as the technical and 
marketing support for women entrepreneurs to be more wide spread so that more women 
entrepreneurs can avail of these facilities. 
11. RECOMMENDATION 
Upliftment of women entrepreneurs 
The Sub-Committee held the discussion with district officials and State Industry 
Department. The Committee was informed that various schemes are operating for upliftment 
of women entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee is of the view that the various schemes 
launched by the State Governments should not be on the paper only and these must be put 
into practice, if women entrepreneurs are to be provided benefits in real terms. (Page 241). 

114 
Action Taken 
All the State Governments have been requested to examine the proposal and 
communicate the action taken thereon. 
The Department of SSI&ARI and the Office of the Development Commissioner (Small 
Scale Industries) have taken several steps for benefit of the women entrepreneurs in recent 
years. These are broadly as under: 
(i) In pursuance of Industrial Policy announced on 24th June, 1991, the measures 
for promoting and strengthening the small scale industries inter alia envisaged 
support to the women entrepreneurs through special training programmes. The 
Office of the Development Commissioner (Small Scale Industries) through its field 
offices, namely, Small Industries Service Institutes located in each State conducts 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme for the promotion and the 
development of the small scale industries. In all such training programme the 
women entrepreneurs are also included. Exclusive training programmes are also 
conducted for the women entrepreneurs. During 1995-96, 40 such programmes 
have been conducted benefiting 1200 women entrepr~neurs. The women 
entrepreneurs trained in such programmes are also guided in availing financial 
assistance/loans from the nationalised institutions. 
(ii) Association of Women Entrepreneurs of Karnataka (A WAKE), Bangalore has 
been included as a member of the Small Scale Industries Board constituted by the 
Government on 3rd January, 1996. 
(iii) Ten officers of Small Industries Development Organisation and NISIET, 
Hyderabad, engaged in Entrepreneurship Development Programmes have been 
trained for eight weeks under the Colombo Plan Training Programme at Durham 
Business School on 'Women Enterprise Development'. 
(iv) For the development of the women entrepreneurs, SIDO has initiate· 
proposals for including three new schemes in the Annual Plan for 1996-97. The. 
three schemes are: 
(a) Skill Development Training Programme for women Entrepreneurs: 
The scheme envisaged to provide necessary skills for establishing enterprises in fields 
like readymade garments, hosiery, knitting, food processing, leather and n!xine goods, 
herbal cosmetics, traditional crafts etc. Apart from skill development, the programme also 
included component of training in entrepreneurship. This would have made the 
entrepreneurs aware of the necessary technology development in the particular field and 
latest equipments and tools of trade. 
With a view to create corps of suitable trained Multidisciplinary Bare foot 
Managers/Small Enterprise Management assistants out of unemployed non­
technical gradua~es with the twin objectives of (1) making readily available to the 

.. 
f :iis ·""': - . 
SSI units suitable for graduates particularly from non-technical streams, a Schente 
for providing fin~Jncial assistailee for trai~~g of Small Entrepreneur Management 
Assistants (Bare Foot Managers) .for SSI ~ector with the involvement of Industry 
Associations NGOs, EDP Institutes at State ·and Central level was created. 
' 
Under the scheme the following NGOs involved in the development of women 
entrepreneurs have been provided financial assistance for conducting training programme: 
1. Association of Women Entrepreneurs of Karnataka (AWAKE), Bangalore. 
2. Association of Lady Entrepreneurs of Apdhra Pradesh1Hyd6rabad. 
(b) Strengtheniag of NGOs: 
The NGOs play a vital role in motivation and promotion of women entrepreneurs. They 
are able to penetract and reach women in all sectors. Under the scheme it was proposed that 
certain infrastructural facilities and/training aids should be provided to such NGOs who Qave 
done commendable Work for promotion of women ,entrepreneurs .. 
(c) Promoting participation of women in exhibitions and fairs; 
In order to facilitate marketing so that the success rate of women owned enterprises is 
ensured, it was proposed to· have a scheme for assisting women enterprises in exhibiting their 
products at various exhibitions and fairs organised at the state, national and international 
level by the Central and State Governments. The schem~ envisaged to support 1,500 women 
entrepreneurs in one year. . , 
(v) Department of SSI&ARI, Ministry of Industry 'is launching a National 
Programme for developing trade related entrepreneurship skill among 1,00,000 
women in rural and urban areas~ The· programme seeks to provide management 
and trade related training
1 
trade information guidance, counselling and follow up at 
one end of the entrepreneurial development spectrum as well ·as extension 
activities to transfer marketable designs and packaging inputs tie ups· with 
marketing organisations, and guidance and follow up at the group entrepreneurial 
level for the rural and urban ~oor. 
To discuss and plan the possibilities for domestic and international trade related 
entrepreneurship ·assistance and development for women, a one day workshop was organised 
on 8th February, 1996. A pilot programme for Trade Related Entrepreneurship development 
has been developed by a team of experts consisting of representatives from Ministry of 
Industry, UNDP, ITC, Geneva and ILO., 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee notes the additional information received from the Ministry of 
Industry on the Committee's recommendation (Annexure-!), It notes the action taken by the 
Central and State Governm~nt on the Committee's recommendation. 
12. RECOMMENDATION 
·-· --· .. ' .. -· .. - .. ~ ' !'!" 
Data feeding by NIC for Women Agriculturists : 
••• • •• -:_ ·:._,-r" ~· . -- • : . 
The Sub-Committee visited the Western Region Headquarter of NIC at Pune where it 
was informed that the c.entre was responsible for "COordinating computerisation activities in 
the four States of the region viz.,·· Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Goa and was 
·~ 

.-····. ---. 
H6 
~:.::...-·- ·- . 
. pri.marily engaged in t}le:.prom~tion ·of oonu;IUterisation Qt all levels iri the Government of 
Maharashtra. 'l;'he NIC,h~d to provide supp()rt for the computer progi:amme at the Central 
as well as at State Jev~l. The Sub-Committee was given to un<fersi.and that NIC, 
. Maharashtra NIC, Mahar,ashtra '$tate Unit, provided comput~risation ,~upport to all State 
Government Departments in Maritralaya (Bombay), all Directorates iii' Pune and Bombay, 
all tlistrict collectorates and Zilla Parishads in Maharasbtra, and various Central Oovernment 
organisations (including-certain 'P~blic: sector undertakings ·atld·.· autonomous· institutions). The 
Sub-Committee was informed that the Maharashtra State unit had taken certaiiilcey projects 
for .. the benefit of the' State, including data collected for the benefit of .agricultural and 
irrigation activities, accounts and treasuries, employment 1 excba,:~ges and .ipdustries. Total 
seventeen women were employed there who were"getting salary equivalent to their male 
colleagues. · ' 
On the basis of. the discussion h~ld with representatives .of the National Informatics 
Centre, Pune, the Committee :stiggest,. that (he centre can feed data .. about women 
agriculturists, tpeir minimum wag~sJ~ed in eacb.State .and other facilities provided. to them. 
The .~ub:Conimittee expresses its satisfaction over the functiq~ing of NIC in the. region. 
--- ............ ~t..... ~ ···- . . . . ·- . 
~a~ .. ~4L~:. . ... · . · 
~dton Taken · · 
. . :tb~ o~s~n;ati~ recom,mendations m,a()e by the Sub~COm,ittee VI was brought to the 
notice of NIC who, have observed as follows:- ·· ., ·.. ' ' 
"The recommendations refers to creation of .database about women agriculturists. ' 
It seems that the interest of the Sub-Committee is also of creation of database for 
women entrepre~eurs a.n~ women workers. NIC State Centres in· particular, 
Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra are being advised. to provide necessary 
assistance to State Directorate 'of Industries for creation of such database for their 
respectiv~ States. The State Directorate of Industries.'may also be· advised by the 
Ministry of Industry for creation of data base of women agriculturists, women 
workers and women entrepreneurs as per r~commendations made by the Sub-­
Committee VI.,_ · 
Ministry of Industry, Office of the DC (SSI) have addressed th~ S~ate .Directorate of 
Industries in this regard~ · 
Comments/Observations 
The Sub-Committee is unhappy to note that· it has not been apprised of the action taken 
by Government of Maharashtra· on the Committee's recommendation. Th~· Sub-Committee 
reiterates 1the Committee's recommendation. · ' 
.. 

ANNEXURE - 'A' 

' I 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT 
OF SSI AND A&RI VIDE O.M. NO. 20014{1)/95-KVI{II), DATED 21.11.1996. 
ACTION TAKEN NOTE IN RESPECT OF KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
COMMISSION (KVIC) ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE STUDY REPORTS OF SUB-COMMITTEE-VI CONSTITUTED BY THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT ON "INDUSTRIALISATION OF BACKWARD AREAS 
AND THE STATE OF CAPITAL GOODS SECTOR." 
Action 
Points 
1.2 KVIC is already inspiring their institutions to switch over to the \\!Ork-shed system. 
But the institutions sometimes face problems from the labour authorities. KVIC is 
in favour of marketing the products of the work-shed system through the proposed 
Joint Committee and it is already taking steps in this regard. 
1.9 KVIC has developed a charkha fusioning the merits of Coimbatore and Rajkot 
Model. The charkha is capable of spinning 20 to 24 hanks with minimum load 
factor. The new KVIC model charkha and the already existing models viz. 8 
spindle charkha and Rajkot model charkha are capable of rendering economically 
sustainable earnings to a spinner which .is around Rs. 20 to Rs. 25 a day of 8 hours 
working. 
As regards subsidization of the implement cost, KVIC will endeavour utilisation of 
the grant of 25% admissible under Special Employment Programme and the 125 
RPDS Block Development programme for subsidising the charkhas. KVIC has 
advised its institutions to ensure uniformity on quality with a view to enhancing 
sales of the khadi and village industries products. KVIC is considering the 
suggestion of utilisation of the National Renewal Fund for the purpose of training 
and redeployment of personnel. The Commission is making efforts for the 
Commissions's representation in the Export Promotion Council. 
With. regard to displeasure expressed by Sub-Committee over the red-tapism in 
KVIC, the KVIC is contemplating introduction of Desk Officer oriented disposal 
system and rationalisation of the procedure prescribed for various purposes 
concerning KVIC target group. An O&M study of the system and procedure shall 
be undertaken with a view to rationalise the same to bring utmost efficiency. This 
has also been recommended by the IIPA and accepted by the Commission. 
2.0 In respect of the recommendation of Sub-Committee to provide an independent 
financial status to KVIC, a suitable proposal for setting up a KVI development 
Bank on the lines of SIDBI is under consideration of the KVIC. With regard to 
other recommendation of Sub-Committee relating to promotion of women 
enterpreneurs, it may be mentioned that the entire programme of KVIC and in 
particular Khadi involves around women. Most of the beneficiaries of this sector 
are women. However, KVIC will look into establishing separate cell for promoting 
women enterpreneurs, if really needed. 
119 

REPLIES RECEIVED FROM MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, OFFICE OF THE 
ECONOMIC ADVISER VIDE O.M. NO. 11019/4/EA/97/EPD, dated 20.8.1997 
POINTS AS CONTAINED IN THE 17TH REPORT 
Que. 1 Whether the growth scheme and the transport subsidy scheme which are being 
implemented by the Central Government are in operation as per the prescribed 
targets? 
Que. 8 Out of the 71 Growth Centres proposed to be set up during the Eighth Plan 
period, how many have actually been set up. What are the plans of 
Government in this regard for the Ninth Plan Period? (20th Report) 
Ans: The position as far as the Growth Centre Scheme is concerned is as follows. 
With a view to promoting industrialisation in the country, the Government of 
India in June, 1988 announced the· Growth Centre Scheme under which 71 
Growth Centres (Annexure-!) are proposed to be developed throughout the 
country which would be endowed with basic infrastructural facilities like power, 
water, telecommunication and banking, etc. Each Growth Centre would be 
developed at an estimated project cost of Rs. 25-30 crores in which the share of 
the Government ~f India is limited to Rs. 10 crotes, Rs. 5 crores are to be 
contributed by the\state Government, Rs. 5 crores by the financial institutions 
and Rs. 10 crores a~,required to be raised by the State Government by market 
borrowing. The procedure to approve the Growth Centres requires that sites are 
selected and project reports are prepared by the State Governments. These are 
then apparised by the lead financial agencies, i.e. IDBI, IFCI, and ICICI. The 
project reports are thereafter considered by the Government of India in 
consultation with concerned administrative ministries and approvals accorded. So 
far 54 Growth Centres (Annexure-H) have already been approved for 
implementation of which 13 were approved in 1996-97 alone . .... 
Of the remaining 17 Growth Centres (Annexure-III) project reports in respect of 
4 Growth Centres have been received and these have also been cleared by the 
Project Appraisal Committee during the current year and are being processed 
further for final approval. Project reports in respect of 4 Growth Centres, i.e. 
Sonapur (Assam). Kanglatongbi (Manipur), Majhita (Sikkim) and Ke!:inga 
(Orissa) are yet to be finalised by the State Governments. In respect of Sonapur 
and Kanglatongbi Growth Centres the States of Assam and Manipur respectively 
are considering change of location. In the past too, on several occasions, State 
Governments have proposed change in location of Growth Centres requiring 
preparation of project reports afresh which was a time consuming exercise. The 
State Governments have been reminded at the highest level to expedite the 
finalisation of the project reports. Nine project reports are pending appraisal. The 
financial agencies have also been reminded from time to time to expedite 
appraisal to enable further action Non-participation by the Central financial 
institutions in the Scheme clearly affected the pace of implementation of the 
Scheme in the earlier years. Release of funds by Central Financial Institutions was 
a precondition to grant of Central assistance. A number of meetings were held 
with the central financial institutions. From time to time they were requested to 
release the funds so that implementation could be speeded up. The Central 
Financial Institutions have since inception not released any funds for the Growth 
120 

121 
Centre Scheme. In fact the Scheme was able to take off only in 1994-95 after the condition 
that Central releases can be made only after the contributions are made by the financial 
institutions was dispensed with in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. The following 
table indicates that after 1994-95 the implementation of the Scheme has in fact been speeded 
up considerably. 
Year (Rupees in crores) No. of Growth 
1990-91 
1991-92 
1992-93 
1993-94 
1994-95 
1995-96 
1996-97 
ToTAL: 
*Rs. 235 crores upto 30-6-1997. 
.. "' 
Plan provision 
30.00 
50.00 
22.00 
22.00 
25.00 
, --. 50.00 
28.96 
Amount released 
15.00 
36.50 
14.74 
7.00 
R0.39 
48.66 
28.96 
231.25* 
Centres approved 
5 
17 
15 
2 
Nil 
2 
13 
54 
Since the inception of the Scheme, Central assistance to the tune of Rs. 23.5 crore has 
been released. The State Governments have released a total of Rs. 128 crores. In fact as 
against a Plan provision of Rs. 50 crores during the Eighth Five Year Plan, higher Plan 
allocations were obtained and a total of Rs. 180 crores was released to the State 
Governments. 
Having regard to the physical and financial progress m~de by the State Governments in 
implementation of the Growth Centre, full Central assistance has been released in respect of 
12 Growth Centres (Annexure-IV). There are. 17 Growth Centres where allotment of plots 
has commenced. (Annexure- V) ' 
A special drive was .undertaken to provide fillip to the implementation of the Growth 
Centre Scheme in the North-Eastern Region, which is a relatively backward area. As a 
result, of the 9 Growth Centres (Annexure- VI) planned for North-Eastern Region, 4 were 
approved in March 1997. Two more projects in the North-East are in the pipeline. For the 
remaining Growth Centres, we are in touch with the North-Eastern States for their 
expeditious finalisation. 
The Growth Centre Scheme has been carried over into the Ninth Five Year Plan and the 
balance 17 projects will be covered in this period. Letters at the highest level have also been 
addressed to the State Governments and the lead financial agencies for expeditious 
appraisaVsubmission of the projects. A provision of Rs. 50 crores has been made for the 
Scheme for 1997-98. An amount of Rs. 4~0 crores bas been proposed to be sanctioned for 
the Ninth Five Year Plan so as to take·, complete care of the Central assistance required 
towards the Growth Centres. ·J 
TRANSPORT SUBSIDY SCHEME 
The transport subsidy scheme was introduced by the Government with a view to 
promoting industrialisation in hilly, remote and inaccessible areas. The scheme is applicable 

122 
to all the industrial units (barring plantations, refineries and power generating units) located 
in North-Eastern Region comprising Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Eight hill 
districts i.e. Almora, Chamoli, Dehradun, Nainital, Pauri Garhwal, Tehri Garhwal, 
Pithoragarh and Uttar Kashi of Uttar Pradesh. Darjeeling district of West Bengal; Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep. 
The scheme was introduced by the Government in July, 1971 and has been extended from 
time to time. It was last extended from 1.4.95 to 31.3.2000. 
Under the scheme, subsidy ranging between 50% to 90% is admissible on the transport costs 
incurred on movement of raw material an~ finished goods from the designated Rail Heads/ 
Ports upto location of the industrial units and vice-versa Within the North-Eastern Region, 
subsidy is also permissible on movement of raw material and finished goods from one state 
to another. (Annexure VII) 
The scheme works on disbursement/reimbursement basis, i.e. the subsidy claims are first 
scrutinised and disbursed by the State Government and reimbursement claimed thereafter 
from the Central Government. 
Since the inception of the scheme till 31.3.97, Transport subsidy amounting toRs. 297 crores 
has been released to various States/UTs. Out of these releases of Rs. 297 crores, funds to 
the extent of Rs. 176 crores were released to North-Eastern States, which constitutes 60% of 
total releases made. The details are given in (Annexure VIII). 
As against the original plan allocation of Rs. 20 crores for the Eighth Plan period, an 
amount of Rs. 154.57 crores was actually provided for. The transport subsidy released during 
the period amounts to Rs. 196.44 crores. This was done by obtaining additional funds under 
the scheme. The details of plan allocation and the amount actually released during the 
Eighth plan period are given as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Plan allocation Amount Released 
1992-93 10.00 12.18 
1993-94 17.00 31.99 
1994-95 29.30 54.00 
1995-96 50.00 50.00 
1996-97 48.27 48.27 
It would thus be seen that the subsidy released was in excess of the annual plan allocations. 
Thus in fact higher t1rgets were achieved. 
During the current financial year 1997-98, a budget provision of Rs. 48.30 crores has been 
made under the Transport Subsidy Scheme. Out of the above provision of Rs. 48.30 cr Jres, 
subsidy to the extent of Rs. 25.08 crores has been released to the various State Governments 
· till date. 
For the Ninth Five Year Plan (up to the validity of the scheme i.e. 31.3.2000), a provision of 
Rs. 200 crores has been made by the Planning Commission. Since the Plan Allocation was 

123 
not found adequate for the current year and for the Ninth Plan Period (upto validity of the 
scheme i.e. upto 31.3.2000), the Planning Commission has been requested to enhance the 
plan allocation under the scheme from Rs. 48.30 crores to Rs. 100 crores during the current 
financial year and for the Ninth Plan from the existing approved allocation of Rs. 200 crores 
to Rs. 300 crores. 

ANNEXURE-I 
LIST OF GROWTH CENTRES 
Sl. No. Name of the Growth Centre District 
Aaan Pradesh 
1. Hindu pur Anantapur 
2. Khammam Khammam 
3. Onaole Prakasam 
4. Vizianagaram- Bobbili Vizianagaram 
Arunachal Pradesh 
5. Niklok Ngorlung East Siang 
A lAIII 
6. Chariduar Sonitpur 
7. Matia Goal para 
8. Sonapur Kamrup 
Bihar 
9. Beausarai Begusarai 
10. Bhagalpur Bhagalpur 
11. Chhapra Chhapra 
12. Darbhanga Darbhanga 
13. Hazaribagh Hazaribagh 
. 14. Muzzafarpur Muzzafarpur 
Goa 
15. Electronic City Verna-Plateau 
Gujarat 
16. Gandhidham Kutch 
17. Pal an pur Banaskantha 
18. Vagra Bharuch 
Haryana 
19. Bawal Rewari 
20. Ambala Ambala 
Himachal Pradesh 
21. Kangra Kangra 
Jammu and Kashmir 
22. Ompura- Lassipora Budgam-Pulwama 
23. Samba Jammu 
124 

Sl. No. Name of the Growth Centre 
Karnataka 
24. Dharwad 
25. Raichur 
26. Hassan 
Kerala 
27. Alleppey- Pa thanamthitta 
28. Kann ur-Kozhikode-Malia puram 
Madhya Pradesh 
29. Boraj 
30. Chainpura 
31. Ghirongi 
32. Kheda 
33. Satlapur 
34. Siltara 
Maharashtra 
35. Akola 
36. Chandra pur 
37. Dhule 
38. Ratnagiri 
39. Nanded 
Manipur 
40. Kanglatongbi 
Meghalaya 
41. Me.ndi pa thar 
Mizoram 
42. Lungmual 
Nagai and 
43. Dimapur 
Orissa 
44. Chatrapur 
45. Dub uri 
46. Jharsuguda 
47. Kesinga 
Pondi~herry 
48. Karaikal \, 
Punjab 
49. Bhatinda 
50. Pathankot 
125 
District 
Dharwad 
Raichur 
Hassan 
Alleppey-Pathanamthitta 
Kannur-Kozhikode-Mallapuram 
Boraj 
Guna 
Bhind 
Dhar 
Raisen 
Raipur 
Akola 
Chandra pur 
Dhule 
Ratnagiri 
Nanded 
Senapati 
East Garo Hills 
Aizwal 
Kohima 
Ganjam 
Cut tack 
Jharsuguda 
Kalahandi 
Pondicherry 
Bhatinda 
Gurdaspur 

Sl. No. Name of the Growth· Centre 
Rajasthan 
51. Abu Road 
52. Bhiiwara 
53. Bikaner 
54. Jhaiawar 
55. Dhoipur 
Sikkim 
56. Majhitar 
Tamil Nadu 
57. Erode 
58. Panangudi- Thirumarugual 
59. Tiruneiveii (Gangai Kondan 
Nanur Block) 
Tripura 
60. Uttar Champamura 
Uttar Pradesh 
61. Bachouii-Buzurg 
62. Banthara 
63. Chaudharpur 
64. Dibiapur 
65. Khurja 
66. Mungra Satharia 
67. Sahjanwa 
68. Shivrajpur-Padampur 
West Bengal 
69. Boipur 
70. Jaipaiguri 
71. Maida 
126 
District 
Sirohi 
Bhiiwara 
Bikaner 
Jhaiawar 
Dhoipur 
Rangpo East 
Periyar 
Thanjavur 
Tiruneiveli- Ka ttabomman 
West Tripura 
Jhansi 
Shahjahnpur 
Moradabad 
Eta wah 
Buiandshahr 
Jaunpur 
Gorakhpur 
Pauri-Garhwai 
Birbhum 
Jaipaiguri 
Maida 

LIST OF APPROVED GROWTH CENTRES 
Sl. No. Name of the Growth Centre 
Andhra Pradesh 
1. Hindupur 
2. Khammam 
3. Ongole 
4. Vizianagaram-Bobbili 
Arunachal Pradesh 
5. Niklok Ngorlung 
Assam 
6. Chariduar 
Bihar 
7. Begusarai 
8. Bhagalpur 
9. Chhapra 
10. Hazaribagh 
11. Muzaffarpur 
Goa 
12. Electronic City 
Gujarat 
13. Gandhidham 
14. Palanpur 
15. Vagra 
Haryana 
16. Bawal 
Himachal Pradesh 
17. Kangra 
Jammu and Kashmir 
18. Samba 
Karnataka 
19. Dharwad 
20. Raichur 
21. Hassan 
127 
District 
Anantapur 
Khammam 
Prakasam 
Vizianagaram 
East Siang 
Sonitpur 
Begusarai 
Bhagalpur 
Chhapra 
Hazaribagh 
Muzaffarpur 
Verna-Plateau 
Kutch 
Banaskantha 
Bharuch 
Rewari 
Kangra 
Jammu 
Dharwad 
Raichur 
Hassan 
ANNEXURE-II 

Sl. No. Name of the Growth Centre 
•.. . . 
Kerala 
22. Alleppey-Pathanamthitta 
23. Kannur-Kozhikode-Malappuram 
Madhya Pradesh 
24. Borai 
25. Chainpura 
26. Ghirongi 
27. Kheda 
28. Satlapur 
29. Siltar 
Maharashtra 
30. Akola 
31. Chandraptir 
32. Dhule 
33. Ratnagiri 
Meghalaya 
34. Mendipathar 
Mizoram 
35. Luangmual 
Orissa 
36. Chatrapur 
37. Duburi 
Punjab 
38. Bhatinda 
39. Pathankot 
Rajasthan 
40. Abu Road 
41. Bikaner 
42. Jhalawar 
43. Dholpur 
Tamil Nadu 
44. Erode 
45. Tirunelveli (Gangai Kondan 
Nanur Block) 
Uttar Pradesh 
46. Bachouli-Buzurg 
47. Banthara 
48. Chaudharpur 
49. Khurja 
128 
District 
Alleppey- Pathanamthitta 
Kannur- Kozhikode-Malappuram 
Borai 
Guna 
Bhind 
Dhar 
Raisen 
Raipur 
Akola 
Chandra pur 
Dhule 
Ratnagiri 
East Garo Hills 
Aizwal 
Ganjam 
Cuttack 
Bhatinda 
Gurdaspur 
Sirohi 
Bikaner 
Jhalawar 
Dholpur 
Periyar 
Tirunelveli- Ka tta bomman 
Jhansi 
Shahjahnpur 
Moradabad 
Bulandshahr 

Sl. No. Name of the Growth Centre 
50. Mungra Satharia 
51. Sahjanwa · 
West Bengal 
52. Boipur 
53. Jaipaiguri 
54. Maida 
129 
District 
Jaunpur 
Gorakhpur 
Birbhum 
Jaipaiguri 
Maida 

ANNEXURE- III 
LIST OF BALANCE 17 GROWTH CENTRES 
Sl. Name of the Growth Centre 
No. District 
Appraisal by IFCI 
Assam 
1. Matia, Goalpara 
2. Sonapur, Kamrup 
Bihar 
3. Darbhanga, Darbhanga 
Haryana 
4. Ambala, Ambala 
Appraisal by IDBI 
Maharashtra 
5. Nanded, Nanded 
Nagai and 
6. Dimapur, Kohima 
Tamil Nadu 
7. Panangudi, Thanjavur 
Uttar Pradesh 
8. Dibiapur, Eta wah 
9. Shivrajpur- Pauri Garhwal 
l>adampur, 
Appraisal by ICICI 
Orissa 
10. Jharshuguda, Jharshuguda 
Kalahandi 11. Kesinga, 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
and Present Status 
Cleared by Project Appraisal Committee in 
current 1997-98. 
Project Report to be submitted by State for 
changed location. 
Under appraisal with IFCI. 
Cleared by Project Appraisal Committee in 
current 1997-98. 
Under appraisal with lOBI. PAC fixed for 
22.8.97. 
Under appraisal with IDBI. 
Under appraisal with IDBI. 
Under appraisal with IDBI. 
Under appraisal with IDBI. 
Under appraisal by ICICI. 
project report not yet received 
State. 
12. Ompura Lassipora,Budgam-Pulwama Project report received during current month 
from State, for appraisal by ICICI. 
Rajasthan 
13. Bhilwara, Bhilwara Under appraisal by ICICI. 
130 

Sl. Name of the Growth 
No. Centre and District 
Afanipur 
14. Kanglatongbi, Senapati 
Pondicherry 
15. Karaikal, Pondicherry 
Sikkim 
16. Majhitar, Ragpo East 
Tripura 
17. Bodhjung Nagar, West Tripura 
131 
Present Status 
Project Report to be submitted by 
State for changed location. 
Cleared by Project Appraisal 
Committee in current 1997-98. 
Project Report not received from 
State. 
Cleared by Project Appraisal 
Committee in current year 1997-98. 

ANNEXURE-IV 
LIST OF CENTRES WHERE FULL CENTRAL ASSISTANCE RELEASED 
,Sl. Name of the growth centre 
No. 
Gujarat 
1. Vagra (Bharuch) 
Haryana 
2. Bawal (Rewari) 
Karnataka 
3. Dharwad (Dharwad) 
Kerala 
4. Kan n ur-Kozhikode- Mala ppuram 
( Ka nn ur-Kozhi kode-Malappuram) 
Madhya Pradesh 
5. Ghirongi (Bhind) 
6. Kheda (Dhar) 
7. Siltara (Raipur) 
Punjab 
8. Bhatinda (Bhatinda) 
9. Pathankot (Gurdaspur) 
Rajasthan 
10. Abu-Road (Sirohi) 
Tamil Nadu 
11. Erode (Periyar) 
Uttar Pradesh 
12. Sahjanwa (Gorakhpur) 
132 
• 

ANNEXURE-V 
LIST OF GROWTH CENTRES WHERE PLOTS ALLOTMENT HAS 
COMMENCED 
Sl. Name of the Growth Centre 
No. 
1. Hindupur (Ananthapur) 
2. Yagra (Bharuch) 
3. Bawal (Rewari) 
4. Dharwad (Dharwad) 
5. Hassan (Hassan) 
6. Raichur (Raichur) 
7. Kheda (Dhar) 
8. Ghirongi (Bhind) 
9. Siltara (Raipur) 
10. Borai (Durg) 
11. Bhatinda (Bhatinda) 
12. Abu-Road (Sirohi) 
13. Bikaner (Bikaner) 
14. Jhalawar (Jhalawar) 
15. Dholpur (Dholpur) 
16. Mungra-Satharia (Jaunpur) 
17. Sahjanwa (Gorakhpur) 
133 
State 
Andhra Pradesh 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Karnataka 
Karnataka 
Karnataka 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Rajasthan 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 

Assam 
1. Chariduar 
2. Matia 
3. Sonapur 
Arunachal Pradesh 
1. Niklok Ngorlung 
Meghalaya 
1. Mendipathar 
Mizoram 
1. Luangmual 
Manipur 
1. Kanglatongbi 
Nagaland 
1. Dimapur 
Tripura 
1. Bodhjung Nagar 
ANNEXURE- VI 
GROWTH CENTRES IN NORTH-EAST 
approved in 1996-97. Rs. 50 lakhs Central Assistance 
released. 
The Project appraisal Committee has cleared the case 
in current 1997-98. 
The State Government is considering change of 
location of the Centre. 
Approved in 1996-97. Rs. 50 lakhs Central Assistance 
released. 
Approved in 1996-97. Rs. 50 lakhs Central Assistance 
released. 
Approved in 1996-97. Rs. 50 lakhs Central Assistance 
released. 
The State Government has to submit project report 
for changed location. 
IDBI is to submit the project appraisal report. 
The Project Appraisal Committee has cleared the 
case in current 1997-98. 
134 

ANNEXURE- VII 
BENEFITS AVAILABLE UNDER THE TRANSPORT SUBSIDY SCHEME 
1. For movement by sea/rail/road 
90% For entire North Eastern Region States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep. 
75% For Himachal Pradesh, 8 hill districts of Uttar Pradesh and Darjeeling District of 
West Bengal. 
90% For movement of raw materials from one State to another State within North 
Eastern Region. 
50% For movement of finished goods from one State to another State within North 
Eastern Region. 
2. For Movement of Electronic Components/Products by AIR 
75% From Calcutta to the airport nearest to the location of industrial unit in North 
Eastern Region and Sikkm and thereafter by rail/head as stated in 1 above and 
vice versa. 
75% From Delhi to Shimla and vice-versa and there after by raiVroad @ 75%. 
75% From Delhi to Srinagar/Ladakh and vice versa and thereafter by raiVroad 
@ 90%. 
135 

ANNEXURE- VIII 
YEAR-WISE STATEMENT INDICATING REIMBURSEMENT MADE UNDER TRANSPORT 
SUBSIDY SCHEME UPTO 31.3.97 
(Ruptts in Lakhs rounded off) 
Sl. Name of the 76-77 80-81 85-86 90-91 91-92 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 Total 
No. State/U.T. To To To 
79-80 84-85 89-90 
1. Assam 3.73 438.22 897.00 1604.90 662.93 643.14 980.05 2217.90 3861.10 2061.89 18870.36 
2. Manipur 0.30 0.84 6.50 16.78 64.14 58.87 128.70 276.16 
3. Tripura 2.00 3.86 55.41 57.86 43.92 23.64 132.99 2.60 28.50 350.23 
4. Arunachal Pradesh 6.37 225.14 212.71 47.66 207.42 769.80 
5. Meghalaya 19.12 88.82 50.27 7.00 136.21 250.10 195.83 190.66 914.74 
6. Nagaland 223.51 217.32 205.73 145.95 . 67.80 860.81 
7. Mizoram 23.58 26.00 322.48 272.82 405.80 1040.68 
8. Sikkim 1.06 171.60 66.64 52.33 55.33 123.24 36.43 606.63 
9. Himachal Pradesh 0.46 7.12 1904.il 513.04 116.50 66.60 690.74 1809.67 86.88 973.19 6199.23 
10. Jammu & Kashmir 1.55 16.11 281.92 252.84 71.34 151.45 334.79 466.30 1575.30 
11. Uttar Pradesh 55.77 318.53 106.94 64.35 66.60 237.89 85.35 600.95 1536.38 
12. Andaman & Nicobar 55.48 544.72 152.51 256.82 245.62 452.19 1.4~ 375.00 197.48 2281.21 
Islands 
13. Lakshadweep 
14. West Bengal 
(Darjeeling) 
ToTAL: 8.04 602.15 1712.26 3275.20 1430.00 1213.25 8199.45 5420.37 3099.00 4820.50 35281.53 
Out of above total releases of Rs. 297 crores, funds to the extent of Rs. 176.00 crorcs had been released to the 
North-Eastern Region, which constitutes 60% of the total releases made. 
136 

137 
Que. 2. As per the Ministry's ATR, the disinvestment policy decided by the Ministry of 
Finance and the disinvestment process is implemented by the Department of 
Public Enterprises. Whether this division of functions is working satisfactorily? 
Ans. The reply would be sent by Department of Public Enterprises. 
Que. 3. The action taken by the Minis.try of Finance on the Committee's recommendations 
to explore possibility of comfnon production planning by group of sick PSUs in 
reasonable proximity and specialising in similar range of products. 
Ans. 
Que. 4. 
Ans. 
Que. 5. 
This relates to Ministry of Finance. 
The extent to which targets of disbursement of funds under PMR Y have been met 
during the past three years. 
The reply would be sent by Department of SSI and ARI. 
The action taken by Government on the Committee's recommendation for 
ensuring special time bound measures for developing small scale units in Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands. 
Ans. The reply would be sent by Department of SSI and ARI. 
Que. 6. The action taken by the Ministry on the COmmittee's recommendation for granting 
certain prerogatives to the State Governments under Articles 268 and 269 of the 
Constitution. 
Ans. The Ministry of Industry is not concerned as this relates to Fi'nance Commission 
Transfers and is a subject matter of Ministry of Finance. 
Que. 7. The action taken by Government on the Committee's recommendation to review 
regularly the criteria for declaration of a State as an industrially backward. 
Ans. In 1968, Planning Commission ~et up two working groups, the uPande Committee" 
to spell out the criteria for identifying industrially backward States/districts and 
"Wanchoo Committee" to look into fiscal and financial concessions necessary for 
promoting industries in backward areas. The reports of the groups were discussed 
by National Development Council and in consultation with, the fiQancial 
institutions, a set of criteria was evolved for identification of industrially backward 
areas in which minimum infrastructure facilities were available. States identified 
245 out of a total of 396 districts as backward districts for the purpose of 
concessions and incentives. 
In 1987 at the instance of Central Board of Direct Taxes, National Institute of 
Public Finance and Policy, NIPFP conducted a study to evaluate the fiscal 
concessions for development of backward areas. The study concluded that while 
the fiscal incentives for backward areas development did successfully promote 
industrial dispersal, the criteiion of identifying backward areas in a State with 
reference to its development indicators rather than all India norms favoured 
developed States. The study, however, suggested enlargement of the s~ope of tax 
incentives for new industrial establishments in Income Tax Act. This was the 
rationale for introduction of full tax holiday for the initial 5 years for the industrial 
units set up in the States/Union Territories specified in Eighth Schedule of the 
Income Tax Act. 
Many representations were subsequently received suggesting that industrially 
backward districts in other States also needed same fiscal support. The Ministry of 
Finance, accordingly constituted a Study Group on Fiscal Incentives for 
Industrialisation under the Chairmanship of Dr. Shankar N. Acharya, Chief 
Economic Adviser, Ministry of Finance. The study group suggested that there was 

138 
need to redesign Central Government tax incentives for backward areas and that 
identification of backward districts in a State for any fiscal incentives should be based 
on objectivity and nationally determined norms and not on norms based on State 
averages. However, the study group did not identify the backward districts which was 
left to another study group constituted in May, 1994 under the Chairmanship of Shri 
M.K. Kaw. This working group was specifically requested to suggest guidelines for 
identifying backward districts and to look into the issue of indicators for determining 
backwardness. The criteria for identifying the extent of backwardness, as suggested by 
the· Study Group on ·Fiscal Incentives, were: 
A. Financial criteria 
- Per capita credit given by sched.uled commercial banks. 
- Per capita deposit received by scheduled commercial banks. 
B. lnfrastructural criteria 
Phones per thousand population 
Per capita power consumption 
Urbanisation 
Metalled roads per 100 square kilometres 
C. Industrial criteria 
- Workers in registered factories per thousand population 
- Per capita gross value added from registered manufacturing 
The Report of the Committee is under consideration of Ministry of Finance and they 
are seized with the matter. Ministry of Industry was associated with these exercises. It 
would, therefore, be observed that the criteria for identification of backward areas has 
continuously been reviewed. 
Que. 8. What action has been taken by the Ministry of Human Resource Development on 
the Committee's recommendation for having network of technical and vocational 
training as well literacy programmes institutes all over the country? 
Ans. Action Taken Report by the Ministry of Human Resource Development: 
In accordance with the priority accorded to vocationalisation of education in the 
National Policy on Education, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Vocationalisation of 
Secondary Education was launched in February. The main objectives of the scheme 
are to enhance individual employability, reduce the mismatch between the demand and 
supply of skilled manpower and provide the alternative for those pursuing higher 
education with particular interest or purpose. The Policy had expressed the 
commitment of achieving diversion of 10% of the higher secondary students to the 
vocational stream by 1995 and 25% by 2000. The scheme is being implemented 
through State GovernmentsiUTs. All State/UTs except Lakshdweep have joined the 
programme. The schools are selected by the State Governments and encompass rural 
and urban areas including backward areas. So far, 18709 vocational sections have been 
sanctioned in 6476 schools all over the country, thereby creating facili~ies for diversion 
of about 9.35 lak~1s students at the + 2 stage which is 11.51% of the enrolment at 
+ 2 stage. 
Under a Central Sector Scheme of this Department, selected Polytechnics are provided 
financial assistance to act as focal points to promote transfer of technology to rural 
sector and make contribution to the rural development. Under this Scheme activities 

139 
like training in technical trades, technology transfer, technical awareness etc. for the 
benefit of women, poor section of the Society, Village Youth and Dropouts are 
undertaken. There is no formal educational qualification, age or sex bar for 
participation in the course offered by these institutions. The financial assistance to the 
institutions is to an extent of Rs. 10.00 lakhs (non Recurring), Rs 5.00 lakhs (Seed 
money) and Rs. 7.00 lakhs per year as Recurring grant. As of now there are 375 
community Polytechnics functioning in the StatesiUTs. 
Que. 9. What .action has been taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forest for the 
purpose of removing ambiguities in the guidelines on environmental clearance in 
the case of Small Scale Industries? 
Ans. The reply would be furnished by Department of SSI and ARI. 
Que. 10. The latest position with regard to amending the Interest on Delayed Payment to 
Small Scale and Ancilliary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 for making it more 
meaningful. 
Ans. The reply would be furnished by Department of SSI and ARI: 
Que. 11. The consideration that weighed for not enhancing the excise exemption limit from 
the existing Rs. 30 lakhs. 
Ans. The reply would be furnished by Department of SSI and ARI. 

REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE PLANNING COMMISSION VIDE O.M. NO. 
F. 28111196-PARL., DATED 20.8.1997 
POINT NO. 1 
Whether any cell to monitor the availability of basic infrastructure facilities has been set 
up by the Planning Commission? 
Comments 
Infrastructure projects are reviewecVmonitored in the Planning Commission at the time 
of finalisation of outlays for the concerned sector during the Annual Plan Meetings. 
Presently a Committee of Secretaries in the Cabinet Secretariat is also periodically reviewing 
the performance of the various infrastructure sectors of economy like Power, Railways, 
Shipping, Ports/Roads etc. Ministry of Programme Implementation also regularly monitor 
the status of the various on-going infrastructure projects. 
There is no cell as such for monitoring the availability of infrastructural facilities in the 
Planning Commission. 
POINT NO. 2 
The Action taken on the Committee's recommendations regarding coordination of 
activities of the concerned agencies in Planning. 
The Five Year as well as Annual Plans are formulated, inter alia, based on integrated 
approach and with full involvement of all interests. The Five Year Plans, which are the blue 
prints of development policies, programmes and strategies, are prepared following an 
elaborate process of Working Groups, Steering Committees, meetings at various levels in the 
Planning Commission, etc. At various stages, these involve extensive deliberations and 
discussions with all concerned and interested groups and individuals like different ministries/ 
departments of Government of India, State Governments, leading industrialists of both 
public and private sectors, industry associations, economists, technocrats, etc. 
The draft Plan chapters are also sent to concerned ministries/departments for vetting 
and comments. It would thus be seen that the process of formulation of Plans for each sector 
involves very extensive and detailed consultations with all concerned agencies and 
individuals. 
POINT NO. 3 
Whether any action has been taken by the concerned Ministries on the Committee's 
recommendations regarding development of infrastructure in North-Eastern States? 
Comments 
A number of development programmes have been initiated for the overall 
infrastructural development of North-Eastern Region, Ministry of Home Affairs appointed 
the following Working Groups to assess the infrastructural development requirements of the 
roads and civil aviation sector: 
(i) Working Group on the Perspective Plan for Roads in the North-Eastern region 
(1994). 
Working Group comprising Director-General (Roads), Ministry of Surface Transport 
and other members from Border Roads Organisation, Planning Commission, Ministry of 
Defence and NEC have gone into details of development requirements of National 
140 

141 
Highways, State Highways, Roads under Border Roads Organisation, their expansion and 
maintenance. The Committee recommended financial requirement for on-going and existing 
works at Rs; 11087 crores. The recommendations are being implemented under the various 
schemes of Ministry of Surface Transport and by the State Governments through their Plan 
Schemes. 
(ii) Working Group for the preparation of comprehensive plan for development of Civil 
Aviation in the North-Eastern Sector. 
This Working Group constituted in April, 1995 in the Ministry of Home Affairs has 
identified various airports for development in the NE region. The identified projects will be 
taken up fqr development during the Ninth Plan period. 
(iii) New initiatives announced by the Prime Minister for the development of North­
Eastern Region. 
In the month of October, 1996 Prime Minister announced various developmental 
projects proposed to be undertaken on priority basis for the development of the region. 
Ministry of Home Affairs has identified rail, road and civil aviation projects of the order of 
Rs. 6116 crores which are being taken up on priority basis. 
(iv) Allocation of 10% of outlays out of the overall outlay of the Ministry/Department. 
Under this provision the respective infrastructure Ministries are mandated to allocate 
10% of their outlay for the development of North-Eastern region. 
(v) High Level Commission for tackling backlogs in Basic Minimum Services and 
Infrastructural Needs (Shri S.P. Shukla Commission 1997). 
This Commission has also identified various gaps in the infrastructural development of 
Railways, Roads, Civil Aviation and Inland Water Transport Services. 
POINT NO. 4 
What action has been taken by the Planning Commission on Committee's 
recommendations for setting up of a 'joint decision making body for deciding the aggregate 
sum for the development of Railways in the country's backward region? 
Comments 
The Railway Budget allocates resources for various purposes in the railway sector on 
the basis of operational needs as well as the development demands of various regions. 
Investment proposals are processed in· the Expanded Railway Board which has 
representatives from the Planning Commision, Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure) 
and the Department of Programme Implementation. The Board provides a forum for joint 
decision making and gives adequate consideration to the development of infrastructure in the 
country's backward regions. 
• 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT 
OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT VIDE O.M. No. 1(64)197-IRS, 
DATED 19.8)997. 
DEPARTMEMT OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
(INDUSTRIAL RENEWAL SECTION) 
Point-wise replies on the points relating to Department of Industrial Development on 
the issues contained in the lOth Report of Department-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Industry as ·enumerated in Rajya Sabha Secretariat's letter 
No. RS. 3 I 4(i) I 97 -Ind. dated the 14th August, 1997. 
POINT NO. 3 
1. Department of Industrial Development has not, on its own, moved any proposal for 
merger of Department of Industrial Development and Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion. 
POINT NO.5 
1. A Note on Operational Modalities for grant of assistance from National R~newal 
Fund (NRF) was submitted by the Department of Industrial Development to Cabinet 
Secretariat. This Note, inter alia, covers assistance from NRF for Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme in State Public Sector Undertakings, etc. It was deferred in the meeting of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) held on 28.11.1995. No further development has 
taken place in the matter till date. 
POINT NO. 12 
1. Government has taken a number of steps to tackle the problem of industrial sickness 
which, inter alia,. include, guidelines of Reserve Bank of India to banks, amalgamation of 
sick units 'with healthy units, setting up of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
under Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provision) Act, National Renewal Fund, National 
Equity Fund, etc. 
2. A brief containing the present status of industrial sickness in the country and a 
summary of remedial measures taken by the Government, is enclosed. 
142 

ANNEXURE 
BRIEF OF INDUSTRIAL SICKNESS 
1. Data on Industrial sickness in the country is compiled by the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) and the latest report is upto the end of March, 1996. Ir. orief, the total industrial 
sickness may be summed up as follows:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
Category No. of Units Outstanding Bank Credit 
1. Sick. non-SSI Units 
2. Weak non-SSI Units 
3. Sick SSI Units 
TOTAL! 
1956 
418 
262376 
264750 
8823.19 
1203.12 
3721.94 
13748.25 
2. A number of causes, both internal and external operating in combination, have been 
responsible for industrial sickness. The main cause include deficiencies in management, 
planning and marketing etc. Management deficiency is a major cause of sickness accounting 
for 53.4% of the cases of industrial sickness. 
3. The remedial measures can be categorised into two parts: 
(a) relating to non-SSI units 
(b) relating to SSI units 
4. For non-SSI units, legislative enactments, namely, Section 72 A of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961 and Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provision) Act, 1985 deal with revival and 
other measures. 
5. Institutional mechanism for controlling sickness of non-SSI units consists of following 
agencies: 
(a) Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction. 
(b) Specified Authority 
(c) Empowered Authority of the National Renewal Fund 
(d) Adminstrative Ministries dealing with the Industry concerned. 
(e) Reserve Bank of India I banks I financial institutions. 
(f) State Gove~ments. 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) has been set up to secure 
timely detection of sick and potentially sick companies. The 'Performance Review, 1996' of 
BIFR indicates registration of 1853 sick units with the Board upto 31.12.1996. 
7. The region-wise number of sick companies are as follows: 
Western region - 563 
Southern region - 558 
Northern region - 447 
Eastern region - 285 
143 

144 
Among the States, substantial number of cases were registered from following: 
Maharashtra· • 290 
Andhra Pradesh • 250 
Uttar Pradesh - 191 
West Bengal • 177 
8. Total number of workers involved in the sick industrial companies registered with the 
BIFR (excluding those dismissed as non-maintainable) is 11,82,432. Textile sector accounts 
for the maximum number of workers affected (3,61,557). 
9. The cumulative losses in these companies had amounted toRs. 23,793 crores. The total 
net worth (paid-up capital and free reserves) of these companies is Rs. 8981 crores. 
10. Sickness in small scale sector is primarily the responsibility of the State Government. 
Govt. of India have announced following relief and concessions for rehabilitation: 
(a) Equity assistance scheme 
(b) Setting up of Small Industrial Development Bank of India. 
(c) State Level Inter Institutional Committee (SLIIC). 
··~·· 
\ 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM D.C. SSI, DEPARTMENT OF SSI AND A&RI vide LEITER 
NO.E. 7(3)/96 DATED 3.7.1997. 
(1) DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY.:.- 17TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION MADE 
BY SUB-COMMITTEE - I 
(a) Recommendation No. 3 
Certain environmental clearance requirements were also coming on the way of dispersal 
of industries. Enterpreneurs interested in setting up industries in backward or far off areas 
find it extremely difficult to get green singal as they had to pass through many agencies.'The 
Central Government should give clear cut instructions/ guidelines on pollution issue. The 
Ministry of Environment should review its policy to delegate powers in setting up of 
industries. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
The recommendation was referred to Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Wildlife for examination and necessary action. 
Action Taken by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Wildlife 
Ministry of Environment and Forest have informed that the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Notification, 1994 as amended on 4th May, 1994 contains a list of projects 
requiring environmental clearan.:;e from the Central Government in Schedule-L There are 29 
projects which require environmental clearance. 
(b) Recommendation N~. 4 
Secretary, Government of Maharashtra also emphasised that non-core s.ector should be 
decontrolled which othe:wise had become a den of corrupt practices. According to him, 
Coal Control Order should be dispensed with. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
The issue of disp~nsing with the Coa! Control order has been rderred to Ministry of 
Coal. 
Latest Status 
Reply I action taken report has not been received so far on the recommendation from 
Ministry of Coal. 
(2) DEPARTMENT-RE:LATED PARUAt\-fENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY -17TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE-RECOMMENDATION MADE 
BY SUB-COMMITTEE · HI 
(c) Recommendation No. 1 
The Sub-Committee expressed its concern over the high percentage ( 46%) of sick 
small scale units in Allah3bad and recommended that ebborate plan may be chalked out 
to revive them. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
It was inter alia stated that the Department would convene a meeting of all 
concerned to take a view on the schemes/ programmes for solving the problem of 
sickness. 

146 
Action Taken after submission of ATR 
To discuss the need of institutional mechanism to look into the sickness of small 
scale industries and other related issues for tackling sickness in small scale sector a 
:neeting has been convened by Secretary {SSI&ARI) on 2rid July, 1997. 
(3) DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY- STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY 17TH REPORT OF THE SUB COMMITTEE • Til 
(d) Recommendation 
Glass Industry of Firozabad is facing problem due to short supply and inferior quality of 
coal. The Committee recommends that the steps may be initiated to make good quality coal 
available in Firozabad. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
ATR submitted earlier inter alia stated that in respect of supply of coal to the existing 
industries the matter has already been taken up with the appropriate authority. 
Latest Status 
The Glass Industry of Firozabad falls within the jurisdiction of Taj Trapezium. Owing t_o 
the pollution caused by burning of coal in the glass furnaces, the Government has already 
taken a policy decision to not to encourage coal based glass industry in Firozabad. As per 
the information available the industry is not facing any problem with regard to short supply 
or supply· of inferior quality of coal. 
As per the directives of Honourable Supreme Court the existing coal based furnaces are 
to be replaced by non-polluting furnaces run by natural gas. 
The Gas Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL) has earmarked 3 lakh million cubic meter of 
Natural Gas for Firozabad Glass Industry. This quantity of Natural Gas has already been 
allotted to 64 industries. The main pipeline has been laid upto the City Gas Station and the 
connecting pipelines within the city for the distribution of gas to industries is being laid. To 
motivate the industry, a study tour for visit to European Glass Indsutry has already been 
organised in collaboration with UNDP and international experts have started providing 
technical assistance to CDGI for the establishment of pilot plant based on gas for 
demonstration and technical consultancy to Glass Industry. 
(4) DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE-
17TH REPORT OF THE COM1\1ITTEE-RECOMMENDATIONS MADE 
BY SUB-COMMITTEE • VI 
(e) Recommendation No. 1.1 
On the basis of the discussion held with small entrepreneurs, the Committee 
recommends that it should be mad¥ compulsory that whatever products women 
entrepreneurs make in the small units some percentage of it must be purchased by the 
Government Departments. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
All State Governments, Department of Women and Child Development and KVIC 
were requested to examine the recommendation and communicate the action taken thereon. 

147 
Action Taken by Department of Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation 
Department of Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation have informed that for 
proper marketing of products of women entrepreneurs, instructions have already been issued 
by State DRDAs to seek the help of Khadi Bhandars, Handloom and Handicraft outlets, 
State Emporia, Leather Corporation for maximising sales and income of the Scheme 
DWCRA (Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas). Some State Governments 
have issued orders declaring the DWCRA groups as approved sources for supply of bulk 
articles required by the Government Departments. CAP ART is organising sale and display 
of DWCRA products in Gram Shree Melas. District supply and marketing societies (DSMS) 
are playing supportive role for the sale of DWCRA products. 
Action Taken by State Governments 
Government of Sikkim 
Department :·of Industries have informed that there is no specific scheme for women 
entrepreneur. However, all small scale entrepreneurs are provided 15% price preference and 
the Government has issued various Notifications to all Governtment Departments to 
purchase local products. 
Government of Goa 
Government of Goa is considering to direct the GHRSSIDC and Goa State Co­
operative Societies to purchase 50% of the total montbly produce manfuactured by women 
entrepreneurs. 
Government of Assam 
I 
Industries Department, Government of Assam have informed that the State 
Government have enacted Assam Preferential Store Purchase Act, 1986 governing purchases 
from SSI units by the Government department. The Act provide for compulsory purchase of 
certain items from SSI units in the State. 
Government of Gujarat 
Industries and Mines Department of Government of Gujarat have informed that they 
have already framed new Purchase Policy 1993 vide which Government Department are 
advised to purchase their stores from SSI units I cottage units I women co-operative society 
etc. 
Government of Tripura 
It has been informed that presently products manufactured in handloomlhandicrafts 
sector, where most of the women entrepreneurs are engaged are being marketed through 
Government undertakings. 
(f) Recommendation No. 1.3 
The Committee recommends that there should be women cooperative bank~ in each 
districts and 50% matching contribution be allocated by the Government for granting the 
loan to ladies who are small entrepreneurs. 
Action Taken Submitted 
All the State Governments and Banking Division, Ministry of Finance were requested 
to examine the recommendation and communicate the action taken thereon. 

148 
Action Taken by Banking Division, Ministry of Finance 
Banking Division, Ministry of Finance has .informed that the extent policy of Reserve 
Bank of India provides setting up of Mahila Urban Co-operative Banks exclusively with 
women as members by means of concession in entry point norms of share capital and 
membership. However, it is for the promoters to come forward for setting up of such a bank 
in any district. As regards providing Government subsidy for settiBg up of Mahila Banks, at 
present there is no such scheme. 
Action Taken by State Governments 
Government of Sikkim 
Department of Industries have informed that considering the size of the State and its 
small population it may not be possible to set up women co-operative banks at !)resent. 
Government of Goa 
Government of Goa proposes to provide 50% matching contribution to women co­
operative banks in both disticts of Goa for granting loans to ladies entrepreneurs. 
Government of Assam 
Industries Department, Governmr , t of Assam has informed that the recommendation 
has been referred to the co-operation Uepartment of the State for taking necessary action. 
Government of Gujarat 
Government of Gujarat has informed that women co-operative banks named as 
"SEV A" already exists in Ahmedabad district. Mahila Arthik Vikas Nigam of the State is 
also helping women entrepreneurs of the State for providing loans required by them. 
Government of Tripura 
According to Government of Tripura proposal has already been initiated to Reserve 
Bank of India for permission to set up a woman urban co-operative bank for West Tripura 
district. 
(g) Recommendation No. 1.4 
The Sub-Committee also recommends that with a view to ensuring effective financial 
arrangement a scheme may be evolved for joint appraisal of projects by financial institution 
and banks for the requirement of the small scale units for the fixed and the working capital 
as early as possible. For revival of sick units in Madhya Pradesh, which, at present are 
suffering from the paucity of finance, the Sub-committee recommends that Madhya Pradesh 
Finance Corporation must initiate for providing finance after getting the viability examined 
by the District Industries Centre. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
Madhya Pradesh Government was requested to examine the proposal and send their 
comments. 
Action Taken by Government of Madhya Pradesh 
Reply/ Action taken by Government of Madhya Pradesh on the recommendation is still 
awaited. · 

149 
(h) Recommendation No. 1.5 
The Sub-committee recommends that some percentage of Prime Minister's Rozgar 
Yojana (PMRY) may be fixed for women and their project must be sanctioned after due 
car.e so that the provision of reservation is not exploited so as to defeat the main objectives 
of the Yojana. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
It was informed by the Department that the recommendation of providing some fixed 
percentage to women is under examination. 
Action Taken 
Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) does not envisage any reservation for women 
beneficiaries· under the scheme so that no upper limit is placed on the women participants in 
any District I State in the country as well as to ensure the fulfilment of overall target in case 
sufficient number of women beneifiaries are not forthcoming. 
However, for improving the participation of ·women under PMRY, State/UT 
Governments have been instructed to ensure that the interest of the women beneficiaries are 
properly taken care of. It has been decided that if in the normal course none of the 
members in the Task Force is a woman then a woman can be specially invited in the DIC 
Task Force Meetings so that the DIC Task Force could be better sensitised towards woman. 
Besides in the Quarterly I?rogress Reports this Office is constantly monitoring the 
participation of women under PMRY. 
(i) Recommendations No. 1.6 
With regard to the condition of working women, the Sub-Committee recommends that 
as has been done in the case of other industries, minimum wages for small scale industries 
may also be fixed depending on the economic condition and viability of the SSI unit. The 
Sub-committee further recommends that the question of enhancing the earning and 
improving the working conditions of the women workers may be dealt with sympathetically. 
Action Taken Submitted 
All the State Governments and the Ministry of Labour were requested to examine the 
proposal and communicate action taken thereon . 
• Action Taken by Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment 
Department of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation has informed that their 
Department is implementing three centrally sponsored schemes of Urban Poverty Alleviation 
namely., Nehru Rozgar Yojana, Urban Basic Services for the poor and Prime Minister's 
Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication Programme. Though these schemes do not identify 
with the recommendation of the Sub-Committee- VI in totality yet the aim of the scheme are 
to improve the quality of life of the urban poor, especially the most vulnerable sections of 
the population such as women, SC and ST and minorities. 
Action Taken by Ministry of Labour 
The recommendation has been examined by Ministry of Labour and they are of the 
view that minimum wages fixed under the Minimum Wages Act are the bare minimum to 
keep workers at the sustenance level. They are of the opinion that fixation of wages below 
the minimum wage level would defeat the very purpose of fixing such wages and 
accordingly, this suggestion cannot be support by them. 

150 
Action Taken by State GoveTnments 
Government of Goa 
Government of Goa proposes to suggest to Labour Commissioner, Secretary, Goa 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the President Goa Small Industries Association 
to fix minimum wages for SSI industries depending upon the economic conditions and 
viability of the SSI units and to deal sympathetically the question of enhancing the 
earning and improving the working conditions of women workers. 
Government of Gujarat 
Industries and Mines Department of Government of Gujarat have informed that 
Minimum Wages Act has already been implemented in their State. 
Government of Tripura 
According to Government of Tripura the level of minimum of wages and condition 
of women workers in Tripura are quite satisfactory. The minimum wages for women 
workers is same as that for men. The State Government is also implementing various 
Labour Laws for protecting the interests of the women workers. 
G) Recommendation No. 1.7 
On the basis of discussion with Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(Ladies Wing), the Sub-Committee is of the view that State Government must find ways 
to help the women engaged in manufacturing of home made products to get their 
products marketed. They should be provided business licences at their residential 
premises. The Sub-committee feels that for the first five years concession be given in 
electric tariff which will definitely help the small entrepreneurs. Some concession .should 
also be given to them with regard to sales tax, income tax etc. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
All the State Governments, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of 
Urban Development, Department of Rural, Development and Employment, Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) 
were requested. to examine the proposal and communicate the action taken thereon. 
Action Taken by Department of Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation 
Department of Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation have informed that for 
proper marketing of products of women entrepreneurs, instructions have already been 
issued by State ORDAs to seek the help of Khadi Bhandars, Handloom and Handicraft 
outlets, State Emporia, Leather Corporation for maximising sa1es and income of the 
Scheme DWCRA (Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas). Some State 
Governments have issued orders declaring the DWCRA groups as approved sources for 
supply of bulk articles required by the Government Departments. CAP ART is organising 
sale and display of DWCRA products in Gram Shree melas. District Supply and 
Marketing Societies (DSMS} are playing supportive role for the sale of DWCRA 
products. 
·• 

151 
Action Taken by National Small Industries Corporation 
NSIC bas informed that they have incorporated special rate of interest in their schemes 
for women entrepreneurs. They also give preferences in organising various Entrepreneurial 
Development Programmes specially where there are a large number of potential women 
entrepreneurs. 
Action Taken by Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
KVIC has informed that various facilities in the form of training, concessional finance. 
etc., are extended to encourage women participation in KVI Sector .. Khadi Gramoudyog 
Vidhyalaya at Pune in Maharashtra, at Kumarikatta in orissa and at MDTC, T. Kallupatti in 
Tamil Nadu impart training to women entrepreneurs in various skills. 
In view of the introduction of project approoch witft margin money scheme from 
consortium bank credit, women's own contribution would be 5% of the project cost in place 
of 10% in all other categories. Similarly, KVIC would provide 30% of the project cost as 
margin money to women undertaking KVI activities in place of 25% for other categories. 
Action Taken by State Go¥ernments 
Government of Sikkim 
Department of Industries have informed that the State is on the verge of declaring an 
industrial policy and it will incorporate many of the suggestions namely encouragement of 
local artisan products, marketing and exort obligation boards, Sales Tax Exemption etc. 
Government of Goa 
Government of Goa proposes to seek assistance from GHRSSIDC through their 
emporia and the State Co-operative Societies through their outlets to get the home products 
manufactured by women entrepreneurs marketed and provide them with 50% concession in 
electric tariff for a period of five years. As for concession in sales tax and incomP.: tax is 
concerned, it is informed that all SSI units enjoy sales tax exemption benefit for 15 years and 
income tax holiday for five years. 
Government of Manipur 
Commerce and Industries Department, Government of Manipur has informed that part 
(iii) of the Industrial Policy of Manipur, 1990 includes power subsidy for five years from the 
date of commencement of commercial production, Subsidy on drawal of electric power line 
to the f~ctory shed upto a ceiling of Rs. 50,000 per unit, exemption of local sales tax for five 
years from the date of commencement of production, reimbursement of stamp duty and 
registration fees etc. 
Government of Orissa 
Under State Industrial Policy, 1996 women technical entrepreneur and women co­
operatives are classified as special class entrepreneur and they are entitled to 5% extra 
capital investment subsidy subject to a limit of Rs. 5 lakhs over and above the general limits 
prescribed in the industrial policy. 
Finished products of all existing and new Khadi, Village, Cottage and Handicrafts 
industrial units are exempted from payment of sales tax when sold at sales outlets of 
authorised co-operatives/Government agencies and agencies recognised by KVIC Coir 
Board, Handicraft Corporations etc. New industrial units having more than 30% of regular 

152 
employees as women and/or handicapped and/or belonging to SC'../ST would be entitled to 
exemP-tion/deferment by two additional years provided the unit has regular employment of 
not less than 20 persons. About granting of business licences to women entrepreneurs at 
their residential premises, a liberal view would be taken in the matter. 
Government of Assam 
Industries Department, Government of Assam has informed that the matter is being 
taken up with the financial institutions. 
Government of Gujarat 
According to Industries and Mines, Department of the Government of Gujarat women 
engaged in Lhe manufacturing home made products are given SSI registration. The small 
women entrepreneurs are given electricity duty concession by the Commissioner of 
Electricity for a period of five years from the date of commencement of production. 
Moreover, additional incentives at the rate of 5% of their capital investment are also 
declared by State Government in the new Industrial Policy of 1995-2000. 
Government of Tripura 
Government of Tripura has informed that the matter of granting business l,incences at 
residential premises is considered sympathetically subject to fulfilment of other requirements 
like pollution control etc. Women entrepreneurs are eligibl~ for various incentives under 
State Incentive Package for industries. Infact, women entrepreneurs are pro:vided 5% 
addition capital investment subsidy over and above 30% subsidy being provided to other 
entrepreneurs. The incentive in income tax is outside the purview of the State Government. 
(k) Recommendation No. 1.8 
The Committee feels that the objectives of Mahila Arthik Vikas Mahamandal 
(MA VIM) in Maharashtra have not come upto the mark and its worK.ing should be 
reorganised. Voluntary organisations should be encouraged and helped by MAVIM like 
institutions in each State. Voluntary organisations should also be encouraged to give 
employment to needy women. The Committee also endorses the view of reservation of 
women in all vocational training courses to enhance their participation in industrial sector in 
the country. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
The Ministry of Labour Human Resource Development and the State Government were 
requested to examine the recommendations relating to employment to needy women by 
voluntary organisations and reservation for women in all vocational courses. 
Action Taken by Ministry of Labour 
Ministry of Labour have informed that under women's vocational training programme, 
various training courses are being conducted by National Vocational Training Institutes and 
Regional Vocational Training Institute for women in Secretarial Practice, Hair & Skin Care, 
Instrument Mechanic, Desk Top Publishing, etc. 
Under World Bank assisted schemes the existing institutes are being strengthened and 
new ITis for women are being set up at State level. 

Action Taken by State Governments 
Government of Goa 
153 
Government of Goa has informed that they propose to take up the matter with 
W.E.G., a women's organisation in Goa to provide employment to needy women. As for 
reservation of women in all vocational training courses is concerned- DIM as a member of 
the State Council for Vocation education would suggest to fix 25% of seat~. to women 
candidates. 
Government of Orissa 
Industries Department, Government of orissa has informed that they have 30% 
reservation for women candidates in Engineering Colleges and 15% in co-educational 
polytechnics. Beides, there are 4 women polytechnics and 9 women ITis. 
Government of Gujarat 
, Industries and Mines Department of Government of Gujarat have informed that a new 
incentive policy of 1995-2000 has been declared in which industrial units are required to 
employ at least 85% of local workers in their organisation. 
Government of Tripura 
According to Government of Tripura voluntary organisation working for women are 
being given due encouragement in the Stateo As regards vocational training it may be 
mentioned that there is separate ITI for women functioning since 1988 with intake cap~city 
of 64. 
(1) Recommendation No. 2.3 
The Committee recommends that food processing units run by women entrepreneurs 
should be provided special assistance by ·the Food Processing Ministry. 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
Ministry of Food Processing was requested to communicate the action taken on the 
recommendation. 
Action Taken by Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
Reply/ Action taken by Ministry of Food Processing is still awaited on the 
recommendation. 
(m) Recommendation No. 2.6 
The Sub-Committee held the discussion with the district officials and State Industries 
Department. The Committee was informed that various schemes are operating for upliftment 
of women entrepreneurs. The Sub-Committee is of the view that the various schemes 
launched by the State Oovernments should not be on the paper only and these must be put 
into practice, if women entrepreneurs are to be provided benefits in real terms. 

154 
Action Taken Report Submitted 
All the State Governments were requested to examine the proposal and communicate 
the action taken thereon. 
Action Taken by State Governments 
Government of Goa 
Government of Goa has informed that with various schemes launched by Government 
they could assure assistance to women entrepreneurs with benefits in real terms. 
Government of Gujarat 
Industries and Mines Department have informed that the State Government has t:aken 
due care in 1995-2000 incentive policy by providing additional 5% subsidy and sales tax 
benefit for women entrepreneurs. 
Government of Tripura 
According to Government of Tripura, they are committed to implement the scheme for 
women entrepreneurs in best possible manner. 
Government of Sikldm 
In response to the recommendations to provide actual benefits to women entrepreneurs, 
Government of Sikkim has constituted a Committee consisting of officials of Industries, 
Social Welfare, Cooperation and Women & Child Welfare Departments to look into the 
matter and submit recommendations to the Government. 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, OFFICE OF THE ECONOMIC 
ADVISER, VIDE OM NO. 11019/4/EA/97/EPD, DATED 21.8.97 
POINTS AS CONTAINED IN THE 17TH & 20TH REPORT 
Replies in respect of Question pertaining to Department of Industrial Development 
Que. 5 What the current position on the Ministry's proposal favouring to extend assistance 
from NRF to State PSUs? 
Ans. A Note on Operational Modalities for grant of assistance from National Renewal Fund 
(NRF) was submitted by the Department of Industrial Development to Cabinet 
Secretariat. This Note, inter-alia covers a~istance from NRF for Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme in State Public Sector Undertakin~s, etc. It was deferred in the meeting of 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs '{CCA) held on 28.11.1995. No further 
development has taken place in the matter till date. 
Que. 12 Whether Ministry agrees that the process of revival of the sick units is very time 
consuming, What remedial measures are contemplated by Government in this 
regard? 
Ans. Government has taken a number of steps to tackle the problem of industrial sickness 
which, inter-alia, include, guidelines of Reserve Bank of India to banks, amalgamation 
of sick units with healthy units, setting up of Board for Industrial and Financial 
reconstruction under Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, National 
Renewal Fund, National Equity Fund, etc. 
A brief containing the present status of industrial sickn~ss in the country and a 
summary of remedial measures taken by the Government, is 'enclosed. 
155 

POINTS AS CONTAINED IN THE 17TH & 20TH REPORT 
REPLIES IN RESPECT OF QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES 
Que 2.As per the Ministry's A TR, the disinvestment policy decided by the Ministry of 
Finance and the disinvestment process is implemented by the Department of Public 
Enterprises. 
Whether this division of functions i:: working satisfactorily? 
Ans. The division of functions as mentioned in the Action Taken Report has since been 
modified. The present position is that the erstwhile Group of Secretaries headed by 
the Finance Secretary has been replaced in 1996 by a Core Group of Secretaries 
headed by the Cabinet Secretary and includes Finance Secretary, Secretary 
Expenditure, Secretary Revenue, Chief Economic Advisor, Member Secretary, 
Planning Commission, Secretary, DPE and Secretary of the concerned administrative 
Ministry. With the Reports of the Disinvestment Commission having become 
available from February, 1997, proposals for disinvestment are now being based on 
these reports and recommendations and are brought before the Core Group by the 
Ministry of Finance. 
Decisions regarding the companies to be disinvested in, the percentage/amount of 
disinvestment the main modalities etc. are taken by the Cabinet for which notes are 
taken by the Ministry of Finance, based upon the recommendations of the Core 
Group Subsequent decisions of an implementational and operational nature are taken 
by the Core Group or at its direction by Task Forces! Administrative Ministries! 
Public Sector Enterprises concerned. The Department of Public Enterprises plays a 
participative role only through its presence at the Cabinet level, the Core Group and 
the Task Force(s). 
Although this system of decision making and implementation is a relatively new, it 
appears to have functioned quite satisfactorily and a successful issue for GDRs has 
been completed for VSNL. The disinvestment process for two public sector 
enterprises, namely, GAIL and MTNL is underway, and the disinvestment is 
expected during the current financial year a decision relating to the disinvestment in 
IOC has been taken and the selection of the Global Coordinators has also been 
done. 
It is submitted that a~ the previous division of functions is no longer operational, the 
question of whether it is working satisfactorily or not, does not arise. 
156 

POINTS AS CONTAINED IN THE liTH & 20TH REPORT 
REPLIES IN RESPECT OF QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO DEPARTMENT OF SSI 
& A&RI 
Que 4. The extent to which targets of disbursement of funds under PMRY have been met 
during the past three years. 
Ans. Under PMRY, targets are prescribed in terms of number of youths assisted under 
the scheme. The Eighth Plan target for PMRY was for providing assistance to 7 
lakh youths. Again this target, achievement in terms of sanction and disbursement 
of bank loans was to 8,18,374 and 5,43,317 youths respectively as on 31.3.97. 
Que 5. The action taken by Government on the Committee's recommendation for ensuing 
special time bound measures for developing small scale units in Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands. 
Ans. 1. An Expert Group was set up by Planning Commission under Chairmanship of 
former DC (SSI) Shri Prabhat Kumar for Development of Small Scale industries 
in Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands. 
2. The Expert Group submitted its report to Planning Commission in 1993. 'f.his 
report was approved in principle by the Planning Commission in 1994. 
3. Based upon approval of Planning Commission, A & N Administration 
formulated specific plan schemes for implementation of the Expert Group 
Report in A & N Islands. · 
4. The Plan Schemes posed by A & N Administration in the year 1995-96 were 
approved by the Planning Commission and funds to the tune of Rs. 10.00 d.-ores 
were allocated to A & N Administration for implementation of the following 
Schemes formulated for development of small industries in A & N Islands as a 
follow up on the recommendations of the Expert Group. 
(i) Loan to Tiny C~ttage Industrial Projects at reduced rate of interest: 
(ii) Infrastructural support including subsidy on installation of the DG set to SSI 
units. 
(iii) Island Transport Subsidy. 
(iv) Inter- Is~ and Transport Subsidy. 
(v) Island Capital Investment Subsidy. 
(vi) Interest free loan for procurement of DG sets and in house water equipment 
for SSI units. 
(vii) Interest free loan for promoters' contribution for the industrial units for 
marketing its products in mainland. 
Que 9. What action has been taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the 
purpose of removing ambiguities in the guidelines on environmental clearance in 
the case of Small Scale Industries? 
Ans. Ministry of Environment & Forests has informed that the Environmental Impact 
Assessment Notification, 1994 as amended on 4th May, 1994 contains a list of 
projects requiring environmental clearance from the Central Government in 
Schedule-! (List enclosed). There are 29 projects which require environmental 
157 

158 
clearance. The Ministry of Environment and Forests have also introduced a 
Scheme of "Adoption of. Clean Technologies in Small Scale Industries". The 
Scheme involves demonstration studies in identified sector, preparation of sector­
specific manuals on waste m~nimisation training and awareness programmes for 
personnel in SSI sector. Such provisions involving demonstration, training and 
preparation of manuals etc., also help in removing ambiguities. 
Que 10. The latest position with regard to amending the Interest on Delayed Payment to 
Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 for making it more 
meaningful. 
Ans. The Delayed Payment Act was enacted in 1993. Representations were received 
from several organisations, agencies and SSI units for b1inging about changes in 
the Act to make implementation of the Act effective and meaningful. After 
examining these representations, following important changes by way of amend­
ment to the Act are under consideration of the Ministry. 
(i) To make the buyers liable to pay interest to the SSI units on the outstanding 
amount at a rate which is 150% of the prime lending rate of the State Bank of 
India instead of a rate which is 5% points above the floor rate for comparable 
lending. 
(ii) To limit maximum period to 180 days for making payment irrespective of 
agreement between buyers and suppliers to the contrary. 
(iii) To bring NSIC and other Small Industries Corporations within the purview of the 
Act. 
(iv) To authorise State Governments to set up Industry Facilitation Councils for the 
purpose of arbitration and conciliation in case of disputes between buyers and 
sellers and to allow option to the SSI seller to go to these councils instead of 
courts. 
Que 11. The consideration that weighed for not enhancing the excise exemption limit from 
the existing Rs. 30 lakhs. 
Ans. Department of SSI & ARI in their pre-budget proposals submitted to Ministry of 
Finance has been taking up the matter of raising excise exemption limit for SSis 
from Rs. 30 lakhs for the last four years. The same has not been agreed by 
Ministry of Finance because-
(i) Only 2% of the 27 lakhs SSI units are registered with Central Excise, 
(ii) 90% of the SSI units have turnover less than Rs. 30 lakhs and all such units 
are exempted from excise duty, 
(iii) Loss of excise revenue of large ~magnitude cannot be afforded when there is 
a big budget deficit. 
In the budget 1997-98 SSI exemption scheme has been simplified and concessional limit 
of excise has been raised from Rs. 75 lakhs toRs. 100 lakhs turnover. The modified scheme 
is stated as follows-

159 
Value of clearance Rate of duty proposed Earlier position 
(i) Upto Rs. 30 lakhs Nil Duty Nil Duty 
(ii) Above Rs. 30 lakhs but 3% ad valorem without 10% less than normal duty 
upto Rs. 50 lakhs MODVAT benefit subject to minimum of 5% 
with MODVAT benefit 
(iii) Above Rs. 50 lakhs but 5% ad valorem without 5% less than nom,al duty 
upto Rs. 100 lakhs (This MODV AT benefit upto subject to minimum of 5% 
range till 1996-97 was turnover of Rs. 100 lakhs with MODVAT benefit 
Rs. 50 lakhs to Rs. 75 
lakhs) 
(iv) Above Rs. 100 lakhs Normal duty 
MODVAT benefit 
with Normal duty above Rs. 75 
lakhs 
After the presentation of the budget 1997-98, several representations were received 
from SSI Associations/Units regarding adverse implication of withdrawal of MOD VA 1j 
credit facility from SSI units in case of SSI units opt for exemption/concession under 
General Excise Exemption Scheme. The matter was taken up with Ministry of Finan~e to 
restore MODV AT credit of duty paid on inputs used in or for manufacture of specified 
goods for clearance between Rs. 30 lakhs to Rs. 100 lakhs alongwith concessional rate of 
duty as available to the SSI units in the previous financial year. 
Finance Minister, while moving Finance Bill, 1997 announced that a new scheme for the 
SSI sector will be modified in consultation with SSI sector under which they will be eligible 
to avail of MODVAT even while paying concessional excise duty. 
In pursuance of the same, Finance Ministry has issued a notification No. 38197-CE· 
dated 27.6.97 according to which MODVAT facility will now be available to SSI units 
alongwith the concession in excise duty as follows: 
Clearances 
For clearance upto Rs. 50 lakhs 
For clearance above Rs. 5D lakhs 
but upto Rs. 100 iakhs 
For clearance above Rs. 100 lakhs 
Rate of duty 
60% of normal duty will be applicable 
80% of normal duty will be applicable 
normal duty 
SSI Excise Exemption/Concession Scheme is available upto Annual Turnover of 
Rs. 300 lakhs. 

ATNs RECEIVED FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF H.l. VIDE O.M. NO. 16(6)196 
PE.XI dated 21.8.1997 , 
DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the study report of Sub-Committee-V 
constituted by the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry in the 
Seventeenth Report on Industrialisation of backward areas and the State of Capital Goods 
Sector Item pertaining to BHEL. 
The management of BHEL pointed out that they had to face problem when they had to 
compete with General Electric, ABB, Siemens, etc. The problem as pointed out by the 
management was in the area of taxation. They informed the Sub-Committee that BHEL had 
to bear with the policy of double taxation. On being asked by the Sub-Committee to 
elaborate on the point, it was clarified that when BHEL imported any particular material, it 
had to pay import duty. Thereafter, on the finished product, sales tax had also to be paid. 
This problem, they informed the Committee, was not being faced by companies like General 
Electric, etc. These companies, when they import any machinery for their plant they do not 
have to pay any duty. They therefore urged the Sub-Committee that CVD is required to be 
abolished. They also informed that the World Bank bidding process should be adopted and 
BHEL should be permitted to participate in open competition bidding. They also 
emphasised the need to introduce "Credit Insurance Scheme" and that the Government 
should also stand as a guarantor. The Sub-Committee recommends that the problems of this 
premier undertaking should be solved on priority basis with regard to adjustment in duty 
structure and the· question of allowing the company to participate in bidding including 
financial bidding. Rationalisation of sales-tax may also help the company a lot. 
ACTION TAKEN 
DHI had submitted an action taken report on 8th October, 1996 indicating that DHI 
agreed with all the recommendations of the Committee except the observation about the 
abolition of CVD on the imported equipment. Since the observations pertained to the 
Ministries of Finance/Power, DHI had forwarded the Committee's recommendations to 
them for appropriate action in the matter. 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide their letter No. RS. 3 /4(i)/97-IND. dated 18th June, 
1997, however, desired that the comments of concerned authorities may also be obtained 
and communicated to them, for information of the Committee. Accordingly, ATNs from the 
concerned Deptts. were called for. The response received from different Departments is 
enclosed. 
1. Ministry of Power 
The points raised by the Committee pertain to Ministry of Finance only. 
2. Department of Expenditure 
They suggested that the matter may be taken up with Deptt. of Revenue, Deptt. of 
Economic Affairs and Department of Supply as only those Department are concerned with 
the issues raised. 
3. Department of Supply 
The matter was taken up with Deptt. of Supply who clarified that the subject matter 
does not pertain to them. 
160 

161 
4. Department of Revenue 
The Department of Revenue have clarified that the recommendations regarding bank 
bidding process and Credit In..surance Scheme do not concern that Department. 
5. Department of Economic Affairs 
The Department of Economic Affairs have stated as under:-
(i) As for BHEL's need to approach various financial institutions in India and 
abroad for additional finances to meet their requirements for bidding for the 
projects specifically the World Bank bidding, DEA have stated that the credit 
insurance is not related to the World Bank bidding process as BHEL are only 
interested in obtaining Government of India's guarantee. Therefore, Credit 
Insurance may not be necessary. 
(ii) On the issue of providing protection to BHEL by way of some insurance against 
the loss being incurred by them on fluctuation in exchange rates, DEA have 
stated that GIC have made enquiries in the matter and have observed that such 
an insurance cover is not available abroad. 
In the Union Budget 1997-98, a policy regarding international competitive bidding for 
all IPPs to be allowed into the country has been announced. 
Deptt. of Public Enterprises vide their order No. DPE/5(5)/97-Fin. dated ·12.8.97 have 
issued instructions that "the Govt. have decided that the domestic manufacturers of Capital 
Goods supplied to Fertilizer, Power and Petroleum projects under International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) would be accorded a price preference to off-set Central Sales Tax to the 
extent of 4% or actuals, whichever is less, as well as Octroi at actuals". This would partially 
take care of "double taxation" to some extent. However, this facility has not been extended 
to projects coming under IPPs. Therefore, the additionality of tax burden to the domestic 
suppliers for sales tax as well as octroi for projects other than in the public sector still 
continues. The State Sales Tax also varies in different States and in some States it is as high 
as 16% thus putting the supplies being made by the domestic suppliers to projects within the. 
state of their manufacturing unit under serious cost disadvantage. Their foreign competitors 
do not have to pay an·y sales tax for such supplies. Therefore, sales tax rationalisation is 
further needed. 
BHEL has also taken up with the Deptt. of Revenue regarding the need for restoration 
of customs duty as the budget proposal of allowing import of capital goods at NIL customs 
duty for the. Refinery Project will make the domestic capital industry non-competitive in 
comparison with the suppliers of the foreign companies exporting these equipment into India 
to the tune of 15-20% (depending on the import content in the domestic supplies). 
The Deptt. of Heavy Industry is not in agreement with the comments received from 
Deptt. of Economic Affairs regarding issues of credit insurance. It has been pointed out to 
them that BHEL is not seeking insurance against fluctuation of exchange rate but for the 
need to create a credit insurance agency to provide insurance cover for project completion 
risks in Greenfield Power Projects. This could be done for export oriented projects through 
ECGC with suitable Government Guarantee for such countries as may be having very high 
risk factor and for domestic projects through IDFC at nominal insurance premium rates. 
This would be in line with the project credit risk insurance available to BHEL's MNC 
competitors from similar institutions in their host countries. 

NOTES RECEIVED FROM THE MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF SSI 
AND A&RI VIDE D.O NO. 16 (5)-ICC, DATED 24.9.1997 
NOTE ON ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION OF FUNDS FOR DEVELOPING SMALL 
AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS 
Based on the recommendations of the Prabhat Kumar Committee, the Andaman & 
Nicobar Administration had formulated Schemes for promoting industrial development of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Allocation of funds was made in the 8th Plan and Annual Plan 
1995-96 of the U.T. Administration. The Andaman & Nicobar Administration sought the 
approval of this Ministry for operating the Schemes, with/without modification. The 
expenditure was to be met out of the funds allocated under Plan in the Budget Provision of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
The formal approval of the Administrative Ministry for pattern of assistance is necessary 
under the Rule 20 of the Delegation of Financial Power Rules, 1978, Financial assistance 
could be sanctioned by the Administrator provided the pattern of assistance is prescribed 
with the previous consent of the Govt. of India. The A&N Administration has, ther~fore, 
been seeking the approval of Govt. of India (Administrative Ministry) {or implementation of 
the Schemes of UT. Before the formal approval of this Ministry is sought for implementing 
tpe Scheme, the necessary budget is allocated sector-wise & the funds provided in the Home 
Ministry's Budget. 
During three years from 1995-96 to 1997-98, the budget outlay and actual utilisation 
undet the Village & Small Industries Schemes, as reported by Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration, has been as under:-
~~ 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year-wise Actual Utilised 
Year Outlay 
1995-96 10.02 5.57 
1996-97 6.79 6.08 
1997-98 9.55 N.A. 
This Ministry does not release funds for the UT's including Andaman & Nicobar Islands. 
It only approves plan schemes and pattern of assistance thereunder in terms of Rule 20 of 
the Delegation of Financial Power Rules, 1978, as and when proposals are received. 
162 

NOTE ON SHARE OF SMALL SCALE SECTOR IN INDIA's TOTAL EXPQ.RTS 
' _,~ ~ 
Exports from the small scale sector over a period of time has acquired a greater 
significance in India's Foreign trade. The SSI Sector today constitutes a very important 
segment of the Indian economy and it accounts for over 40% of the total exports (direct & 
indirect) from the country. Direct exports from the SSI Sector accounts for about 34% of 
the total exports and the remaining 6 to 7% are indirect exports from the small scale sector. 
I. DIRECT EXPORTS 
Contribution of small scale sector in country's total exports during the year 1995-96 
was as under: 
(i) Total exports 
(ii) Share of SSI exports 
(iii) Percentage share 
Rs. 106464.86 crores 
Rs. 36470.22 crores 
34.25 
(a) Manufacturing Sector excluding Handicrafts, Handloom, Silk, Coir items 
The detailed break-up of Product-wise performance of SSI Sector during the year 
1995-96 was as under: "" 
Sl. Product Group 
No. 
1. Engineering Goods 
2. Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals, Cosmetics 
-'· Chemicals and Allied Products 
4. Plastic Products 
5. Finished Leather & Leather Products 
6. Marine Products 
7.· Processed Food 
8. Woollen Garments & . Knitwear 
9. Sports Goods 
10. Readymade Garments 
11. Rayon & Synthetic Products 
12. Processed Tobacco, Snuff & Bidi 
13. Cashew Ke~nal & Cashew Nut Shell Liquid 
14. LAC 
15. Spices, Spice-Oils, Oleoresins 
Sub total (a): 
Others (b): 
Total (a) & (b): 
• Provisional figures supplied by EPCs, Commodity Boards etc. 
II. INDIRECT EXPORTS 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total Share of 
Exports SSI Sector 
1995-96 1995-96 
12595.00 
7970.30 
7458.10 
1662.40 
5762.08 
3501.11 
7932.00 
1145.72 
207.50 
14806.49 
3122.67 
421.04 
1230.20 
99.71 
743.35 
3025.00 
3002.50 
250.04 
265.00 
4910.45 
624.31 
5155.80 
896.10 
207.50 
14806.49 
1686.24 
237.55 
1230.20 
98.71 
74.33 
68657 .67* 36470.22* 
37807.19 Nil 
106464.86 36470.22 
%age 
Share 
24.00 
37.67 
3.35 
16.00 
85.22 
17.83 
65.00 
78.21 
100.00 
100.00 
54.00 
56.42 
100.00 
99.00 
10.00 
53% 
Nil 
34.25 
Export ~tatistics pertaining to performance of small scale sector are collected from the 
various Export Promotion Councils, Commodity Boards etc. It has been experienced that 
besides direct exports of about 34%, SSI Sector also accounts for 6 to 7% as indirect 
exports. There is no specific study about the estimation of such share of indirect exports. 
163 

164 
However, the above estimate is based mainly on the following factors: 
(i) A large number of Ancillary units are working in the small scale sector. Such 
Ancillary units supply their products in the form of parts, assemblies etc. to the 
large scale sector. The items under reference are ultimately exported by the 
firms from the large scale sector. 
(ii) A large number of units in the small scale sector are supplying many items to 
the export houses, trading houses in the large sector. These SSI units due to one 
reason or the other are not in a position to directly exports their merchandise. 
These supplies of items, manufactured in the small scale sector to the Export 
Houseslfrading houses, etc. are exported in the world market. 
(iii) Export data concerning export performance of small scale sector is compiled on 
the basis of information received from various Export Promotion Councils/ 
Commodity Boards. These EPCs/Commodity Boards in turn collect export 
figures from their member exporters. But it has been observed that many small 
scale units/exporters do not get themselves registered with the concerned EPCsl 
Commodity Boards. So the export performance of such unregistered units is not 
reflected in the export performance figures compiled by the said Councils/ 
Commodity Boards. But the fact remains that exports from such unregistered 
units take place and form a part of performance of small scale sectur. 
In view of above factors, it is estimated that indirect export from the small scale sector 
accounts for about 6 to 7% of India's total exports. Hence total share of small scale industry 
in the country's exports comes out to be over 40%. 
III. A DETAILED NOTE OF EXPORT ON KVIC PRODUCTS, WITH DATA, 
DIRECTION-WISE, FOR THE LAST 3 YEARS: 
Marketing in itself is a significant factor to accelerate the economic development of the 
country. KVIC as all India organisation with a production of about Rs. 4,000 crores of KVI 
products enjoys immense potentiality to enter the global market. 
The present trend of international market, is also most favourable for KVI products, as 
most of the KVI products are environmentally friendly. "Near to nature", "back to basic" 
and "Green-is IN" are new global awareness, and hence KVI products enjoy a preferential 
market all over the globe. 
High Power Committee headed by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India, in its rcj)ort of 
export of KVI products, amongst other things, have recommended:-
(i) KVIC should be declared as registering authority for export of KVI products and 
it should have powers for inspection and certification for KVI products for which it 
should be given status of Export Promotion Council. 
(ii) Yarn has a fast growing export market and hence effective measures be taken for· 
its export. · 
(iii) There should not be any Excise Levied on yarn export. 
(iv) To promote export of Village Industries Products, a beginning may be made by 
providing 5% subsidy to exporters. 

165 
KVI Products having export potential 
l. Handmade Paper Items: Drawing sheets, greeting cards, writing pads, carry bags, 
envelopes, stationery papers, bond papers, paper machine handicraft items. 
2. Leather: Gents jackets, gents trouser, ladies jacket, shirt, trouser, leather belt, money 
purse, pouch shoes (gents & ladies), chappal, sandles, kolhapuri, katki chappals, 
punching gloves, ladies bags, purse. 
3. Silk Khadi: Saree, scarf, shirt, trouser, Jawahar jacket, Gandhi cap, kurta, ladies 
salwar, kurta, tie, dupatta. 
4. Cotton Khadi: Jawahar jacket, kurta, pajama, kurta churidar, Gandhi cap, Gents 
dhoti, gents jhabba, baniyan, underwear, handkerchief, kitchen towel, bath towel, 
bedsheet (embroidered, printed and glasswork), cushion cover, pillow cover, table 
cover, teacosy, printed ·curtains, cotton sarees, glasswork bag and wall hanging. 
5. Muslin Khadi: Gents dhoti, ladies dhoti, kurta, pajama, shirts, ladies embroidery 
dress materials, dupatta, handkerchief. 
6. Processing of Cereals and Pulses: Papad, spices, dal, basmati rice. 
7. Handicraft Items: Rosewood handicraft items, sandalwood handicraft items, cane and 
bamboo handicraft items, wood carving items, wooden toys. 
New initiative taken by KVIC to boost export 
1. Registeration of KVI Institutions/Societies/Individuals, engaged in manufacturing 
and sale of Khadi and V.I. Products as Export-oriented units. 
2. Introduction of Export Incentive Scheme: 
(i) Export variety of all items of Khadi shall be outside the ambit of cost chart, 
which otherwise is, required to be followed as per certification rules for sale of 
Khadi. 
(ii) To boost export of Khadi, 20 per cent subsidy in the form of grant on the input 
of raw material deployed for undertaking the export shall admissible to the 
institution (~o reba~e wmt·be paid to them on sales). 
(iii) Institutions engaged in manufacturing V.I. products and undertaking export 
shall be eligible for concessional rate of interest of 11 per cent on the working 
capital deployed for export production, in lieu of pre-shipment and post­
shipment rate of credit finance from Commercial Banks. 
(iv) 5 per cent export subsidy on sale of V.I. products on FREE ON BOARD 
(FOB) price exclusive of Freight, Insurance, Customs etc. shall be extended to 
societies/institutions/individuals registered as exporting units. The incentive, 
however, shall not be admissible if the agency fails to undertake export of less 
than at least 10 per cent of the total targeted V.I. Production. 
(v) Like other normal V.I.Programme, implementing agencies like E.O.Us shall 
also be eligible for assistances like Margin-money, Term-loan, Working Capital 
and other benefits for domestic production. 
3. Formation of Export Consortium for KVI. 
4. Linkage with I. I. F. T. 

... 
.J. 
(A) 
Sl. 
No. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
166 
5. Participation in exhibitions and market surveys abroad. 
6. Tie up with Apparel Export Promotion Council (AEPC). 
7. Exports data for last three years. 
Industries/Products 1994-95 1995-96 
Handmade Paper 5.99 4.05 
Palm 1.35 0.46 
Cereals and Pulses 5.08 7.01 
Others 0.40 
TOTAL 12.42 11.92 
(Rs. in Crores) 
1996-97 
(Provisional) 
12.00 
(B) Products and target countries 
Description of Products 
1. Cotton and Silk Fabrics and Woollen Carpet 
2. Muslin fabrics 
3. Readymade garments 
4. Rural Handicrafts 
5. Handmade Paper 
6. Leather 
7. Processed Food and Fruit items 
8. Agarbatti and Matches 
9. Honey 
Target Countries 
U.K., U.S.A., France, Germany. 
Gulf Countries 
U.S.A., U.K. 
U.K., U.S.A., Germany 
U.S.A. 
U.K., Russia, Australia 
Gulf Countries · 
African Countries 
Gulf and European Countries 
(iV) EFFORTS BEING MADE TO UPGRADE THE QUALITY & PACKAGING OF 
PRODUCTS MANUFACTURED BY THE KVIC UNITS: 
(a) Development of new model charkha with merits of 'Ring Spin Technology'. 
(b) KVIC & Khadi Gramodyog Prayog Samity, Ahmedabad have developed 8 
spindle model charkha which can be plied at a spindle speed of 8-10 thousand 
RPM and capable of rendering 4.5 to· 5 hanks spindly point. 
(c) The Dying & Printing Laboratory of KVIC at Mumbai has done experiments in · 
process developments in the field of wet processing and has developed shade 
cards for cotton & silk using improve class of dies such as vat, reactive, sulphur, 
metal complex etc., for adoption in the Khadi sector for better finish and colour. 
(d) KVIC has entered into a MOU with National Institute of Fashion Technology 
(NIFT) for assistance in the area of producing and processing high fashion 
garments suitable for domestic as well as export market. NIFT will also impart 
one months training to two batches of garment fabricators through Khadi Bhavan, 
KVIC, New Delhi to improve the quality of Khadi garments suiting national and 
internatioanl standards. 
(e) Collaboration with Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (liFT) for imparting training 
to KVI units and KVIC officers in the field of export as well as organising 

167 
seminars with fashion designers, exporters etc., so as to develop and upgrade KVI · 
products suiting international quality standards. 
(f) Seminars and meetings have been conducted with Indian Institute of Packaging to 
develop attractive packaging of KVI products. Proposal to explore possibility of 
using pearlpet jars and other food grade packaging for honey is in process. KVIC 
has introduced eco-friendly packing of handmade paper bags for packing high 
fashion readymade garments and same has been introduced on experimental· basis 
in selected metropolitan cities. 
/ 

ANNEXURE - 'B' 

I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11th August, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M.K. Patil - Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
3. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
5. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
6. Shri Sanat Mehta 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Sub-Committee considered the ATRs received from the Ministry of Industry on 
the 17th and 20th Reports of the Committee and after some discussion decided to hear the 
Secretaries, Ministry of Industry, Member Secretary, Planning Commission and Chairman, 
Disinvestment Commission. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again on Friday, the 22nd 
August, 1997. 
171 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 22nd August, 1997 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M.K. Patil - Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Parmar 
4. Shrimati Anandiben Jethabhai Patel 
5. Shri Jayant Kumar Malhoutra 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
7. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
8. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
9. Shri Naval Kishore Sharma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
I. Representatives of Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
1. Shri T.R. Prasad, Secretary 
2. Shri A.V. Singh, AS & FA 
3. Mrs. Pratibha Karan, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri M.C. Singhi, Additional Economic Adviser 
II. Representatives of Departments of Industrial Development and Public Enterprises · 
1. Shri P. G. Mankad, Secretary 
2. Shri S. Talwar, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Pushpendra Rai, Joint Secretary 
III. Representatives of Department of Heavy Industry 
1. Shri Prabir Sengupta, Secretary 
2. Shri Anup Mukerjee, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.C. Samant, Joint Secretary 
172 

173 
IV. Representatives of Planning Commission 
1. Shri V.K. Paridit, Special Secretary 
2. Shri K.K. Mishra, Adviser (Energy) 
3. Shri B.D. Jethra, Adviser (I & M) 
4. Shri B.N. · Puri, Addl. Adviser (Transport) 
5. Shri P.N. Shali, Joint Adviser (I & M) 
6. Dr. O.P. Sharma, Joint Adviser (I.E.) 
V. Representative of Disinvestment Commission 
Shri G.V. Ramakrishna, Chairman 
2. The Sub-CQmmittee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses on 
the ATRs on the recommendations as contained in the 17th and 20th Reports of the 
Committee. The Sub-COmmittee directed the witnesses to furnish the information promised 
by them during the course of oral evidence at the earliest. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 2. 00 P.M. to meet again on Tuesday, the 16th 
September, 1997. 

III 
TffiRD MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 16th September, 1997 in 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi: 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M.K. PatH-Convenor 
RAJYA S:ABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri Rajubhai A. Pamiar 
4. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
5. Chaudhari Chunni Lal 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
7. Shri Namdevrao Diwathe 
8. Shri Naval Kishore Sharma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural 
Industries 
1. Shri Ashok Parthasarathi, Secretary 
2. Shri A.V. Singh, AS & FA 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri K.V. Irniraya, AS & DC 
5. Dr. C.S. Prasad, Addl. DC 
6. Shri R.K. Bhargava, C.E.O., KVIC 
7. Shri S. Bandopadhya, Jt. CEO, KVIC 
8. Shri Rajiv Bhatnagar, Sr. Ex. Director, NSIC 
9. Shri B.L. Malhotra, Ex. Director, NSIC 
10. Shri R. Kannan, Secretary, Coir Board 
2. The Sub-Committee heard the above noted witnesses on the ATRs received from 
the Ministry of Industry on the 17th and 20th Reports of the Committee. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Sub-Committee thereafter considered its future programme and decided to 
visit Chennai, Pondicherry and Port Blair from September 29 to October 4, 1997 for an on 
the spot study of the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee as contained 
in its 17th Report. The Sub-Committee decided that the Chairman, Committee on Industry 
may be tequested to obtain the approval of Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha for the said 
study, visit. 
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M .. 
174 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 3rd November, 1997 in 
Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri M.K. PatH-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Syed Sibtey Razi 
3. Shri T.M. Venkatachalam 
4. Shri Jayarit Kumar Malhoutra 
5. Chaudhari Chunni Lal 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shrimati Jayawantiben Mehta 
7. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
8. Slui Namdevrao Diwathe 
9. Shri Shyamlal Bansiwal 
10. Shri Nawal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Sanat Mehta 
*12. Shri Sunil Khan 
13. Shri Darbara Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Deepak Goyal, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. Initiating the discussions, the Convenor mentioned that the Secretariat had not 
received comments from any of the Members of the Sub-Committee on the Draft Report of 
the Sub-Committee as was decided in the last meeting of the full Committee held on 
October 21, 1997. Thereafter, he explained in brief the purpose for calling the meeting of 
the Sub-Committee and invited views and suggestions of the Members in the matter. qe also 
informed the Members that the Chairman of the Committee would be meeting the 
Convenors of the three Sub-Committees on November 13, 1997. 
3. Shri Malhoutra, in his intervention, reiterated his earlier position. He expressed his 
dissatisfaction at the manner in which th<t Ministry had furnished Action Taken Report. He 
added that no specific answers had been given and the Committee was not receiving 
cooperation from the Ministry of Industry. 
4. Shri Sanat Mehta mentioned that he had already sent his views in writing and 
requested that the same should be taken into account while finalising the Report. Briefly, 
recapitulating what he had said in his. written notes, he mentioned that Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) was largely in .consumer industries and not in the infrastructure. He added 
that his position had be.en vindicated from the notes subsequently. furnished by the Mi~.istry • 
• A Member of Sub-Committee - II. attended the meeting with the permission of the Convenor. 
175 

176 
of industry giving details of FDI hi India since 1991 when the process of liberalisation was 
started. He added that in the subsequent notes furnished by the Ministry of Industry data in 
most gf the cases was still missing. 
4.1 As regards disinvestment in PSUs, his idea was that the funds so realised would be 
utilised for rehabilitation of sick industries and for the benefit of employees, and not to meet 
the budgetary deficit. He suggested that the Disinvestment Commission should be given full 
autonomy. 
4.2 As regards National Renewal Fund (NRF) Shri Sanat Mehta mentioned that the 
State Renewal Funds should also be given funds from the NRF wherever States had set up 
State Renewal ·Funds. He expressed his displeasure that in the current year's budget, 
Ministry of Finance had only made provision for NRF and no specific State-wise allocation 
had been made. 
5. Shri Naval Kishore Sharma suggested that the Draft Report of the Sub-Committee 
may be suitably recast so as to clearly indicate wherever no specific replies had been 
furnished by the Ministry. 
6. Shri Patil, Convenor, stated that the Secretariat had already prepared a note pointing 
out paragraphs where the response of the Ministry was either inadequate or not specific. 
7. The Sub-Committee adopted the Draft report subject, howeVer. to the incorporation 
of the views/suggestions of the Members therein. · 

ANNEXURE - 'C' 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 3.00 
P.M. on Friday, the 14th August, 1998 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. • ... 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Raghavji-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Govindrao Adik 
3. Sh.ri Karma Topden. 
4. Shri Rajubhai A. Pannar 
5. Dr. Ranbir Singh 
6. Shri Nagmani 
7. Shri Bhagaban Majhi 
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
9. Shri ·Santosh ijagrodia 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri M. Srinivas 
11. Shri Vijay Shankar 
12. Shri Gya~ Singh 
13. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
14. Shri Ramanand Singh 
15. Shri Annasaheh M.K. Patil 
16. Shri Anand Ratna Maurya 
17. Shri Punnulal Mohale 
18. Shri Nadendla Bhaskar Rao 
19. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
20. Shri Dutta Meghe 
21. Shri Komjeti Roshaiah 
22. Shri Sunil Khan 
23. Shri Ananda Pathak: 
24. Shri K. Palaniswamy 
25. Shri Shakuni Choudhury 
26. Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
27. Shri Prabhat KUmar Samantara~ 
28. Shri Zora Singh 
29. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
30. Prof. Jogendra Kawade 
179 

SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. • 
180 
• * 
3. • * * 
4. The Committee then took up the Reports of three previous Sub-Committe~s on 
Action Taken Reports of-Ministries of Steel, Mines and Industry on its 17th, 18th, 19th and 
20th Reports for discussion. After brief deliberations, all the Reports were adopted. The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate the Members for the presentation of the 
Reports to the both Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session. 
5. * * • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
: 
•••Relate to other matters. 