 
REPORT NO.  
248 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
ON  
 
CAPACITY ADDITION AND EXPANSION OF MANUFACTURING 
FACLITIES OF THE MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD 
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS . 
 (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS .) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2013 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 06.08.2013 ) 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2013/ Ashadha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY- EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
CAPACITY ADDITION AND EXPANSION OF MANUFACTURING 
FACLITIES OF THE MADRAS FERTILIZERS LTD  
PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS . 
 (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS .) 
 
PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 23.07.2013) 
(FORWARDED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 23.07.2013)  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2013 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 06.08.2013 ) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… ( ) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………. ( ) 
 
3. REPORT……………………………………………………………………. 
 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A 
 GLANCE………………………………………  
 
5. MINUTES…………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Date of Constitution 31 st  August, 2012)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
2. Shri Narendra Budania 
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
4.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
5.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
6.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
7.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
8.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
9.   Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna 
10.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.   Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
12.   Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa 
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat 
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
16. Shri Hassan Khan 
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20. Shri Somen Mitra 
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri B. Y. Raghavendra 
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh 
28. Ch. Lal Singh 
29. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
30. Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
Shri Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
(i) 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred 
and Forty- Eighth Report on the Capacity Addition a nd Expansion of Manufacturing 
Facilities of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. pertaining to  the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with the Management of Madras 
Fertilizers Ltd and received inputs for this Report.   
 
3. I, thank the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry  of Chemicals and Fertilizers and 
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy  Industries and Public Enterprises 
for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.  
 
4. The Committee in its meeting held on   11 
th July, 2013 considered and adopted the 
report. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Tiruchi Siva 
Chairma n                                                                                   
                          Department -related Parliamentary  
                                                                                       Standing Committee   on    Industry  
 
 
 
New Delhi 
July, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
 
 Indian Economy is largely agrarian in character and  our country’s 
agriculture heavily depends on the use of chemical fertilizers to produce 
yields that help feed the population of more than a billion people.  Fertilizers 
can be  broadly divided into, primary fertilizers which are  required in large 
amounts and secondary nutrients, required in micro quantities. Inspite of 
growing demands, the Fertilizer industry in India has a lot of limiting factors 
like dependence on imported raw materials, outdated  manufacturing 
technology, etc. The reasons for sickness of most o f the Fertilizer producing 
CPSEs can be traced to the above said factors. Neve rtheless, it remains a 
reality that more fertilizers are needed in ever in creasing quantity and hence 
capacity addition and expansion of manufacturing fa cilities of these CPSEs 
are of compelling importance. 
2. Capacity Addition & Expansion of manufacturing f acilities is one of 
the tools in the dynamic parameters for assessment of MoU performance of 
CPSEs.  Hence, the Committee took up the issue in r espect of Madras 
Fertilizers Limited’s (MFL) MoU performance. The re port is based on the 
finding and facts that have been observed and submi tted before the 
Committee while interacting with the representative s of MFL during its 
study visit to Chennai in February, 2013.   
3. Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), a PSU under the a dministrative 
control of the Department of Fertilizers (DOF), Min istry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers, was incorporated on December 8, 1966 a s a Joint Venture 
between Government of India (GOI) and American Oil Corporation 
(AMOCO) India Incorporated of U.S.A. in accordance with the Fertilizer 

Formation Agreement executed on 14.5.1966, with equ ity contributions of 
51% and 49%, respectively.  In May 1997, the MFL ha d an initial public 
offering of its shares. After this allotment of sha res the shareholding pattern 
changed with GOI holding 59.50 %, Naftiran Intertrade Co. Ltd (Affiliate of 
NIOC) 25.77 % and Public 14.73 %.     
4. The Company is engaged in the manufacture of Amm onia, Urea, 
Complex Fertilizers and Biofertilizers. Its activit ies also include marketing 
of these fertilizers and trading in Agro Chemicals and Organic Manure under 
the brand name “VIJAY”. The Company’s Plant facilities and Head Quarters 
are located at Manali near Chennai city. As stated earlier at present, GOI 
holds Rs. 95.85 Crore (59.50%), Naftiran Intertrade  Co. (NICO) Ltd holds 
Rs. 41.52 Crore (25.77%) and Financial Institutions  / Public hold Rs. 23.73 
Crore (14.73%) of equity. The total paid up capital  of the Company is Rs. 
161.10 Crore.  The Company was a profitable enterpr ise till around the mid-
nineties.  
 
5. MFL consists of production plants, Ammonia, Urea  in single streams 
and NPK in three streams, viz. NPK A Train, B Train  and C Train.  Utilities 
Plant is the service plant supplying treated water,  cooling water, off-site 
steam, instrument air, captive power and emergency power. Its original 
capacity was 750 TPD Ammonia, 885 TPD Urea and 1800  TPD Complex 
fertilizers. The capacities/Plants were revamped and expanded between 1993 
and 1998. The project was originally conceived at a  cost of 485 crore and 
was to be completed in 3 years.  Eventually, it was  completed at a cost of 
about 700 crore including startup expenditure of ar ound 100 crore with a 
time over-run of over 2 years. The revamp faced pro blems of delayed 
commissioning of Plants, stabilization and internal  imbalances in some 

sections of the Plant.  This led to frequent shutdo wns and low capacity 
utilization.  
6. After the revamp, the Company’s performances beg an to slump. The 
reasons being various, the major ones can be stated as: 
•  Losses due to cost and time overrun during revamp of 
Ammonia and Urea Plants. 
 
•  Delay in stabilization of revamped Plants due to t echnology 
related problems.  
 
•  High energy consumption and deterioration in relia bility of 
Plants due to poor maintenance for want of funds. 
 
•  Introduction of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for Urea in 2003 
resulting in high depreciation and interest costs.  
 
•  Price Concession Scheme (PCS) for complex fertiliz ers, 
introduced in 2002 also proved unfavorable for the company. 
 
 
7. The Committee understands that MFL continued to incur losses till 
2008-09 and was declared as a sick PSU under the pr ovisions of Sick 
Industrial Company Act, 1985 by BIFR in April 2009 and State Bank of 
India was appointed as its Operating Agency. 
 
8. Thereafter, Project & Development India Ltd (PDI L) prepared a 
proposal for MFL which was examined by SBICAPS (SBI  Capital Market 
Ltd) and a Financial Revival Package with the most suited options was 
presented to the Planning Commission. However, this  proposal was turned 
down by Planning Commission and other related Ministries. In this scenario, 
BIFR at its hearing held on October 22, 2011 direct ed SBI to submit a fully 
tied up Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) consideri ng conversion of GOI 
loan in to equity and waiver of interest. According ly, SBI submitted the 

DRS to BIFR on February 10, 2012. During the hearin g held on May 7, 
2012, under certain objections on conversion of GOI  loan into equity, BIFR 
directed the Company to further revise the DRS. The  final Draft 
Rehabilitation Proposal submitted by the Company had sought 100% waiver 
of interest and penal interest on Government loans and 40% waiver of the 
principal amount of the Government loan. Company ha s proposed to repay 
the balance 60% of the GOI loan from its operationa l profit as and when it 
comes out of sickness. It was informed that the pro posal was now with the 
Operating Agency (SBI) for further review 
 
9. Since 2009-10, the Company’s operations have bec ome profitable 
since due to certain amendments in New Pricing Sche me III (NPS) policy 
w.e.f. 01.04.2009. It has been submitted to the Com mittee that the 
Company’s operations for the year 2011-12 ended with a profit of Rs.111.99 
Crore. This is the highest ever operating profit ma de in any year since 
inception, if extraordinary items (OTS benefit) is not taken into account. 
According to MFL, it was possible mainly because of  100% capacity 
utilisation of Urea achieved for the first time in the history of the Company. 
The performance of the Company from 1991 to 2012 is placed at Annexure-
1. 
 
10.  
The Committee notes that MFL was a profitable ventu re until 
1996-97, barring the year 1993-94. It is given to u nderstand that the 
Company went into the red owing to the problems att ributed to the 
capacity enhancement and technology upgradation car ried out between 
1993 and 1998. Once the Company stabilized its oper ations, the 
introduction of New Pricing Scheme for Urea Price C oncession Scheme 
for complex fertilizers are said to have gone again st the interests of the 

MFL.  Such persistent problems led the Company to g etting declared 
sick in April 2009. However, the Committee is pleas ed to see MFL 
returning to profit from 2009-10 onwards with the a mendment of NPS-
III. It has been further noted that a Rehabilitatio n Scheme, after taking 
into consideration of the inputs from Ministries co ncerned, Planning 
Commission and other stakeholders has now been subm itted to SBI 
(Operating Agency). The Committee is also of the co nsidered opinion 
that since MFL is back to making profits now throug h their efforts, it is 
imperative that the Government extends a helping ha nd through a 
favorable approach to the Company. Accordingly, it strongly 
recommends that the Government should expeditiously  finalize the 
Rehabilitation Scheme of MFL. The Committee also ex pects the 
Government and MFL to focus attention on measures a nd implement 
them so that MFL is not allowed to slip back to bec ome another sick 
CPSE.  A resurgent CPSE, especially, one working in  the fertilizer 
sector is of crucial importance for agricultural an d economic growth of 
the country.  It is, therefore, necessary to encour age and support MFL 
in every way possible.     
 
Capacity Addition and Expansion of Manufacturing Facilities 
 
 
 11. According to the materials supplied by MFL to the Committee the 
company commenced commercial production of Ammonia,  Urea and NPK 
complex on November 1, 1971. The feedstock for prod ucing Ammonia is 
Naphtha and it is being supplied by the neighboring  M/s Chennai Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (CPCL). The original Manufactur ing Plants of MFL 
were of Chemico design and their installed capacities were: 
MT Per Annum 

• Ammonia: 2,47,500 
• Urea:  2,92,000 
• NPK:  5,40,000 
 In 1991, the old Chemico converter of Ammonia Plan t was replaced 
with the latest S 200 Radial Converter. MFL submitt ed that during 1993-
1998 it undertook a major Revamp-cum-Modernization and Capacity 
Enhancement of its plants at a cost of Rs 600 Cr, to extend the economic life 
of the plants by another 15 years and also for impr ovement in energy 
consumption. The Revamped Plants started production  from March 3, 1998.  
Installed Capacities after revamp are as given below:  
MT Per Annum 
• Ammonia: 3,46,500 
• Urea:  4,86,750 
• NPK:  8,40,000  
12. Funds required for the revamping were provided by addition of equity 
capital from promoters ie. GOI and NICO supplemente d through public 
offer and balance through loan from GoI, FIs & Bank s. The break-up for the 
Final Project Cost of Rs  601.43 crore are tabulated below: 
     Cr. 
Equity (A) Debt (B) 
GoI 65.63  GOI Loan 122.30  
NICO 27.00  FIs 93.00  
Public 
Issue 38.71 
 NFL 70.00  
  131.34  NIEP, Japan 168.00  
   Debentures 14.81  
   
Internal 
Resources 1.98 
 
    470.09  
Total (A) + (B)   601.43  

 
 
13. After the revamping, a rehabilitation study was  carried out through 
PDIL in the year 2009 with an intention of bringing  back the plant 
operations on sound footing by adopting suitable te chnical and financial 
improvement measures. In its report, PDIL identifie d problematic areas and 
suggested various technical measures (124 schemes-g iven in Annexure-2) 
to be implemented with a capital investment of Rs.  376 crore spread over a 
period of 5 years.  It was pointed out that with th e proposed investment, 
most of the equipment would get new lease of life d ue to their 
repair/replacement.    
 
14. The extra lease of life to the Plant was estima ted to be another 15 
years on account of (i) Replacement of weak structu rals, (ii) Replacement of 
old pipelines, (iii) Providing timely replacement w ith proper spares for 
running the equipment, (iv) Replacement of balance vintage equipment and  
(v) Providing protective painting on equipment and structurals. MFL has  
 
started implementing these measures from the year 2 009-10 with the help of 
plan funds. The revised Plan Scheme envisages an ex penditure of Rs. 150 
crore during the 12 
th  Plan Period (2012-13 to 2016-17) and the list of t he 
schemes are furnished in Annexure-3.  
 
15.  The Committee observes that MFL is currently not in  a financial 
position to plan any further capacity addition or e xpansion schemes. 
But, it remains an indisputable fact that the Compa ny could survive the 
slump in performance in the mid-nineties solely due  to the Revamp-
cum-Modernization and Capacity Enhancement of its p lants.  

Accordingly, the Committee views that it is extreme ly important to take 
measures as suggested by the rehabilitation study c arried out through 
PDIL in the year 2009.  It would help extend the li fe of plant and 
equipment for another 15 years. It is noted that th e Report of PDIL 
suggested a capital investment of Rs.  376 crore sp read over a period of 
5 years for the said technical measures. However, i t is given to 
understand that the revised Plan Scheme for MFL env isages only an 
expenditure of Rs. 150 crore during the 12 th  Plan Period with which the 
work is being executed.  In this light, it is recom mended that MFL and 
the Government should take care that the technical measures suggested 
by the rehabilitation study conducted by PDIL in 20 09 be executed 
without fail. It has to be ensured that financial constraints should not be 
allowed to stand in the way of it implementation.   
  
 
 
 
Future Plans 
 
  
16. In the area of capacity addition and expansion of manufacturing 
facilities MFL placed before the Committee that the  company at present is 
not contemplating any new plans. Instead, they are set to concentrate on 
switching over to Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) feeds tock from the present 
naphtha in compliance with the Directives of GOI an d to come out of the 
purview of BIFR. 
 
17. According to MFL, at the time of revamping in 1 993-98, major 
components of fuel switch from Naphtha to R- LNG wa s also incorporated. 
Hence, the project for gas conversion does not requ ire prima-facie 
revamping; only addition/ modification of few equip ments requiring an 

investment of Rs 25 crore is needed. Natural gas ha s been the preferred 
feedstock for the manufacture of Urea over other fe edstock viz. Naphtha, as 
it is eco friendly, cheap, efficient source of ener gy which has direct impact 
on the quantum of subsidy on Urea. The quality of L NG required for 
replacement of existing fuel is approximately 1.2 MMSCM per day.  
 
18. For feedstock conversion from Naphtha to Natura l Gas, MFL has 
been received the Basic Engineering & Design Packag e (BEDP) and 
Detailed Engineering is in progress. The Company is  now examining the 
following options for sourcing gas: 
 
i.  From KG D6 field when additional production 
materielises and gas pipeline is laid between Kakin ada and 
Chennai.  
 
ii. From IOCL’s proposed LNG terminal at Ennore, 
expected to be commissioned in 2015-16. 
 
iii.  From GAIL’s LNG Kochi terminal, through spur line 
from Krishnagiri on Kochi- Bengaluru pipeline. 
 
iv. From Krishnapatnam Port through  road/rail in 
cryogenic containers. 
 
 According to MFL, to make any further headway in t his direction, 
Gas Transmission Agreement (GTA) and Gas Supply Agr eement (GSA) 
need to be signed with one of the above suppliers. 
    
19. In reply to a query regarding the failure of MF L to switch over to 
Natural Gas by 2009 as originally envisaged, the Co mpany submitted inter 
alia  that Gas conversion at MFL was based on KG D6 gas, to be supplied by 
Reliance Gas Transportation Infrastructure Ltd. (RG TIL) through Kakinada 
– Chennai Gas pipeline.  However, the pipeline proj ect did not materialize 

and original authorization given to RGTIL to lay th e pipeline has been 
cancelled. 
 
20. The Committee understands that conversion of fe edstock from 
Naphtha to Natural Gas is an inevitability for the long-term 
sustainability of Madras Fertilizers Limited.  It i s understood that cost 
of production of urea from Naphtha is very high.  W hile Rs. 40,000 is 
required to produce one tone of urea Rs. 18,000 to Rs. 19,000 is 
required to import same quantity of urea.  It is in  this context that 
conversion from Naphtha to Gas is essential to cut down cost of 
production and make the production process more env ironment 
friendly. It is understood that the MFL is almost r eady for operation by 
using gas.   But it is disturbing to find that though the major components 
of fuel switch over were also incorporated during t he capacity 
enhancement and technology upgradation carried duri ng 1993 to 1998, 
the switch over has not yet materialized.  The init ial deadline of 2009 
has passed without any achievement as the Company r elied only on KG 
D6 gas for the conversion. The Company is suppose t o switch over to 
gas by December 2013.  However, it would not be pos sible to do so by 
this date.  In view of this, the Committee recommen ds that till the 
company switches over to gas, it must be supplied w ith Naphtha at the 
rate at which gas is available.  This will help the  company to smoothly 
transit from Naphtha to gas.  Therefore , the Committee recommends 
that MFL to be proactive in this front and switch over to Natural Gas as 
feedstock in the least possible time. It is also re commended that the 
Government also has to accord priority to MFL in pr oviding access to 
Natural Gas as the changeover is critical to the su stainability of the 
Company itself.  The Committee is of the opinion th at the conversion of 

feedstock to Natural Gas is made part of the Rehabi litation Scheme of 
MFL.   
 
Research and development  
 
21. When the Committee looked into the R&D efforts of MFL, it was 
found that presently the company does not have any R&D activities. As per 
the documents supplied to the Committee, it is unde rstood that  Bio-fertilizer 
product, is one of the successful outcomes of the e arly R&D measures of 
MFL.  It led to the commissioning of a Bio-fertiliz er Plant of 100 MT 
Annual Installed Capacity at MFL Plant Site, Manali . It is also understood 
that the MFL is one of the few fertilizer plants of  our country which 
produces bio-fertilizers. This is a heartening and commendable aspect of 
functioning of the MFL.   Presently, the Company is totally dependent on the 
process licensor M/s Haldor Topsoe A/S, Denmark for  technology 
improvement of Ammonia plant.  
22. The Committee notes that MFL, which had R&D activit ies in its 
early years, has stopped R&D activities due to consistent losses. The fact 
that Bio fertilizers of MFL were developed through in house R&D 
underlines the importance of R&D.  As the Company h as been making 
profits since 2009-10, the Committee is of the stro ng view that 
resumption of R&D activities should be one of the priorities of MFL.   
 
************** 
 
 
 
 
 

 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE-
AT A GLANCE  
 
 
1.  The Committee notes that MFL was a profitable ventu re until 
1996-97, barring the year 1993-94. It is given to u nderstand that the 
Company went into the red owing to the problems att ributed to the 
capacity enhancement and technology upgradation car ried out between 
1993 and 1998. Once the Company stabilized its oper ations, the 
introduction of New Pricing Scheme for Urea Price C oncession Scheme 
for complex fertilizers are said to have gone again st the interests of the 
MFL.  Such persistent problems led the Company to g etting declared 
sick in April 2009. However, the Committee is pleas ed to see MFL 
returning to profit from 2009-10 onwards with the a mendment of NPS-
III. It has been further noted that a Rehabilitatio n Scheme, after taking 
into consideration of the inputs from Ministries co ncerned, Planning 
Commission and other stakeholders has now been subm itted to SBI 
(Operating Agency). The Committee is also of the co nsidered opinion 
that since MFL is back to making profits now throug h their efforts, it is 
imperative that the Government extends a helping ha nd through a 
favorable approach to the Company. Accordingly, it strongly 
recommends that the Government should expeditiously  finalize the 
Rehabilitation Scheme of MFL. The Committee also ex pects the 
Government and MFL to focus attention on measures a nd implement 
them so that MFL is not allowed to slip back to bec ome another sick 
CPSE.  A resurgent CPSE, especially, one working in  the fertilizer 
sector is of crucial importance for agricultural an d economic growth of 
the country.  It is, therefore, necessary to encour age and support MFL 
in every way possible.     

(para 10) 
 
2. The Committee observes that MFL is currently not in  a financial 
position to plan any further capacity addition or e xpansion schemes. 
But, it remains an indisputable fact that the Compa ny could survive the 
slump in performance in the mid-nineties solely due  to the Revamp-
cum-Modernization and Capacity Enhancement of its p lants.  
Accordingly, the Committee views that it is extreme ly important to take 
measures as suggested by the rehabilitation study c arried out through 
PDIL in the year 2009.  It would help extend the li fe of plant and 
equipment for another 15 years. It is noted that th e Report of PDIL 
suggested a capital investment of Rs.  376 crore sp read over a period of 
5 years for the said technical measures. However, i t is given to 
understand that the revised Plan Scheme for MFL env isages only an 
expenditure of Rs. 150 crore during the 12 th  Plan Period with which the 
work is being executed.  In this light, it is recom mended that MFL and 
the Government should take care that the technical measures suggested 
by the rehabilitation study conducted by PDIL in 20 09 be executed 
without fail. It has to be ensured that financial constraints should not be 
allowed to stand in the way of it implementation.   
 (para 15) 
 
 
3. The Committee understands that conversion of fee dstock from 
Naphtha to Natural Gas is an inevitability for the long-term 
sustainability of Madras Fertilizers Limited.  It i s understood that cost 
of production of urea from Naphtha is very high.  W hile Rs. 40,000 is 
required to produce one tone of urea Rs. 18,000 to Rs. 19,000 is 
required to import same quantity of urea.  It is in  this context that 

conversion from Naphtha to Gas is essential to cut down cost of 
production and make the production process more env ironment 
friendly. It is understood that the MFL is almost r eady for operation by 
using gas.   But it is disturbing to find that though the major components 
of fuel switch over were also incorporated during t he capacity 
enhancement and technology upgradation carried duri ng 1993 to 1998, 
the switch over has not yet materialized.  The init ial deadline of 2009 
has passed without any achievement as the Company r elied only on KG 
D6 gas for the conversion. The Company is suppose t o switch over to 
gas by December 2013.  However, it would not be pos sible to do so by 
this date.  In view of this, the Committee recommen ds that till the 
company switches over to gas, it must be supplied w ith Naphtha at the 
rate at which gas is available.  This will help the  company to smoothly 
transit from Naphtha to gas.  Therefore , the Committee recommends 
that MFL to be proactive in this front and switch over to Natural Gas as 
feedstock in the least possible time. It is also re commended that the 
Government also has to accord priority to MFL in pr oviding access to 
Natural Gas as the changeover is critical to the su stainability of the 
Company itself.  The Committee is of the opinion th at the conversion of 
feedstock to Natural Gas is made part of the Rehabi litation Scheme of 
MFL.   
 
 (para 20) 
 
4. The Committee notes that MFL, which had R&D activit ies in its 
early years, has stopped R&D activities due to consistent losses. The fact 
that Bio fertilizers of MFL were developed through in house R&D 
underlines the importance of R&D.  As the Company h as been making 

profits since 2009-10, the Committee is of the stro ng view that 
resumption of R&D activities should be one of the priorities of MFL.   
(para 22) 
 
************** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
 
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  
 
XXII 
 
Twenty-Second Meeting  
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M on Thursday, the 11 
th  July, 2013 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present  
 
     Shri Tiruchi Siva  — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
1.   Shri Narendra Budania 
2.   Shri Ashk Ali Tak 
3.   Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
4.   Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor  
5.   Shri Basawaraj Patil 
6.   Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
7.   Shri Vivek Gupta 
8.  Shri M.P. Achuthan 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
9.     Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala  
10.     Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
11.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
12.   Shri. Kaushalendra Kumar 
13.   Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod  
14. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
15.   Shri P. R. Natarajan 
16. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
17.   Shri R. K. Singh Patel 
18.   Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat 
19.   Ch. Lal Singh 
20. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21.   Shri E. G. Sugavanam 
22.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
Contd…………..2/ 
 
 
 

-2- 
 
Secretariat  
1. Shri. S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Director 
3. Shri. Roshan Lal, Joint Director 
4. Shri. Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welc omed the Members and briefed 
them that the agenda of the meeting was to consider  and adopt the Draft 246 
th , 247 th and 
248 th  reports on Revival of Nagaland Pulp & Paper Compan y Ltd pertaining to the 
Department of Heavy Industry, M/o Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises; 
Implementation of Interest Subsidy Eligibility Cert ificate (ISEC) Scheme pertaining to 
the M/o Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises and Capac ity Addition and Expansion of 
Manufacturing facilities of Madras Fertilizers Ltd,  pertaining to the Department of 
Fertilizers, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, respectively of the Committee.  
2.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the reports f or consideration and after some 
discussion the Committee decided that the 246 th  draft report on the revival of Nagaland 
Pulp and Paper Co Ltd  i s to be considered during the next meeting for adop tion, after 
redrafting as suggested by the Committee.   
3. Then, the Committee took up the 247 
th and 248 th  reports for consideration. After 
some discussions, the Committee adopted the 247 th and 248 th  Draft Reports.  
The meeting adjourned at 12.00 Noon. 
 
New Delhi                                                                                                          Roshan Lal  
11 
th  July, 2013                                                                                               Joint Director 
 
 
To  
The Chairman and Members of the  
Department –Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 