78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN THE
COMMITTEE ' S  68th   REPORT ON WORKING AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF MINERAL
EXPLORATION CORPORATION LTD (MECL) DEPARTMENT OF MINES,  (MINISTRY OF COAL AND
MINES )
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON          2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON          ,  2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2002/SRAVANA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                                   
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                        
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND   RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                          
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002  )
            Shri T.N. Chaturvedi — Chairman @
RAJYA SABHA
Prof. M.M. Aggarwal
 @@3.   Dr . Abrar Ahmad
 $ 4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
 @5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Shri Faguni Ram
  ☼ 8.   Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
 #13. Smt. Sushree Devi
14. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
LOK SABHA
Smt. Jayashree Banerjee
Kumari Mamata Banerjee
Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Thomas Hansda
22. Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Sunil Khan
27. Shri Manjay Lal
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ananta Nayak
Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
 Ø 32. Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 15
th April, 02 vice Sh Ramdas Agarwal who ceased to be
a member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon his cessation to be a Member of the Rajya Sabha
@@Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April, 02 vice Ms. Frida Topno who  ceased to be a  Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02nd
April, 02 consequent upon her cessation to be a Member of  the Rajya Sabha
$ nominated w e.f 14
th May, 02
@nominated w.e.f. 22nd May, 02 vice Shri Jibon Roy ceased to be a Member of the Committee # nominated w.e.f. 14th
May, 02 vice Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09th April, 02 consequent upon
his cessation to be Member of  the Rajya Sabha
*nominated w.e.f.  15
th May, 02 vice Shri G. Mallikarjunappa ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  25th
February, 02
Ø nominated  w.e.f. 10
th June, 02
☼ nominated w.e.f 11th June, 02
 
33. Shri Uttamrao Patil
34.Shri Malyala Rajaiah
35.Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand Sahu
Shri Ramanand Singh
Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh
Chowdhary Talib Hussain
Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri  D.P. Ahuja ,Under Secretary

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,  having   been authorised  by
the Committee, hereby present this  Seventy-eighth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in  the Committee's  68
th    Report on Working And Performance Review of Mineral
Exploration Corporation Ltd. which is under the administrative control of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and
Mines).
2.         The Committee examined and  considered  the Action Taken Note on recommendations contained in the
Committee's  68
th   Report on Working And Performance Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. which is
under the administrative control of Department of Mines (Ministry of Coal and Mines).
3.         The Committee at its meeting held on 9
th August, 2002 considered and adopted the Report.
                       
 
NEW DELHI;
August   , 2002
 
 
T .N. CHATURVEDI
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Mines (Ministry of coal and Mines) on
the Recommendations contained in its 68
th   Report ( of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry) on the  Working and  Performance Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited (MECL )which was
presented /laid to  on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  8
th March, 2002.
 
 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department  of Mines in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Mines
(Chapter - I).
Recommendations:-    3.2,  5.4 , 6.5 , 7.3 ,8.4 , 15.1.4 , 15.3.2
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s replies :
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations:-    4.4 ,8.5 ,13.2 , 15.4.2
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of Mines:.
(Chapter - III).
 
Recommendations:-   5.5 , 10.3 , 11.6 , 12.3 , 15.1.3 , 15.5.3
 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  Ministry of Mines   have not been received. (Chapter
– IV).
NIL
(Chapter - I)

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry of Mines :
 
Recommendations     (Para 3.2 )
 
Activities of  MECL
 
The Committee understands the vital  role of MECL in carrying out  detailed systematic mineral  exploration and hopes 
that  MECL  management  would be guided  by the management by objectives (MBO) and make its  earnest efforts for
achieving the cherished goals.
 
Action Taken
 
            The  observation of the  Committee has been noted.   MECL's  management is committed to  an overall
improvement of physico financial  performance of the company, to achieve the  goals set.
 
Recommendations        (Para 5.4)
 
Co-ordination and co-operation between MECL and GSI/Merger of MECL with GSI
 
The Committee is of the view that GSI should   undertake  honest effort for  searching and identifying   new prospects
for MECL for detailed exploration. 
 
Action Taken
 
MECL is in  constant touch with  GSI for identifying new prospects for obtaining detailed exploration work for the
company.
 
Recommendations     (Para 6.5)
 
Budgetary support
 
MNCs and private parties are doing exploration only for four  to  five precious and base etals and many other minerals
of national importance are still required to be  explored, which form a part of 64 minerals as mentioned in National
Mineral  inventory  of IBM, for which MECL  is the right choice.  Government should,  therefore,  continue budget
support to MECL.
 
Action Taken
 
            For  the year 2002-03 (BE),  Rs.8.00  crores has been provided  to MECL for promotional  projects which  is to
be reimbursed against work to be executed by  MECL.  Additional  funds  requirements.  if, any could be met out of the
Mineral Exploration Fund (MEF)  under which Rs.12.00  crores is also available
 
Recommendations     (7.3)
 
Performance of  MECL
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by MECL and hopes that it  would continue to strive its best in
implementing its programme of minerals exploration and mine development.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
MECL  ensures to strive its best in implementing its programme of mineral exploration and mine development in  the 
country.  Customers satisfaction is  one of the key areas where the company needs to improve.  Under the ongoing

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
liberalization process, it  is the endeavour of the company to obtain more contractual work from multi-national 
companies, both domestic and foreign, and execute the projects efficiently to meet their  requirements and remain
competitive.
 
Recommendation (8.4)
 
Physico-financial performance of MECL
 
The Committee is constrained to note that public sector support to MECL through promotion of  projects and
contractual work has considerably eroded.  The Committee feels that, if our PSUs are to remain, inter PSU cooperation
and synergy  is  required.
 
Action Taken
 
            To improve the physical performance of the company efforts are being made to get more jobs from PSUs and
State Government Organizations.  The Company has had detailed discussion with the officials of newly formed State of
Chattisgarh and Jharkhand to obtain work related to mineral explorations and development from these States.  In
addition, discussions have also been held with  UCIL, HCL, NMDC, AMD, SCCL, ONGC & CCL  for award of work
in the fields of mineral exploration mine development  and  IT enabled services.  MECL  management is hopeful to get
favourable results with constant persuasion with these and other organizations.
 
Recommendation       (15.3.2)
 
Coal sampling and analysis
 
            The Committee is pleased to note that MECL has  made its presence felt   in the   field  of coal sampling and
analysis.  The Committee  recommends  that MECL management should make effects for procuring work  order in this
field.
 
Action Taken
 
            For the year 2002-03 work order  for Rs. 250 lakhs  for coal sampling and analysis are available.  Though  in this
field a number of   private parties are also  active,  MECL is committed to grab each and every opportunity by  quoting
its most competitive  rates  to keep its resources and facilities created for the purposes gainfully deployed.
 
(Chapter - II)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the government’s
replies
 
Recommendations     (Para 4.4  )
 
Organisational Structure
 
            The Committee is of the view  that  zonal office should be made a profit making centre  and all projects assigned
to them should be in a such  a  way that each zonal office justifies is existence and each zonal office must   contribute in
the  profitability of  MECL .  The existence of zonal office  must contribute  in the profitability of MECL.  The
existence of zonal office  should  be linked to profitability.  The Committee further recommends that efforts should be
made  to reduce its administrative expenditure.
 
Action Taken
 
The Zonal offices are set up based on the availability of work.  Reduction in the availability of  work is  anticipated in

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
2002-03.  Hence  the reduction  of  Zonal  offices   from  five to three   is being  contemplated.  The control of
expenditure vis-a-vis  the  availability of work is being exercised  strictly and the contribution towards profitability of
the company are being  monitored continuously.
 
Recommendation       (8.5)
 
Physical  and financial performance of MECL
 
            The Committee, while appreciating the physical performance of MECL, recommends that MECL management
should make efforts to  procure work orders from all concerned areas so that physical  performance of the  company
should have direct  positive impact on the financial performance of MECL.  The Committee hopes that once the
diversification programmes are implemented and financial restructuring proposals,  which is under the consideration of
Ministry of Finance, is approved and comes into effect, MECL would start making net profit.
 
 
Action Taken
 
MECL has been making  losses.  The gross sales  of the company has been mainly  on account of the work done for the
Government sector.  The company is dependent on equity,  loan and promotional grants.  Financial restructuring of the
company has been under the consideration of the  Government.   However, such an  exercise could be done only if the
company is able to remain viable on  a sustainable basis after such a process.  However, from the data presently
available it does not appear that financial restructuring would be viable.
 
 
Recommendation       ( 13.2)
 
SWOT analysis of MECL
 
The Committee understands that the strength of MECL is enough to be competitive in its activities and, therefore,   
recommends  that MECL  management  should take every  possible step to take advantage  of its strength and avail
opportunities to improve the financial and physical performance.  The Committee  further  recommends that MECL
management should make efforts for overcoming its weaknesses and imbibe sufficient and sustainable  resilience to
combat  threat to its existence.  MECL should also try  to  shed surplus work force under VRS.
 
Action Taken
 
MECL is committed to avail all opportunities in the field of Mineral Exploration and related activities with  its 
available resources and strength.   The  Company has diversified in areas such as Coal Bed  Methane (CBM)
exploration  and could make a break  through for drilling of slim holed on behalf  of ONGC.  It  has  successfully
completed the assigned job.  Based on the performance of MECL, ONGC  is considering award of additional work. 
Other organisations like  Reliance Industries, ESSAR, etc.  have approached MECL.  Simultaneously, the company has
been reducing its manpower  position.  Against the approved strength of 2500, it has 2586  employees on roll as on
1.4.02.  The Company proposes to  further reduce  its staff strength by 500.
 
Recommendation       (15.4.2)           
 
Mining & Beneficiation of Beach sand
 
            The Committee recommends that Government may grant the  lease at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
 
            Mining Lease of mineral sand at Tirunelveli, Tamil Nadu is in  advanced stage of consideration at the level of
State Government and is likely to be granted in  favour of MECL.  shortly.

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 (Chapter - III)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry of
Mines.
 
Recommendation       (5.5)
 
Co-ordination and co-operation between MECL and GSI/Merger of MECL with GSI
 
            The Ministry of Mines may explore the possibility of merger of MECL with  Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
for better co-ordination and continued prospect for MECL for detailed exploration.  MECL could work as a separate
division in GSI structure.
 
Action Taken
 
            MECL had earlier   been a part of  GSI  and had been carved  out  of the  latter  in  1972 to undertake  detailed
exploration work.  Moreover, GSI as an organization, is itself in the process of revamping.
 
Further recommendation       (5.5)
 
Budgetary support
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Department of  Mines  should have furnished the details  of   GSI's
revamping  process and the extent  and  scope for co-operation and collaboration between GSI and MECL.  It is
because  of the fact that  MECL has been  covered out of GSI and  keeping in view the need to rationalise non-plan
expenditure through rightsizing manpower  and avoiding double set up  of administration, the  Committee recommended
merger of MECL with GSI.  At least MECL could be made a division of GSI while  discharging its present functions
and responsibility.   Such measures would not only lead to rationalisation of non-plan expenditure and avoidable
administrative expenditure, but would also strengthen both GSI and MECL.
 
Recommendation       (10.3)
           
Revival plan of MECL
 
Financial Restructuring
 
The Committee is of the view that implementation of the recommendations of the Revival Committee would have a
positive impact on the physical and financial performance of MECL.  The revival  committee had  recommended the 
writing off  of accumulated losses and waiver of interest on Government  loan to clean the balance sheet of  MECL.   
The Committee recommends that the request of MECL for  waiving  of the interest on loan and transfer of balance loan
amount to  equity should be considered by the Government so that MECL could make a turnaround .  The Department 
of Mines may seriously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance.
Action Taken
 
 
            MECL has been making  in losses.   The gross sales of the company has been mainly on account of the work 
done for the Government  sector.  The company is  dependent on equity, loan and promotional grants.  Financial
restructuring of  the  company has been under  the consideration of the Government.  However, such an exercise  could
be done only if the company is able to remain viable on a sustainable basis after such a process.  However, from the data
presently available it does not appear that financial restructuring would be viable.  The matter is presently under the
consideration of the Department of Mines.
 
Further recommendation       (10.3)

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
The Committee is constrained  to express  its concern over the reluctant approach of Department of Mines in regard to
future  prospects of MECL.  On the one hand   Department of Mines is indifferent  to the view of  merger  of MECL
with its parent body i.e.  GSI for injecting  a new  lease of life.  On the other hand,  the Department of Mines in not
convinced of MECL's capacity/resilience  to become viable even after implementation of financial  restructuring.  The
MECL's  proposal of financial restructuring   is gathering  dust in the Department of Mines.  This is a paradoxical state
of  affairs and speaks of inaction of the Department of Mines.  It seems that the Department  of Mines is banking on the
idea  that the things  would improve automatically  without  any efforts/measures  while  the fact of the situation is that
MECL's proposal of financial restructuring needs immediate aid from the Government to make the company sustainable
on a regular basis. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of Mines must come out of its slumber
and act promptly in pushing ahead the financial restructuring proposals of MECL.
 
Recommendation       (11.6)
 
Grant of PL and ML
 
            The Committee is happy to note that MECL is making efforts towards obtaining prospecting licence and mining
lease.  The Committee   recommends that PL and ML may be granted, notwithstanding, the  Disinvestments proposal. 
MECL should be allowed to show its mettle.
 
Action Taken
 
            MECL has been applying for prospecting and mining leases  from State Governments.  MECL has applied for
mining lease  for Mineral Sand deposits in Tirunelveli District in  Tamil Nadu.  The Company is expected  to sign an
MOU shortly with the State Government  for setting up a Titanium Dioxide plant in the state   before grant of ML.   It
is   expected  that ML will  be granted in MECL’s favour.
 
Further recommendation
 
            In  Action Taken  Note to this present report the MECL management   should  furnish the outcome of  action 
taken in regard to the fate of application   for obtaining  prospecting  licence (PL) and Mining lease (ML) .
 
 
 
Recommendation       ( 12.3)
 
Research and Development activities of MECL
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that MECL  should  prepare technological  road maps exploring its
opportunities and understanding technological road blocks for innovative technological break through.  The Committee
is of  the view  that the MECL should  set up a R&D Wing for undertaking R&D  projects in order to attain leadership
in its spheres of activities.  It  may be noted  that technological leadership is a product of vision, innovation, experiment
coming out of research  work.  MECL  may contribute  in developing   technology  and skill in detailed exploration.
 
Action Taken
 
            The Research and Development activities  in the  area of detailed exploration  are   being  taken up to be at par
with other exploration companies.
 
Further recommendation:
 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation  that MECL  management should set up   an R&D wing in MECL
for undertaking  R&D project in  order to  attain  leadership in its spheres of activities.  MECL, if it once attains
technological leadership in the field of detailed  exploration, it may not only prove a  milestone in its way of revival but

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
well undertake steps for  technology export  in the field detailed exploration  to other developing countries.
 
Recommendation       (15.1.3)
           
Business Plan of MECL
 
The  Committee is happy to observe that MECL is emerging as one of the leading agencies in the field of CBM 
exploration.   As the  Government of India  has also  liberalized  the CBM   policy  recently and seven CBM blocks has
been auctioned, and association of MECL with prospective.  Indian/foreign  entrepreneurs will go a long way in
developing the CBM resources.  MECL should not leave any stone unturned in getting orders for exploration. 
Government also should give priority of  MECL.
 
Action Taken
 
             MECL  has already identified  plant  and machinery as well as trained  manpower to undertake slim hole drilling
for development of CBM resources in the country.  The company has been making all out efforts to get the work orders
for  exploration  of CBM from the agencies associated in this field.  It is expected that with the final  allocation of CBM 
blocks to the various agencies, MECL would be able to provide its services on most competitive basis to the satisfaction
of the clients.
 
Further recommendation:
 
            The Committee is of the view that MECL  management should continue  its all out efforts  for getting the work 
orders for exploration of  Coal Bed Methane (CBM) from the agencies  associated in the field.  The Committee further 
recommends that the Development  of Mines should extend its all possible to assistance to MECL management  in their
efforts   for procuring  work order.  The committee desires that the Department of Mines should furnish in the ATN  of
present report the details of efforts undertaken on the   part of MECL  management (names of agencies with whom
MECL management  interacted and  their response),  assistance extended by the Department of Mines, in this regard and
the overall outcome of efforts undertaken in the   form  of quantum of work order received  by MECL management in
the  field of CBM.
 
Recommendation (15.5.3)
 
Ground Water exploration
 
            The Committee  understands that  effective utilization is essential for proper water planning and  management. 
The Committee feels  that MECL with its rich experience in deep drilling and exploration, should  be able to play a
positive role in exploring ground water  which is gradually becoming a  scarce resource.
 
Action Taken
 
            MECL with its experience  in deep  drilling considered  ground water exploration as a new field for 
diversification.   However, MECL's board  is of the opinion that there is  severe competition in  the market for ground
water exploration and, therefore, it has been deferred for the time  being.
 
Further recommendation      (15.5.3)
 
            The Committee is of the view that  MECL  should   come out with an all out effort in the  field of ground water 
and should not be deterred  by competition.   Therefore, the Committee expects that MECL management would give due
impetus to the drilling and exploration of ground water.
 
(Chapter – IV)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry of Mines   have not been received.

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
NIL
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
Further recommendation       (5.5)
 
Budgetary support
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Department of  Mines  should have furnished the details  of   GSI's
revamping  process and the extent  and  scope for co-operation and collaboration between GSI and MECL.  It is
because  of the fact that  MECL has been  covered out of GSI and  keeping in view the need to rationalise non-plan
expenditure through rightsizing manpower  and avoiding double set up  of administration   the  Committee    
recommended merger of MECL   with GSI.  At least MECL could be made a division of GSI  while  discharging
present functions and responsibility  such measures would not only lead to rationalisation of non-plan expenditure and
avoidable administrative  expenditure, but would also strengthen both GSI and MECL.
 
 
Recommendation       (10.3)
 
Revival plan of MECL
 
The Committee is constrained  to express  its concern over the reluctant approach of Department of Mines in regard to
future  prospects of MECL.  On the one hand   Department of Mines is indifferent  to the view of  merger of MECL with
its parent body i.e. GSI for injecting  a new  lease of life  on the other   hand   the Department of Mines in not convinced
of MECL's capacity/resilience  to become viable even  after implementation of Financial  restructuring .  The MECL's 
proposal of financial restructuring   is gathering  dust in the Department of Mines.  This is a paradoxical   state of affairs
and speaks of inaction of the Department of Mines.  It seems that the Department  of Mines is banking on the idea  that
the things would improve automatically  without  any efforts/measures while  the fact of the  situation is that MECL's
proposal of financial restructuring needs immediate aid from the government to make the company sustainable  on
regular basis. Therefore,  the Committee recommends  that  the Department  of Mines must  come out  of its  slumber  
and act promptly in pushing ahead  the financial restructuring proposals  of MECL.
 
Recommendation       (11.6)
Grant of PL and ML
           
Further recommendation
 
            In  Action Taken  Note to this present report the MECL management   should  furnish the outcome of  action 
taken in regard to the fate of application   for obtaining  prospecting  licence (PL) and Mining lease (ML) .
 
Research and Development activities of MECL (12.3)
 
            Further recommendation: 
 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation  that MECL  management should set up   R&D wing in MECL for
undertaking    R&D project in  order to  attain  leadership in its spheres of activities.  MECL, if  it  once  attains
technological leadership in the field of detailed  exploration it may not only prove a  milestone in its way of revival but
well undertake steps for  technology export  in the field detailed exploration  to other developing countries.
 
Recommendation       (15.1.3)
 
BUSINESS PLAN OF MECL                                  Future thrust areas  of MECL 

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
 
Exploration and Development  of coal bed  Methane
 
Further  Recommendation
 
            The Committee is of the view that MECL  management should continue  its all out efforts  for getting the work 
orders for exploration of  Coal  Bed Methane (CBM) from the agencies  associated in the field.  The Committee further 
recommends that the Development  of Mines should  extend its all possible to assistance to MECL management  in their
efforts   for procuring  work order.  The Committee desires that the Department of Mines should   furnish in the ATN  of
present  report the details of efforts undertaken on the   part of MECL  management (names of agencies with whom
MECL management  interacted and  their response),  assistance extended by the Department of Mines, in this  regard
and the overall outcome of efforts undertaken in the   form  of quantum of work order received  by MECL management
in the  field of CBM.
 
Ground Water exploration
 
Further Recommendation      (15.5.3)
 
            The Committee is of the view that  MECL  should   come out with an all out efforts in the  field  of the ground
water and should not be deterred    of competition. Therefore, the Committee expects  that  MECL management would 
give due impetus to the drilling  and exploration of ground water.
MINUTES
XI
 
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
                        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday the 9
th August, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT
 
Shri T.N. Chaturvedi - Chairman         
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Dr. Abrar Ahmad        
3.         Shri Prasanta Chatterjee          
4          Smt. Saroj Dubey                    
5          Dr.  Faguni Ram                                  
6          Smt. Sumitra Mahajan
7          Sh. P.K. Maheshwari              
8          Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
9          Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
                                   
LOK SABHA
 
10        Smt. Jayashree Banerjee          
11        Shri Nepal Chandra Das          
12        Shri A.C. Jose
13        Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
14        Shri Sunil Khan
15        Dr. K.Malaisamy

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
16        Shri A. Narendra 
17        Shri P. Rajendran
18        Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
18        Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19        Shri Chunnilal Bhau Thakur
20        Smt. D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
2.         Shri A.C. Jose, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and other members of the Committee 
felicitated the Chairman of the Committee who had since been designated as the Governor of Karnataka.  In the
felicitation address, all the three Convenors and other members of the Committee appreciated the work done by the
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T.N. Chaturvedi.  They all were of the view that Shri Chaturvedi gave a new
thrust and orientation to the working of the Committee and gave inspiration to the Committee with his valuable
contribution and personal interest in the day-to-day working of the Committee and in a short span of four months, the
Committee could present a record number of ‘23’ reports.
            The Chairman, in response, observed that due to the hard work put in by the Sub-Committees it had been
possible to prepare such a large number of reports.  He thanked the Convenors of all the Sub-Committees, Members of
the Committee and the Secretariat for extending cooperation to him to discharge his duties as the Chairman of the
Committee.
3.         The Committee then took up consideration of the following draft reports:-
76
th Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 53rd Report on Modernization, Restructuring
and Expansion Programmes of NALCO.
77
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 67th Report on Organization, Structure and
Performance Review of Indian Bureau of Mines.
 78
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 68th Report on Working and Performance
Review of Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd. (MECL).
79
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s   65th Report on Modernisation,
Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL).
80
th  Action Taken Report on recommendations contained in Committee’s 66th Report on Performance Review of
Jawahar Lal Nehru Aluminum Research Development and Design Centre.
81
st   Report  on Sickness in SSI Sector of Cement Industry in Uttar Pradesh.
82nd   Report on  MoU system in the Strategic Sector PSEs
83rd Report on  MoU system in the Allied Sector PSEs.
84th Report on Implementation of Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala.
85th Report on Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Hindustan
Steel Works Construction Ltd. (HSCL).
86
th Report on Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC).
87th Report on Implementation status of Financial Assistance-cum-Restructuring Package and Revival of Bharat
Refractories Ltd. (BRL).
88
th Report on  Performance review of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL).
89th Report on Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Programmes of Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP).
90th Report on Sickness in SSI Sector in the City of Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh.
91st   Report on Coir Board – A performance Review.
 

78th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/78threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:15:42]
4.         The Committee adopted all the above stated reports and authorized its Chairman  to make corrections, if any, in
the reports.  The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports on the 13th August, 2002.  The
Committee for this purpose authorized its Chairman to present the reports  in the Rajya Sabha and in his absence Shri
Khan Ghufran Zahidi and Prof. M.M. Agarwal to present the reports.  The Committee also authorized Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha and in his absence authorized Shri A.C. Jose and Shri A. Narendra to lay the reports.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M.
 