58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT
 
ON
 
PROBLEMS FACED BY HINDUSTAN PAPER
CORPORATION LIMITED IN THE NORTH EASTERN
REGION
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 7TH DECEMBER, 2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2001/AGRAHAYANA, 1923  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
                                                                                                                           
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                               
2.         PREFACE                                                                                                         
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE –AT   A  GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                              
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
       1.        Shri Ramdas Agarwal   -   Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri  Khan Ghufran Zahidi
Dr.  Faguni Ram
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
Shri Jibon Roy
Shri Somappa R. Bommai
Smt. Saroj Dubey
Sardar  Balwinder Singh Bhundar

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha
Prof. .M.M. Aggarwal
Shri Bangaru Laxman
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri A. Narendra
Shri Ramdas Athawale
Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
Shri Nepal Chandra Das
Shri K.P. Singh Deo
Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
Shri Thomas  Hansda
Shri G.J. Javiya
Shri A.C. Jose
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri  K. Malaisamy
Shri G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri K.H. Muniyappa
Shri Nagmani
Shri Anant Nayak
Shri R. Basanagouda  Patil
Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil
Shri  M. Rajaiah
Shri P. Rajendran
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Tarachand  Sahu
Shri Ram Sajivan
Kunwar  Sarv Raj Singh
Shri Ramanand Singh
Shri Chunnilal Thakur
Shri Rizwan Zaheer
Smt. Renu Kumari
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
   Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu , Deputy Secretary
     Shri Rakesh Naithani,  Committee Officer
P R E F A C E
 
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been
authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Fifty-Eighth Report  on the Problems faced by  Hindustan Paper
Corporation Limited in the North Eastern Region pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industry,  Ministry of  Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises.
2.         The  Sub-Committee heard the views of   Shri Arun Shourie , Minister for Department of Disinvestment and
Development of the North Eastern Region on 27th September, 2001. The Sub-Committee also heard the oral evidence of

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
the Secretaries and representatives of the Ministries of  Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Railways, Environment
& Forest, Home, Commerce (IPP), Petroleum and Natural Gas and Finance (Banking and Revenue Divisions)  and the
CMDs of the Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited, Bongaigaon Refinery Ltd,  Numeligarh Refinery Ltd and Indian oil
Corporation Ltd   on  the 8th August, 2001 and 27th September, 2001 respectively.
3.         The Sub-Committee in its meeting held on  the 19th November, 2001 considered and adopted the Report.
4.         The Committee in its meeting held on the  3rd December, 2001 considered and adopted the Report.
                                     
 
NEW DELHI;
December 3, 
2001
 
 
RAMDAS AGARWAL
Chairman                                                           
                                                 
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
REPORT
 
HINDUSTAN PAPER CORPORATION LTD – AN OVERVIEW
 
1.1       Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd. (HPCL) incorporated in May 1970, is engaged in manufacture of paper,
paperboards, craft paper and newsprint. HPC is a Holding Company and has three Subsidiaries and two major integrated
pulp and paper Mills under its control.  These are:
 
Subsidiaries
 
Mandya National paper Mills Ltd.
Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Ltd.
Hindustan Newsprint Ltd.
 
Units
 
Nagaon Paper Mills (NPM)
Cachar Paper Mills (CPM)
 
            The production of the Company (NPM and CPM) during the year 2000-2001 is likely to be Rs.424.14 crore.
 
Mandya National paper Mills Ltd.
 
1.2       Mandya National Paper Mills Ltd. (MNPM) was incorporated in the private sector in 1957.  After it became
sick, HPC took over the management of this mill in January 1974 as a result of the tripartite agreement between
Government of Karnataka, HPC and MNPM.  HPC holds 97.8% of equity share capital and entire preference shares. 
The company became sick and was referred to BIFR.  Karnataka High Court have since pronounced winding up of the
company on 20.10.2000.
 
Nagaland Pulp & Paper Company Ltd.
 
1.3       Nagaland Pulp and Paper Company Ltd. (NPPC) is a subsidiary of Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC).  HPC
hold 95% of the equity shares and the Government of Nagaland hold 5%.  The company which came out of the purview
of BIFR due to financial restructuring again became sick as the revival scheme could not be put into operation due to
law and order problem, lack of infrastructure and absence of banking facilities.  Government has communicated its
stand to BIFR that it will accept any decision of BIFR including winding up.  In the meanwhile, on NPPC’s request
BIFR has asked the company to prepare a revival plan and direct OA to submit a report.  There is no production activity
in the plant.
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
Hindustan Newsprint Ltd.
 
1.4       Hindustan Newsprint Ltd. (HNL) was originally started as a unit of HPC.  Subsequently this unit was converted
into a wholly owned subsidiary of HPC in August 1983.  This mill is having an annual capacity of 1 lakh MT is located
in the State of Kerala and is engaged in the production of newsprint.  The company has undertaken a scheme for
establishing a de-inking plant at a cost of Rs.52.20 crores.  This is likely to improve the financial health of the company
and reduce dependence on forest resources.  The production during the year 2000-2001 is anticipated to be Rs.255.45
crores.
 
Study of HPCL by the Sub-Committee on Heavy Industries  and Public Enterprises
 
1.5       The  Sub-Committee of Ministry of the Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises   ( of the Department Related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry) was constituted in May 2000 to study the performance of HPCL.  The
composition of the Sub-Committee was as under:
 
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah - Convenor
Shri S. Sivasubramanian
Shri P.K. Maheshwari
Shri Deepak Kumar
Shri Anantrao Gudhe
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Shri Sunil Khan
Shri Manjay Lal
Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil
Shri Ram Sajivan
 
At the outset, the Sub-Committee had extensive meetings with the workers' unions and the management of the Company
on the 9
th July 2000 at Calcutta. Points raised by them and the comments offered thereon by the Ministry of the Heavy
Industries and Public Enterprises are as under:
 
 Points raised by the workers' Union Comments  of the Ministry
   
 
Their wage revision is due since 1.1.1997 Proposal for wage revision in respect of HNL and HPC 
was received in the Department .  Approval for wage
revision of  the  HNL  has since been issued.  Proposal
in regard to HPC,  this Department has sought certain
clarifications from the Management of HPC which are
awaited.  The pay revision of HPC  will be considered
after receiving clarifications from them.
 
 
There should be excise duty holiday for the Cachar
Paper Mill, Nagaon Paper Mill located in the North
East.  This will  make their  unit more sustainable
Proposal was taken up with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs who informed that PM's   package for NE region
has already been decided  .  The issue will be again
taken up with the concerned Department.
 
 
Subsidy scheme should  be extended to Cachar Paper
Mills till the  conversion work from  broad gauge to
meter  gauge of their sector is completed.
 
The Standing Committee on Industry on PSUs of  the
Department of  Heavy Industry Disinvestment, Sickness 
and Revival in its 36th Report    recommended  
transport   subsidy   to
 
 
 Points raised by the workers’ Union Comments of the Ministry
  

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
 the North-eastern units which has been taken  up with
the Ministry of Home Affairs by this Department.
 
 
All  Government Departments should buy papers from
HPC
The Ministry had advised all
Ministries/Departments/State Governments for
patronising HPC  for  purchase of paper.
 
 
Proposal of captive afforestation be expedited The issues have been taken up at  Minister level with
the  Ministry  of Environment and Forests and is being
followed up by the department at appropriate level.
 
De-linking of subsidiaries from HPC The pros and cons of de-linking of subsidiaries of HPC 
from the holding company are being considered by this
Department.  It may, however ,  be  pointed out that
Government  has already decided to close MNPM  and a
Voluntary  Separation Scheme (VSS)  was introduced as
a safety  net for 3 months w.e.f. 1.4.2000.  Out   of 659 
employees, 639 employees have opted for VSS.  As
regards NPPC,  Government  has conveyed its stand to
BIFR  that any decision including  winding up would be
acceptable to Government of India and  the mater is now
before the  BIFR.
 
Proposal for capital restructuring is pending with the
Government
 
Proposal was earlier circulated to all concerned
Ministries/ Departments.  Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure, advised to submit a
comprehensive proposal on financial restructuring of
HPC.  The revised comprehensive proposal is under
consideration of the Government.
 
 
Proposal for writing off of interest upto 31.3.1997 is
also pending with the Government.  The management
reiterated that the extension of transport subsidy for
the units of Assam would go a long way in making
their product competitive.
Writing off of interest as suggested by the
management is also a part of proposal for financial
restructuring referred in para 1 above.  The Standing
Committee on Industry on PSUs of the Department of
Heavy Industry – Disinvestment, Sickness and
Revival, in its 36
th Report recommended transport
subsidy to the North-Eastern units which has been
taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs by this
Department.
 
 
 
 
Points raised by the Management Comments of the Ministry  
 
Excise duty holiday for their manufacturing facilities
in North East.  De-inking of HPC from its subsidiaries
to improve the financial performance of the company.
 
The issue of Excise Duty concession would be taken
up with the concerned Department.  This Department
is considering the pros and cons of de-inking of
subsidiaries of HPC from the holding company.  It
may, however, be pointed out that Government has
already decided to close MNPM and a voluntary
Separation Scheme (VSS) was introduced as a safety
net for 3 months w.e.f. 1.4.2000.  Out of 659
employees, 639 employees have opted for VSS.  As
regards NPPC, Government has conveyed its stand to
BIFR that any decision including winding up would be
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
acceptable to GOI and the matter is now before the
BIFR.
 
In so far as Hindustan Newsprint is concerned,
although the company was doing well, still the
management felt that the imposition of anti-dumping
duty on imported newsprint will make their product
more competitive.  Presently, the applied rate of
customs duty on imported newsprint is less than the
bound rate of customs duty.
Ministry of Commerce (DGFT) have not agreed
stating that it is not possible to change the import
policy of newsprint in view of GOI’s international
commitments.  Further, the issue of increasing
customs duty on newsprint was also taken up by this
Ministry in its suggestions to the Ministry of Finance
for the union budget 1998-99 and 1999-2000.
 
 
 
Discussions held with Secretaries of  various Ministries and
Industries :
 
2.1       During the course of the meeting the workers union expressed certain problem at the technical level, which
affected the morale and motivation of the workers like overdue wage revision etc. DHI confirmed that this has been
addressed to.  Besides, both the workers’ union and the management emphasised the need for extending excise duty
holiday to these mills located in the NE as is extended to other units set up in the NE after 1997.  Besides, the workers
union and the management also proposed that government departments should buy their paper requirements from the
HPC.  Moreover, both emphasised before the sub-committee that their proposal for captive plantation should be
expedited to enable continuous operation of these plants.  In addition, the management also highlighted the need for
extending transport subsidy to the HPC units located in the NE region.
 
2.2       Department of Heavy Industries had earlier issued a pay revision notice besides having taken up the issues of
transport subsidy, excise duty exemption to the NE located units and also expediting of captive plantation with the
respective ministries, as conveyed vide its ATR of 16th August 2000.  However, the persuasive efforts of Department of
Heavy Industries were not bearing much fruit.  Besides it was observed by the sub-committee that these issues needed to
be approached through a coordinated effort and moreover the sub-committee also felt that there was a lack of
appreciation of concerns expressed by the Department of Heavy Industry in respect of HPC’s operation by the other
ministries.  The sub-committee felt that at the strategic level the problems facing industrial units in the NE,
notwithstanding whether it was private or public sector, were uniform and similar.
 
2.3       Issues like aforestation for captive purposes, transport subsidy, excise duty exemption, etc. encompassed all
these units.  Hence, the sub-committee sought to hear the views of public sector as well as the private sector located in
the NE.  It heard the view of the industries in the NE both in the public and the private sector on 8
th  August 2001.  It
emanated from the views expressed by these that not only were the problems of the units grave but it was being further
aggravated by a Supreme Court order of 13thDecember 1996 related to debarring private plantation in the NE which
violated the constitutional guaranteed rights of the local tribals of the NE under article 371A-D and 371-H of the
Constitution.  It came to the observation of the sub-committee that this situation was leading to an insurgency in the NE
region and needed to be addressed on priority. The Convenor, Sub-Committee-III thereafter called upon the Secretaries
of Ministries of Environment and Forest, Law, Industrial Policy and Promotion, Banking and Revenue, Heavy Industry,
Railways and HPC on 21
st August, 2001  to begin process of dialogue through which some of the issues could be
resolved. The sub-committee noted that discussions with the Member Traffic, Railway Board, had resolved the
problems of HPCL.  Other Secretaries present in this meeting decided to deliberate in detail and come back to the sub-
committee within a period of four weeks.
 
2.4       On September 27, 2001, the Secretaries came back to the sub-committee.  In the meantime, the government had
also formed a new Department  of the Development of  North-East and the Hon’ble Minister of North-Eastern
Development had also expressed his eagerness to be educated on the sub-committee’s findings and their interaction in
the matter so far.  Hence, he was also requested to join the meeting as a special invitee.  In this meeting, the Hon’ble
Minister began with the opening remarks that it would not be appropriate to expect government investments to
rejuvenate   the North East.  The need and focus of the government was to think of ways by which local initiative

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
generated income at local level.  Thereafter, he shared with the sub-committee some information relating to some of the
projects in the power sector, which have been cleared and also assured that all non-polluting activity would be supported
by the government.  At the same time, it was emphasised that while the North-East had 65% of its area under forest
cover, the same was depleting very fast.  The depletion was being mapped through an ISRO mapping centre. 
 
2.5       Thereupon Secretary, Department of Heavy Industries, underlined the problems of the HPC regarding three
major areas viz. railways, bamboo availability and general policy.  Regarding railways, the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy
Industry, appreciated that the Railways had facilitated better availability of wagons.  The Railways have agreed to
permit movement of rake each of bamboo from lower Assam to upper Assam and rake of coal from Margretta with
transhipment facility at Lumding on trial basis.  But these are short-term measures and need for a long term solution like
uni-gauge availability in the NE would go a long way at addressing the problems of the HPCL. 
 
2.6       As regards availability of bamboo, he said that there was need for expediting the approval of working plans for
extraction of bamboo by the M/o E&F and permission for dirt roads to facilitate extraction of bamboo from unexplored
areas. Besides, it was also emphasised that imminent gregarious flowering of  bamboo could lead to destruction of the
forest cover.  Hence a realistic replacement solution was warranted on the part of M/o E&F. He further informed that an
agreement with private firms for extraction of bamboo on long term basis from the forest area reserved for HPC would
be examined to see whether there were any violation of Forest Conservation Act. HPC could also examine feasibility of
permitting decentralisation of chipping units in association with local communities. With regard to private plantation, it
was mentioned that owing to local compulsion, forest areas could not be leased out to industries for captive plantation. 
However, HPC may enter into  an MOU with State Forest Departments to mobilise such plantations with necessary
financial support with the  proviso that first charge of  the crop 
at the time of  harvesting would be of HPC.  Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, informed that they
have given blanket permission to the State Government not to bother about non-preparation of the working plan for
extraction of bamboo. They have extended the felling programme by two years.  They would be earmarking some funds
for preparation of the working plans. It is imperative   to plan for replenishment of bamboo in view of gregarious
flowering expecting in next two-three years. 
 
2.7       He further informed that there was no dearth of bamboo in the North East.  It is a problem of harvesting and
utilising it.  Very important national resources would go waste if ways and means were not found to utilise it.  Secondly,
even if the need were there to lease out the land locally, policy-wise it would not be possible.  Thirdly, whatsoever
practical problems were there for extraction of bamboo, they have delegated full power to regional CCF, Shillong, who
has been authorised to allow diversion of forest land upto 5 hectares.
 
2.8       CMD, HPCL, informed the Committee that they wanted to encourage locally available materials to be used
locally.  They did a study and found that one tonne of bamboo generated 40 person days of employment from plantation
to processing.  Now, for a few Rupees  more, bamboo was being  allowed to be removed indiscriminately out of the
region.  He further wondered  that  if  bamboo was available abundantly how Cachar Paper Mill had to remain closed
for 2-3 months every year.   He pointed out that when HPC was conceived it was conceived as a mega project of 600
tonnes,  For balanced regional development  this  was  split into 300 tonnes capacity each, one at  Naogaon and  other at
Cachar.  They are out-performing the industry today by increasing capacity utilisation by 10-12%.
           
2.9       Coming to the State Government, he said that a lot of agreements, which had been concluded, were being
revised  with impunity.  They were using Supreme Court judgement wherein there was a clause that all the agreements
could  be reviewed and revised.  He emphasised the need for construction of dirt road that reach inaccessible areas as
bamboo was going waste in inaccessible areas.
 
2.10     He further emphasised that total extractable bamboo available in Assam was only 8 lakh tonnes but they needed
8.5 lakh tonnes and there was no excess supply existing.  He, therefore, suggested that there was a need to increase the
forest area and forest regeneration could be a joint venture.  If forests were not there, these mills would have to be shut. 
He brought it to the notice of the Committee that gregarious flowering was an area where no research had taken place. 
Whenever gregarious flowering took place, the seeds came out and rodents multiplied.  The rodents had been eating up
the seeds and the crops.  After gregarious flowering the bamboo would increase dramatically for two years and then for
the next seven years it would be completely zero growth.  Their mills would be closed forever under such circumstances

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
and Barak Valley would be denuded and HPCL would have to go for extensive imported pulp. He thanked the Railways
for making available wagons but stressed the need for more wagons.  About fiscal concession, the excise exemption and
the transport subsidy continuance was a necessity for ensuring sustained competence of HPC, he added.
2.11     Lastly, he informed the Committee that Barak Valley during monsoons is cut off from the rest of the country. 
The only way they could tackle the problem of transport was using the waterway.  River Bhairavi, when it would come
to Kolarib District of Mizoram, the draft come down.  So only when it was raining and the river was in full spate, they
could use it.  Upto a particular point, it would come by raft and then trucks were used.  But trucks could not be used
because approachable roads were not there.  He suggested that cleaning up of waterways would make things easy when
they use river for transportation.
 
2.12     Chairman, Kitply Industries, apprised the Committee that North Eastern states had been reeling under the
onslaught of the current economic slowdown and absence of any investment initiative, sharpened the problem of
unemployment and thereby rendering the impressionable youth vulnerable to the temptation of taking recourse to
insurgency.  The employment potential of the pulp and paper industry and the plywood industry was undoubtedly one of
highest, especially after taking into account the spin off effects in unorganised informal sector which the predominantly
tribal population found something akin to their traditional occupation.  Suddenly,  the Supreme Court order came
banning felling of trees from forests including private plantations in the North Eastern states.  The Supreme Court was
not apprised by the Government about the protection enjoyed by the tribals of North Eastern states under Article 371A,
371B, 371D, 371H of the Constitution of India as well as the fact that not cutting the forest cover did not necessarily
increase the forest cover but actually depleted the cover as per forest systems.  Except in the North East, cutting in
private plantation is permitted in other parts of the country.  In the circumstances, the forest produce based industry’s
woe could be addressed by according permission to cut private plantation in the North East and for this purpose
Ministry of Environment and Forests should start dialogue with the North Eastern states and industrial bodies and
implement the Supreme Court order in such a way that private plantation were not ignored and were permitted to cut
their plantation without disturbing the ecological balance.
 
2.13     It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that as a result of the Supreme Court orders, the wood-based
industries had to close their factories but they had to continue to pay wages to their employees in pursuance of the
Supreme Court order, which had put the industry in a bad financial state.  It was requested that banks should examine
the individual cases on the basis of their past performance and refinance them so that their factories could be made
operational again.
 
2.14     The third point related to the general policy issue and transport subsidy, which was being presently administered
by the D/o Policy and Promotion.  This department envisaged benefits under this scheme to the units in the NE for the
first five years of production.  However, the units in the NE suffered a continuing disadvantage of poor infrastructure,
inaccessibility and as long as these continuing disadvantages existed, the transport subsidy scheme should be extended
irrespective of the number of years of commercial production by the units. 
 
2.15     It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that the excise duty exemption and transport subsidy
envisaged for new industrial unit being set up under the Government of India Industrial Policy for the North East
(announced in December 1997) have not paved the way for significant industrial development in the region.  The
existing industrial units were becoming increasingly uncompetitive on account of the general economic slow down and
adverse inbound and outbound logistics.  It was, therefore, fair and reasonable that the excise duty exemption and
transport subsidy, as envisaged in the newly emerging units, be extended to the existing units, which are teetering on the
brink of bankruptcy and eventual closure.
 
2.16     The Forest Department informed the Committee that they were working within the framework of the rules,
regulations and policies.  The situation in the North East was a little different compared to the rest of the country
because direct cognisance  had been taken by the Supreme Court who had been giving directives from time to time.  The
Forest Department have suggested the State Governments to try to reduce bureaucratic hurdles in at least felling of
plantations in the North East.  They had received schemes from four states.  When schemes from all the eight states
were received, they would try to change the guidelines in consultation with the State Governments so that bureaucratic
hurdles were removed to the maximum extent possible. 
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
2.17     The representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum apprised the Committee that there are four  refineries in the
NE.  All are of sub-economic size.  Combined capacity of all four was 7 million metric tones.  75% of it was sent out. 
Before 1.4.98 when everything was totally controlled, there was a mechanism in oil pool account which used to
compensate for these movements.  Now only 4 products – MS, HSD, kerosene and LPG – are controlled.  Other
products, which were not controlled, have to be paid for by the refineries. 
 
2.18     Another issue was that when these refineries were set-up, one of the considerations was that local crude which
was projected in early 90s to come to the level of around 7 million metric tonnes, had stagnated at around 5.  So one of
the refineries at Bongaigaon was running on imported crude.  Its transportation cost was also being borne by the
refineries.   In addition,  there has not been a balanced industrial growth in the North  East and hence the  petroleum
products do not have any market in the region and it needs to  be  transported from North East to West Bengal, Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh at a very   high  cost.
 
2.19     With APM dismantling from 2002, even the controlled products costs would have to be borne by these
refineries.  So, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas had prepared a draft Cabinet Note suggesting two things: (1)
transport subsidy of the D/o Industry Promotion and Policy should be extended to refineries where it was not so till now
and (2) excise duty exemptions which have been allowed in 1999 for new investments and which have allowed for one
of the refineries which came up after that may be allowed to other units.
 
2.20     CMD, Bongaigaon Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd., Informed the Committee that Bungaigaon refinery was
situated in the extreme western part of Assam.  Its capacity utilisation is 55-60% for want of crude oil.  At the same time
it was a tribal locality where there is no other industry.  The effective date of notification to give excise duty exemption
to the refinery was December 1997.  That needed amendment because their refineries were installed in 1974 and
commissioned in 1979.  Unless it was granted along with transport subsidy, its viability would be difficult.  Last year,
for the first time, the refinery made a loss of Rs.60 crores.  In the current year it would make a loss of 180 crores.
 
2.21     The representatives of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion informed the Committee that the issue
raised by industries of NE are two-fold – (1) excise exemption.  All these units had been set up before the notification
date (December 1997).  It would be very difficult under the existing policy to extend excise benefits for the units, which
were existing on the date of notification because the main objective of the policy was to promote investment in the NE
and not to provide any competitive level.  So if the issues of this industry had to be seriously addressed then it would
call for a modification of the existing policy.  This would have revenue implications and the Department would have to
go the Cabinet.  As for the transport subsidy it was introduced in 1971 and in 1993 the scheme was modified and a cap
was introduced because it was found that continued transport subsidy was not called for.  A gap of 5 years was
stipulated, that beyond 5 years from the date of commercial production no transport subsidy should be payable.  The
refineries, plantations   and power generating units were put under the negative list.
 
2.22     The Department received request from D/o Heavy Industries and a Cabinet Note from D/o Petroleum that the
existing units should be considered for the purpose of excise benefits and transport benefits and they were  examining
both the issues.
 
2.23     Revenue Secretary informed the Committee that basically these refineries were not viable in the long run
because there was not adequate crude there and there was not adequate demand there.  Once it is understood then
subsidies could be seen in a larger context. e.g. for the North East region this was the cost that the country would have
to bear. Subsidies would provide relief for a few years but if the consumption did not go up then it would come back as
some other subsidy.  So, this was a larger problem. 
 
2.24     The Representatives of the Banking Division, Ministry of Finance, informed that their policy had always been to
invest funds effectively, invest in areas where it could get the returns.  In the North East Government were looking for
investment opportunities.  Government’s problem was that such proposals were not coming.  The accounts, which were
with it, were mainly sick accounts.
 
2.25     Government had set up specialised institutions for the North East. But unfortunately, the impact had not been
there.  Government did seem to have a problem about size.  The proposed projects were in small to medium sector and

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
the main problem was because of lack of entrepreneurs. The atmosphere there had been such that entrepreneurs are shy
of coming in.
 
 
Industrial Scenario in the North Eastern Region and Sub-Committee’s Findings,
Observations and Recommendations
 
3.1       The entire North East region is very sensitive and has been witnessing troubled socio-political disturbances since
long.  As a consequence, the economic development has suffered badly, resulting in poor industrial growth.
 
3.2       The main reason for insurgency in the North East was the alienation of the people, which began immediately
after independence. The government has taken some initiatives and a sizable number of insurgents have laid down
arms.  But immediately after, they have starting looking for employment.  Internal security problems cannot be resolved
if such issues cannot be addressed.
 
3.3       Every government that has come to power at the centre has been concerned about the development in the North
East but progress has been rather tardy, if not stagnant, despite announcement of special economic packages.  In 1995,
North East Development Bank with an authorised capital of Rs.500 crores was created but how far it has helped
expansion and modernisation of industrial enterprises is not known.  The region still lacks good roads, water and
electricity, the basic needs for development.  What can help boost growth is collection of unspent balance of the
amounts earmarked for different Union Ministries and spending of the same in the region with the emphasis on the
feasible projects and sustaining the existing industries, which are facing difficulties.  It has two objectives – one is the
survival of the industry and the second is the generation of employment.  The main objective is, however, the reduction
of insurgency.  The existing units should be helped so that they can meet the social obligation, develop the area,
generate employment.  Everything should not be seen from the revenue point of view.  Unless existing industries
survive, no investment from outside North East is likely to come as is evident from the fact that after 1997 no new
projects have come to the region.  The fiscal concessions along with peace initiative will change the economic climate
of North East and bring it in the mainstream of country and it will not be viewed as a distant territory.
3.4       The Government of India had granted certain incentives to some specified industries located in the North East. 
Their incentives were mainly in the form of excise duty relief and capital investment subsidy.  The incentives are
applicable only for those who started production after 24
th December 1997.  The transport subsidy scheme 1971 was
also included in the above policy.  This step is in fact to encourage the industrial growth in the North East region.  The
underlying idea behind extending these incentives was to provide the much needed impetus to the North Eastern states
so that the region could overcome its backwardness and the difficulties faced by it on account of geographical isolation
and provide them a level playing field.  The ultimate goal was to facilitate setting up of new industries and sustain those,
which exist thus paving the way for all round economic development of the region.  However, due to the incorporation
of the cut-off date of 24
th December 1997, a large section of the industries in the area prior to this date were left
uncovered by those well-intended notifications.
 
3.5       The industrial activity in the North Eastern states can be attributed to four industries- (a)  forest-base   industries
like pulpwood using paper industries and wood-using plywood and veneer industry (b)  tea plantation (c) refineries (d) 
ancillary and allied  activities based on requirement for   the aforesaid three  industries.
 
Findings of  the Sub-Committee relating to  Pulp  Wood  Paper  Industry
 
4.1       HPC's two mills located in the north eastern sector, having all potentialities to operate at the  rated  capacity,
have been carrying huge liability payable to Government of India, which had accrued during initial  periods of 
operations, when the production did not stablise.  Although  the  production could  be stablised from 1994-95, after
implementation of  de-bottlenecking scheme , the production did not stabilise.  Although the production could be
stabilised from 1994-95, after implementation of de-bottlenecking schemes, the production could not be maximised due
to depressed market conditions.  Now, although the paper market has shown some signs of improvement, it is felt that
because of the cyclical nature of Indian paper industry, the boom period may not last for a long time.  Moreover, the
Indian paper markets, including newsprint market, are closely linked with international paper market scenario, which is

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
very volatile.
 
             HPC solicits the following reliefs:
 
Restoration of transport subsidy and waiving  of excise duty for Cachar Paper Mills.
Allotment of degraded forest land for raising the captive plantation in Assam.
Timely  allotment of wagons and expeditious conversion of meter gauge railway line to broad gauge in Lumding-
Silchar sector to avoid transhipment.
 
Continuing of Transport Subsidy and Waiving  of Excise Duty
to Cachar Paper Mills
 
4.2       Cachar Paper Mill (CPM) located in the southern part of Assam, experiences more locational disadvantages than
Nagaon Paper Mill and the freight charges incurred by the mill, both for transporting inputs and products, are very high
as compared to other mills.  The paper produced by Cachar Paper Mill is mostly sold in the Northern region.  Due to
higher element of freight, the mill fails to procure institutional orders from Northern region in competition with other
paper manufacturers.
 
4.3       The transport subsidy was introduced by the Government of India to lessen the burden of heavy transportation
cost incurred by the industries located in the North-Eastern sector for movement of raw materials and finished products
from certain selected rail heads.  So far as the locational disadvantages for Cachar Paper Mills are concerned, there is no
improvement in the situation from what prevailed at the time of commissioning of the mill.  Moreover, the freight
charges are increasing day by day, causing more financial outgo from the mill.  The rail head at CPM being a meter
gauge, all the incoming materials and outgoing finished products are transhipped at Lumding which results in avoidable
delay and wastage due to transhipment.  The problem becomes worst during rainy season  additionally due to landslides.
 
4.4       Under the new industrial policy for the North Eastern region, finalised by the Government in December 1997,
the units located in the North Eastern sector are eligible for transport subsidy only for the first five years of commercial
production till 31.3.2007.  in addition, all the units in these zones would be free from income tax, excise, for a  period of
10 years from the commencement of production.
 
4.5       The rationale for transport subsidy is to mitigate the high cost of transportation of raw material and finished
product due to location of the units in remote, hilly inaccessible areas of the country, where the infrastructure is poor.
 
4.6       The transportation cost at NPM and CPM for raw materials and finished products from and to the main lands is
extremely high and hence needs to be mitigated through extension of the subsidy.  The grant of transport subsidy should
be viewed in a different light.  While the units through improved performance may become economically viable even
after tax holiday, the transportation cost does not get mitigated unless the requisite infrastructure is developed.
 
4.7       The southern part of Assam, where the CPM is situated, is highly monsoon prone area and the roads are
inundated with flood waters every year and land slides occur causing disruption of roads movement for about 2-3
months in a year.  Thus, CPM deserves some fiscal concessions from the Government to become a viable unit.
 
4.8       In view of the above, HPC appealed to the Government of India to include the existing establishments which are
continuously being affected adversely due to their locational disadvantages, like the CPM, under the new industrial
policy and grant exemption of excise duty payment for a period of 10 years and to revive the transport subsidy scheme
effective from April 1995 as a special case for CPM.
 
Allotment of Degraded Forest Land for the Development Of Captive Plantation
 
4.9       In order to become self-sufficient in meeting with requirement of bamboo for the two mills of HPC and to
reverse the deficiency of forest resources in general, the need for taking up the captive plantation by HPC should be
recognized and clearance be given.  This also has a beneficial effect to social upliftment due to the manpower required
for this activity.  Since early 1990, HPC has been appealing to the Government of Assam, Ministry of Environment and

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
Forests for allotment of degraded forest land which needs special consideration to allot sufficient land immediately.
 
Timely allotment of wagons for CPM and expeditious conversion
of meter gauge to broad gauge to avoid transhipment
 
4.10     Cachar Paper Mill is having meter gauge facility and facing tremendous difficulties in getting timely wagon
allotment both for getting inputs and sending out the product.  The rail head at the mill being on meter gauge, all the
inputs and products are transhipped at Lumding, which results in delay and wastage due to transhipment.  It has been
experienced by CPM that after placing the indent for a rail rake, it takes sometimes 3-4 weeks for the allotment of the
rake.  Moreover, the meter gauge rakes are sometimes found to be in a very bad condition.   Due to delay/non-
availability of rakes, CPM has to often depend on despatch of finished products to various destinations by road
transport, resulting in additional expenditure.  In order to have smooth supply of inputs to the mill and despatch of
paper, the following may be consider by the railways:
 
At present, the paper industry is under category “D” and therefore, allotment of rakes gets last priority and takes more
time.  It is thus, proposed that the industries located in the North Eastern region should be given traffic preference on
priority basis, considering socio-economic development of this region, which depends heavily on the major industry
like, Cachar Paper Mills.
In the case of Bamboo, which is the main raw material for manufacturing of paper, priority for allotment of rakes may
also be given considering the extra expenditure involved in road transport.
As regards despatch of finished products from CPM, priority for allotment of rakes should be given considering the
huge expenditure involved in the case of transportation by road.  Further, the wagons have to be maintained in good
condition to avoid damage to paper marketed.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
4.11     The Government Policy has been that they have given a one time incentive and some limited time incentive for
development of remote areas.  One time incentive has been in the shape of capital subsidy and the limited time incentive
in the shape of transport subsidy or excise duty exemption or sales tax concession.  For areas like the North East, there
is a continuing disadvantage and if there is a one-time incentive or a limited time incentive it has not taken care of the
continuing disadvantage.  There is always a need for transporting the finished goods because they cannot be consumed
locally.  There are some raw materials, which are to be brought in. if the industries are to survive in the North East
region, then these incentives must be on a continuous basis.  It has generally been seen that a large volume of
investments in remote and under-developed areas did not become fruitful  because of continuous disadvantage of that
area and  could not be underwritten and as a consequence they perished. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends  continuance of  transport subsidy and excise duty exemption to the HPC units located in the North East
region till the relative infrastructural  disadvantages are completely over come as are applicable to new industrial units
under new North East Policy of 24.12.1997.
 
4.12     As regards allotment for degraded forest land for raising captive plantation in Assam, the committee notes from
the oral evidence tendered by the Secretaries, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises  and M/o
Environment and Forests,  that they would see working plans for extraction of bamboo in the North East are approved
expeditiously and permission for construction of dirt road would be granted to facilitate extraction of bamboo from
unexplored areas.
 
4.13     The Committee also notes that the agreement with private firms regarding extraction of bamboo on a long term
basis from the forest areas reserved for the HPC would be reviewed to see whether there are any violations of Forest
Conservation Act.
 
4.14     The Committee was informed that due to local compulsion forest areas could not be leased out for captive
plantation.  The Committee recommends that if land is not made available by the State Government for afforestation,
then the HPC should enter into an agreement with state forest departments to mobilise such plantations with necessary
financial support with the condition that the first charge on the crop at the time of harvesting would be of  HPC.
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
4.15     As regards availability of wagons etc., the sub-committee recalls that the matter was discussed by the Convenor,
on 21.8.2001 with the Railways.  The committee observes that the response of the Railways was prompt.  The
committee notes that there has been substantial improvement in the availability of wagons and the problem of
transhipment at Lumding is also being addressed to.  The committee appreciates the cooperation extended by the
Railways and expects such coordination between and among Union Ministries/Departments would take the country a
long way.  The Committee recommends that Department of Heavy Industries should take up with the Railways the
matter relating to additional requirement of wagons for HPC so as to enable them to operate efficiently in an otherwise
difficult terrain.
 
4.16     The committee felt that there is a need to address the issue of gregarious flowering which could lead to excessive
rodent population and further aggravate the situation.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that Ministry of
Environment and Forests should address the problem of gregarious flowering, remedial afforestation  and construction
of dirt roads for exploration of bamboo in the inaccessible forest areas.
 
4.17     The Committee also recommends that HPCL should be facilitated in exploring the utilisation of inland
waterways in transportation of its products and raw materials from interiors.
Sub-Committee’s findings relating to Wood-using plywood
and veneer industry:
 
5.1       In Assam about 50,000 people are directly employed in the wood industry and also an equal number of people
are engaged indirectly.  In all 2,50,000 people are engaged in wood industry in the North East region.  The Supreme
Court order pronounced on 31.12.1996 banned felling of trees from forests including private plantations in the North
East states.  The Supreme Court was not informed about the protection enjoyed by the tribals of the North East states
under the Constitution of India.
 
5.2       The absence of gainful employment opportunities has aggravated the disenchantment particularly among the
youth who are lured by the terrorists and anti-national outfits.  The state governments have also lost immensely on
account of non-utilisation of exploitable and renewable resources.  The tribals who used to earn their livelihood by
carrying out forest based economic activities, have been rendered unemployed.
 
5.3       The excise duty exemption and transport subsidy envisaged for new industrial unit being set up under the
Government of India Industrial Policy for the North East (announced in December 1997) have not paved the way for
significant industrial development in the region.  The existing industrial units are becoming increasingly uncompetitive
on account of the general economic slow down and adverse inbound and outbound logistics.  Wood-based industry has,
therefore, requested that the excise duty exemption and transport subsidy, as envisaged in the newly emerging units, be
extended to the existing units, which are teetering on the brink of bankruptcy and eventual closure.
 
5.4       Although wood-based industries had to stop operations in view of the Supreme Court order, the management had
to pay the wages to the employees as per Supreme Court directives.  As a result, the financial health of the plywood
companies has become very poor.  They are in need of restructuring for survival.
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
5.5       As regards felling of trees in private plantations, the Committee recommends that M/o Environment and Forests
should interact with the state governments and the industry to reduce the bureaucratic hurdle in felling  plantation in the
North Eastern region and ensure the constitutional rights of the tribals of that region.  With regard to the transport
subsidy and excise duty exemption, the Committee recommends that these fiscal facilities should be extended to these
industries as non-extension of these benefits will make them uncompetitive and may lead to closure of these units and
result in loss of employment, direct and indirect, aggravating the insurgency problem.
 
5.6       Moreover, the Committee felt that in view of the disadvantages due to several factors, a proper incentive-based
financing package was needed to ensure the survival of existing units, which is very vital for ensuring economic
development in the region and also for attracting future investments necessary for rapid economic development. The
Committee recommends that the Banking Division, Ministry of Finance, should formulate an incentive-based financial

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
package both for term lending as well as working capital, at the same time ensuring adequate collateral to at least those
units which had excellent target record.
 
Findings Relating to Refineries
 
6.1       The major industrial activities in the North East region revolve around the growth and development of four
refineries and petrochemicals plants, which are well established in the region and already have plans to invest about
Rs.3300 crores in the next few years.
 
6.2       The operation of these refineries under the present scenario is unsustainable and as such the companies have no
option and would be compelled to close down the operations in the region.
 
6.3       However, closure of these refineries will result in the retrenchment/redeployment of about 8000 employees in
these refineries apart from a huge unemployment in the ancillary units.  This is bound to give rise to a large-scale
resentment and may become a sensitive issue.  Further, in the absence of these refineries, the crude oil being produced
in the region will have to be moved out of the region and to meet the local demand of the region petroleum products will
have to be brought into the region, resulting in duplication and prohibitive increase of expenditure, apart from the risk of
supply security due to frequent natural calamities and other socio-political disturbances.
 
6.4       Hence it is essential to assist these refineries by way of extending fiscal benefits in the form of transport subsidy
excise duty benefits etc. to make the operations of these refineries viable and to ensure perceptible industrial growth in
the region.
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 
6.5       The sub-committee observed that there were many refineries established in the NE which did not fall in the
ambit of the existing transport subsidy scheme of the government.  It is the opinion of the sub-committee that the
problems faced by the refineries are not different and hence the transport subsidy scheme should be suitably modified to
cover the refineries located in the NE region particularly due to the huge transportation cost for moving out products
from the region.  This apart, the administered price regime for petroleum products shall cease to be in affect from 1st
April 2002.  The premise on which some of the refineries with sub-optimal capacity were set up in the NE was the
existence of administered price regime.  Hence the cessation of administrated price regime will lead to making these
units unviable and hence leading to their closure.  The Committee, therefore, recommends extension of the excise duty
exemption, transport subsidy scheme and other incentive effective in the NE mutatis mutandis to these refineries. 
 
Creation of Department of  Development of North Eastern Region
 
7.1       With the creation of Department of Development of North East Region, the aspiration of the people of the region
has been raised.  The committee appreciates the fact that at long last this region has received the much needed attention
and it has already got on with the job immediately after its formation and addressed some of the vexed problems which
have not been properly handled earlier. Since local industries and local people are to play a great role in the
development of the region, the Committee recommends that Government should institutionalise an information sharing
and experience exchanging deliberations forum under the aegis of the Department of Development of the North East
Region involving representatives of industrial units and the affected local communities to restore the receding
meaningful economic activity in the region by issuing necessary policy guidelines to all concerned for eliminating the
irritants for fostering entrepreneurial and economic activities.
 
7.2       The Committee hopes that the Central Government will grant economic concessions to the industries in the
North East region without any discrimination, which will help the existing units to survive and bring investment in the
area.  Improvement in the industrial climate and peace initiative taken by the Central Government should go hand in
hand.  This will give industries in the region a level playing field to come at par with the rest of the country.
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends continuance of  transport subsidy and excise duty exemption to the
HPC units located in the North East region till the relative infrastructural  disadvantage and completely over come as are
applicable to new industrial units under new North East Policy of 24.12.1997.
 ( 1 )
 
The Committee was informed that due to local compulsion forest areas could not be leased out for captive plantation. 
The committee recommends that if land is not made available by the State Government for afforestation, then the HPC
should enter into an agreement with state forest departments to mobilise such plantations with necessary financial
support with the condition that the first charge on the crop at the time of harvesting would be HPC.
( 2 )
 
The Committee recommends that Department of Heavy Industries should take up with the Railways the matter relating
to additional requirement of wagons for HPC so as to enable them to operate efficiently in an otherwise difficult terrain.
 
( 3 )
 
The Committee, therefore,  recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests should address the problem of
gregarious flowering, remedial afforstation  and construction of dirt roads for exploration of bamboo in the inaccessible
forest areas.
( 4 )
 
The Committee also recommends that HPCL should be facilitated in exploring the utilisation of inland waterways in
transportation of its products and raw materials from interiors.
( 5 )
 
            As regards felling of trees in private plantations, the Committee recommends that M/o Environment and Forests
should interact with the state governments and the industry to reduce the bureaucratic hurdle in felling  plantation in the
North Eastern region and ensure the constitutional rights of the tribals of that region.  With regard to the transport
subsidy and excise duty exemption, the Committee recommends that these fiscal facilities should be extended to these
industries as non-extension of these benefits will make them uncompetitive and may lead to closure of these units and
result in loss of employment, direct and indirect, aggravating the insurgency problem.
( 6 )
 
            The Committee recommends that the Banking Division, Ministry of Finance, should formulate an incentive-
based financial package both for term lending as well as working capital, at the same time ensuring adequate collateral
to at least those units which had excellent target record.
( 7 )
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends extension of the excise duty exemption, transport subsidy scheme and other
incentive effective in the NE mutatis mutandis to these refineries. 
( 8 )
 
The Committee recommends that Government should institutionalise an information sharing and experience exchanging
deliberations forum under the aegis of the Department of Development of the North East Region involving
representatives of industrial units and the affected local communities to restore the receding meaningful economic
activity in the region by issuing necessary policy guidelines to all concerned for eliminating the irritants for fostering
entrepreneurial and economic activities.
( 9)
MINUTES
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
 
The Sub-Committee–III for Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry)  met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th August, 2001 in Room No.67, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT MEMBER
 
1.         Dr. B.B. Ramaiah    -    Convenor
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri S. Sivasubramanian
3.         Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 
LOK SABHA
 
4.         Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
5.         Shri Manjay Lal
6.         Shri Deepak Kumar
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Dy. Secretary
      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
WITNESSES
 
Hindustan Paper Corporation
 
Shri Raji Philip, CMD
 
Kitply Industries Ltd.  (Kolkata)
 
Shri S.P. Goel, Chairman
 
DHI, Ministry Of Heavy Industries And Public Enterprises
 
Shri A.B. Joshi, Director
 
2.         At the outset, the Convenor welcomed Members of the Sub-Committee and apprised them about the issue to be
taken up in the meeting regarding problems of wood-based industries/HPCL and its subsidiaries situated in North
Eastern Region.
 
3.         The Convenor requested the CMD, HPCL, Shri Raji Philip to make a presentation before the Sub-Committee on
the subject under reference. Shri Raji Philip, CMD, HPCL, informed the Sub-Committee that the raw material rich
North-Eastern Region which had not been fully  tapped by the private corporate business houses was a testimony to the
realisation that the North-East was bedeviled with problems arising out of infrastructure inadequacies, insurgency-
related problems and various other adverse factors.  Two mills were set up in North Eastern Region, one at Nagaon and
other mill was set up at Panchgram, which fell under Hailakandi district of Assam.  He further stated that both these
mills got identified with two hill districts; the Nagaon Paper Mill and the Cachar Paper Mill. In the beginning when mill
was  started, there was meter gauge all around. Today, the  Cachar Paper Mill was suffering because, up to Guwahati,

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
though the meter gauge had been converted into broad gauge, but from Lumding onwards, it was meter gauge. Because
of this inadequate infrastructure, the company was forced to do transshipment at an infrastructurally inadequate station
called Lumding.
 
4.         The Convenor then requested  Shri A.B. Joshi, Director, DHI, to present his view point  in this regard. Shri Joshi
stated that the distance between Cachar and Lumding is 220 kilometers
wherein the project had been going on for the last one decade. Lumding was, infact, was an infrastructurally inadequate
station to handle the transshipment.  He further said that a large  areas of unexplored forest lands were remaining
untouched because of inadequate railway support  and  secondly,  there was a ban on repairs of the feeder roads also.
This inadequate infrastructural facility has blocked materials inside the forests. He further informed the Sub-Committee
that the Supreme Court banned felling of trees by their orders dated 12
th December, 1996 which had  exempted the
wood-based copanies from extracting the raw materials from the North-Eastern Region. Shri S.P. Goenka addressed the
problems of transport subsidy and excise duty, loan on felling trees in private plantations and problems of working
capital in the plywood industries. Convenor decided to have an inter-actions session with the concerned Secretaries of
the various ministries. The Convenor, thereafter, thanked the members for making suggestions.
 
5.                     *                                  *                                  *  
 
6.         The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________________*** Relates to other
matters.
XI
 
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
 
The Sub-Committee–III for Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry)  met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27
th September,  2001 in Committee  Room `A',  Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT MEMBER
 
1.         Dr. B.B. Ramaiah   -  Convenor
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri S. Sivasubramanian
3.         Shri P.K. Maheshwari
 
LOK SABHA
 
4.         Shri Ram Sajiwan
5.         Shri Sunil Khan
6.         Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe
7.         Shri Uttamrao Deorao Patil
8.         Shri Deepak Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri  Tapas Das Gupta, Director
      Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
SPECIAL INVITEE
 

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
Shri Arun Shourie, Minister,  the Department of Disinvestment and Development of North-Eastern Region
 
 
WITNESSES
 
I.          Ministry of  Heavy Industries  & Public Enterprises
 
Shri Ravindra Gupta, Secretary
Shri Pradeep Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri A.B. Joshi, Director
 
II.         Department  of the  Development of North-Eastern Region
 
         Shri  Pradeep Baijal, Secretary
 
III.       Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
 
Shri R.K. Thoopal, Member ,(Traffic) &
Ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India,
Shri S.S. Bhandari , Addl. Member, (Traffic)
Shri  Shri Prakash,  Executive Director, TT(F)
Shri P.K. Sanghi, Executive Director ,(Works)
Shri R.S. Khanna, Deputy Director Finance (BC)
           
IV.       Ministry of Finance (Banking Division)
 
Shri S.K. Purkayastha, Addl. Secretary
Shri P.M. Sirajuddin, Director
Shri M.V. Muthu,  Executive  Director, IFCI
Shri R.K. Chavli, General Manager, IFCI
 
V.        Ministry of Finance (Revenue)
 
            Shri S. Narayan, Secretary
 
VI.       Ministry of COMMERCE, (IPP)
 
            Shri S. Jagdishan,  Joint Secretary
 
VII.      Ministry of Environment and Forest
 
Shri S.C. Sharma, Addl. Director General
Shri S. K. Pandey, Director General & Special Secretary
Shri A.R. Chadda, DIG (Forest)
 
VIII.     Ministry of Home Affairs
 
Dr. P.D. Shenoy, Special Secretary
2.   Shri D.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
 
 
IX.       Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
 
             Shri Ajay Tyagi , Director

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
 
1.   Shri Raji Philip, CMD, (HPC)
Shri K.S. Subramanian, Manager (HPC)
 
XI.       Kitply Industries
 
 Shri S.P. Goenka, Chairman
 
XII.      Numaligarh Refinery Ltd.
 
Shri R.K. Dutta, Managing  Director
Shri L.S. Kumar, Advisor (Marketing)
Shri S.K. Barua, SM (C&F)
           
XIII.     Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
 
 Shri S. Basu, Executive Director
 Shri A.N. Das, Executive Director
 Shri M.C. Sachdeva, Executive Director
 Shri N.K. Nayyar, General Manager
 Shri S. Muttoo, DGM
 Shri A.K. Singh, CTMS
 
XIV.    Bongaigaon Refinery Ltd. 
 
1.      Shri B.K. Gogoi, CMD
2.      Shri R.N. Das, Director (Finance)
3.      Shri N. Saikia, CM(A&C)
           
2.         The Sub Committee held discussions with the above mentioned witnesses in connection with the problems of
Industrial Units in Nor-Eastern Region.  At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Hon'ble Minister, Shri Arun Shourie
and Members present in the meeting. Thereafter, he informed the Sub-Committee that most of the Industrial Units in
North-Eastern Region  are facing a lot of problems which has resulted in closing many of these units.
 
3.         The Convenor, than invited the special invitee, Shri Arun Shorie, Hon'ble Minister, Department of North-Eastern
Region, to share his views with the Sub-Committee in the  matter.  The Hon'ble Minister informed the Sub-Committee
that it was not the problem of funds/financial assistance for these papers wood-based industries and refineries. He
further stated that  enormous amount of money has been released for the development/promotion of these Industries but
all had gone in vain. He informed that presently there are 38 PSUs in North Eastern Region and all are under losses. He
finally stated that solution of these industries lies in completion of various Projects/Schemes  already under operation
within the stipulated time.
 
4.         The Convenor, thereafter, stated that regarding transshipment of products in North-Eastern Region, Railways are
doing well which is appreciable. He further stated that these industries should come forward with viable projects to get
the bank loans for their working capital requirements.
 
5.         The Committee heard Secretaries, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Railways, Ministry of
Finance (Revenue  and  Banking Divisions) Department of  Development of North Eastern Region,  Representatives of
MOEF, PZNG, Home Affairs, and also representatives of  HPCL, Numeligarch Refinary Ltd., IOC, BRL and Kitply
Industry on the subject.
 
5.         The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 1.20 P.M.

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
XIV
 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING
 
 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry  met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 3rd
December,  2001 in Committee  Room `A',  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT MEMBER
 
1.         Shri Ramdas Agarwal,  - Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
 
2.         Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
3.         Shri P.K. Maheshwari
4.         Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
5.         Shri Bangaru Laxman
 
LOK SABHA
 
 6.        Shri  Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
 7.        Shri Nepal Chandra Das
 8.           Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
 9.        Shri Manjay Lal
       Shri  G. Mallikarjunappa
Shri Nagmani
Shri Anant Nayak
Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
Shri Ram Sajivan
Shri Chunnilal Thakur
Smt. Renu Kumari
 
  SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu
Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman  welcomed  the Members of the Committee and apprised the Committee about the
business of the day.  The Committee, thereafter  took up the following  draft reports for consideration  :-
 
Draft 58
th Report  on the "Problems faced by the Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd in the North Eastern Region";
Draft 59th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its  47th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2001-02) pertaining to Department of Heavy Industries, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises, and
 
Draft 60
th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in its 44th Report on the
“Performance Review of the BYNL Group of Companies”.
 
After some discussions, the Reports were adopted with some changes.
 
3.         The Committee decided that the reports may be presented to both the Houses on the 7 December, 2001 and that

58th Report
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/58threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:13:29]
Prof. M.M. Aggrawal  and in his absence, Shri P.K. Maheshwari and Dr. B.B. Ramaiah and his absence, Smt. Renu
Kumari may present the 58th and 59th Reports to Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha  respectively.
 
4.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 5.30 P.M.
 