 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
311 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 306th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2021-22)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Pausha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN ON  247TH  REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF  INTEREST SUBSIDY 
ELEGIBILITY CERTIFICATE (ISEC) SCHEME  
 
PERTAINING TO 
THREE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 306th Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2021-22)  
pertaining to 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................... (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION..................................................................................... (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS........................................................................................ (iii)-(v) 
4. REPORT.................................................................................................... 1- 40 
   
 Chapter I      
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by  
the Ministry................................................ 
 
     2 -  12 
 Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue further in view of the Ministry’s 
replies............................................................................... 
 
  13 - 25 
 Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry 
………………................................................................... 
 
 26 – 33 
 Chapter IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited………………………………………………...  
 
 34 - 40 
5. MINUTES ........................................................................................... 
 
41-43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2021) 
 
     1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao    - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri Hardwar Dubey    
 3. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shrimati Ranee Narah  
 6. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 8. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 9.  Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 10.  *Vacant 
  LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinghji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shri Hemant Godse  
 15.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 16.   Shri Ravi Kishan 
 17.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 18.   Shri Ravinder Kushawaha 
 19.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 20.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 21.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
 22.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 23.   Shri Chirag Kumar Paswan 
 24.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 25.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 26.   Ms. Jothimani S.  
 27.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
 28.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 29.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 30.   Shri ThirunavukkarasarS.U. 
 31.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
5.  Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
6.   Shri Anil Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
*Vacancy caused due to resignation of  Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar from DRPSC on Industry w.e.f. 
08.11.2021, notified on 12th November, 2021. 

 
(i) 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Co mmittee, hereby present this 311th Report on 
the Action Taken by the Ministry of Heavy Industries  on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee on Industry contained in the 
Committee’s 306th Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22).  
 
2. The 306th Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Industry was presented to the R ajya Sabha on 17 th March, 2021 and laid on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2021. 
 
3. The Ministry of Heavy Industries  furnished the Action Taken Note s on the 
recommendations contained in the Committee’s 306th Report of the Committee on 
Industry on 17th November, 2021. 
  
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 21st December, 2021 considered and 
adopted the Report. 
 
  
 
 
New Delhi 
21 December, 2021 
Agrahayana 30, 1943 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
  

 
ACRONYMS 
 
2W - Two Wheeler 
ACC  Advance Chemistry Cell  
ACMA - Automotive Component Manufacturers Association of India 
AE - Actual Expenditure 
AEB - Auto Emergency Braking  
AEC - Atomic Energy Commission  
AIS - Automotive Industry Standards  
APS - Advance Passive Safety  
ARAI - Automotive Research Association of India 
ATN - Action Taken Note 
ATR  Action  Taken Report 
AUSC - Advanced Ultra Super Critical 
AYCL - Andrew Yule and Company Ltd. 
B2B - Business to Business 
BE - Budget Estimate 
BHEL - Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd 
BHEL-EML - BHEL-Electrical Machines Ltd 
BPCL - Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd 
BS - Bharat Stage 
CAFE - Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency 
CAG - Controller and Auditor General 
CAROTAR - Customs(Administration of Rules of Origin Under Trade 
Agreements)Rules 
CCEA - Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CEFC - Common Engineering Facilities Centre 
CG - Capital Goods 
CGS - Capital Goods Sector 
CIRP - Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process  
CMTI - Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
CMVR - Central Motor Vehicle Rules 
CO - Carbon Monoxide 
COC - Cost Optimization Cell  
(CoEs) - Centres of Excellence  
CO2 - Carbon Dioxide 
COVID-19 - Corona Virus Disease 
CPPRI - Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute 
CPSE - Central Public Sector Enterprise 
DPE - Department of Public Enterprises 
DCAAI - Development Council for Automotive and Allied Industries. 
 DAE - Department of Atomic Energy  
DFG - Demands for Grants 
DHI - Department of  Heavy Industry 
DIPAM  Department of Investment and Public Asset Management  
(iii) 
 
 

 
DoNER - Department of  Development of North Eastern Region 
DRDO - Defence Research and Development Organisation 
DST - Department of Science & Technology 
EGR - Exhaust Gas Recirculation 
EFC - Expenditure Finance Committee  
EV - Electronic Vehicles 
FAME- India - Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid&)Electric 
Vehicles in India 
FY - Financial Year 
GARC - Global Automotive Research Centre 
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
GoK  Government of Kerala  
GoI - Government of India 
GST - Goods and Services Tax 
GWh - Gigawatt  hours 
HEC - Heavy Engineering Corporation 
HMT - Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. 
HNL  Hindustan Newsprints Ltd 
HPCL - Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited/Hooghly Printing 
Co. Ltd. 
HPC - Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd 
HSL - Hindustan Salts Ltd. 
IBC - Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
I&C  installation and commissioning  
ICAT - International Centre for Automotive Technology 
IGCAR - Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 
IISC - Indian Institute of Science 
IIT - Indian Institute of Technology 
  IRP  Interim Resolution Professional  
  KINFRA  Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation  
KITE - Knowledge Integration for Technology Enrichment 
KWh - KiloWatt Hour 
LESA - Linear Electrohydraulic  Servo Actuators 
LMV - Light Motor Vehicle 
MHI - Ministry of Heavy Industries 
MII-BDG  Make in India Business Development Group 
MIL  Malfunction Indicator Lamp 
MoF - Minist y of  Finance 
MoRTH - Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
MSME - Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
NATRAX - National Automotive Test Tracks 
NATRiP - National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project 
NCLT - National Company Law Tribunal  
(iv) 
  

 
 
   
NIT - National Institute of Technology 
NMHC  Non-methane hydrocarbons 
NOx   Nitrogen Oxide 
NPPC - Nagal and Pulp and Paper Company Ltd. 
NTPC - National Thermal Power Corporation 
OBD - On-Board Diagnostics 
OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer 
PDC - Project Development Cell 
PEMS - Portable Emissions Measurement System 
PLI - Production Linked Incentive 
PPP - Public Procurement Policy 
PSU - Public Sector Undertaking 
QCO - Quality Control Orders 
RVSF -      Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility  
R&D - Research &Development 
RCE - Revised Cost Estimate 
RDE - Real Driving Emissions 
RE - Revised Estimate 
RMDP  Revival and Mill Development Plan  
SBD  Solar Business Division 
SIAM - Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers 
SIL - Scooter India Ltd. 
SSL - Sambhar Salts Ltd. 
UNIDO - United Nations Industrial Development Organisation 
VRS - Voluntary Retirement Scheme  
VSS - Voluntary Separation Scheme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 1 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries on the recommendations contained in the Committee‟s 
Three Hundred and Sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) pertaining to 
Ministry of Heavy Industries. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries in 
respect of the recommendations /contained in the 306th Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I    The recommendations/observations, wh ich have been accepted by the                     
Ministry. 
   
Para: 29, 38, 57, 58, 61, 66, 75, 85, 94, 97, 99 and 102 (Total 12) 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire 
to  pursue further in view of the Ministry‟s replies. 
   
Para: 9, 10, 21, 22, 24, 30, 42, 45, 49, 53, 60, 63, 70, 83, 86, 88, 92 and 101  
(Total 18) 
  
 
Chapter-III-    The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has  
  not accepted  the replies of  the Ministry. 
 
Para: 8, 12, 23, 28, 40, 84 and 96 (Total 7) 
 
Chapter-IV-  The  recommendations/observations  in respect  of   which   the   final 
replies of the Ministry are still awaited.  
  
Para: 36, 37, 39, 41 and 90 (Total 5) 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are 
given in the succeeding pages.  
 
 

 2 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee was informed that the Delhi -Chandigarh E -vehicle friendly 
expressway has been completed and declared as the first e -vehicle friendly expressway of 
the Country. The work was under progress in another two expressways/highways viz., 
Delhi - Jaipur and Mumbai - Pune. DHI further informed that 22 charging stations have 
been installed on the Delhi - Jaipur Expressway and work is going on for installation of 
another 10 charging stations. Similarly, 11 charging stations have been installed on the 
Mumbai - Pune expressways and work is in progress for installing another 6 charging 
stations. The Department assured that the installation work on these charging stations 
would be completed within a few months after the lifting of lock -down. As the lock -down 
has now been lifted across the country, the Committee desires that the installation of the 
remaining Charging Stations on the Delhi - Jaipur and Mumbai -Pune 
Highways/expressways may be completed expeditiously and the Committee be apprised 
of the completion.  
(Para 29) 
 Action Taken Replies 
 As on 30th September, 2021, 29 charging stations have been installed on the Delhi 
- Jaipur-Agra Expressway/Highways and work is going on for installation of another 3 
charging stations. Similarly, 15 charging stations have  been installed on the Mumbai - 
Pune expressways and work is in progress for installing another 2 charging stations.  The 
work for installing charging stations on the sanctioned expressways/ highways is in 
progress. The installation work of sanctioned charg ing stations would be completed 
expeditiously as normalcy gets restored. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.            The future of the automobile Industry is going to be influenced by the next 
generation autonomous driving technology. The next generation aut onomous driving 
technology is currently in the development and testing phase in the developed nations. It 
would rather enhance road safety and reduce road accidents, pollutions and carbon 
emissions, fuel consumption, road congestion, make transportation ac cessible to all 
including disabled. The Committee has been informed that the autonomous vehicles are 
in different levels, with level 0 being the manual cars of today and level 5 the fully 

 3 
autonomous, self -driven vehicles. The Committee is aware of a few de merits of 
autonomous vehicles in Indian environment owing to the heavy traffic and poor road 
conditions, more so as it will affect the employment of Drivers. In India, some 
manufacturers are now introducing level 1 autonomous vehicle. OEMs are working on 
R&D and would be launching different levels of vehicles with autonomous functionality 
in the near future. The Indian automobile industry has a stake on the global Auto Sector 
and hence any lag may leave us behind in the race. To keep pace with the latest 
technology, the Committee expects that necessary initiative in this regard is taken to 
promote autonomous driving technology to compete with the international market trends. 
    
 (Para 38) 
Action Taken Replies 
Autonomous vehicles will be encouraged. 
In order  to ensure that Indian manufacturers keep pace with the Global auto 
manufacturers, the Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) Committee has already initiated 
the formulation work for the following aspects of autonomous driving technology viz., 
Auto Emergency Braking (AEB) for Commercial vehicles application, and Lane 
departure system. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee accordingly opines that the Ministry may scale up the technology 
and infrastructure of the Scheme. For the said purpose, it may do gr ound level 
assessment of the requirements when scaling-up needs. The Committee notes that the M/o 
Finance have provided BE of Rs.97.59 crore for the Scheme, which was the projected 
demand made by the Ministry. However, for scaling up, more funds would be r equired 
and the same may be placed before the M/o Finance at the RE 2020-21 stage. 
(Para 57) 
Action Taken Replies 
The scheme enhancement of competitiveness in the Indian Capital Goods Sector 
phase-II is being framed by this Ministry and after the in princi ple approval of the 
scheme, EFC note has been prepared and approved by Hon‟ble Minister (HI&PE). The 
draft EFC note is under circulation for seeking comments on Ministry of Finance, NITI 
Aayog and other concerned Ministries/Departments.  Once the scheme is approved by the 
Competent Authority the requirement for the additional funds would be placed before the 
Ministry of Finance as per the requirement.  
 
 

 4 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee notes that the Phase -II proposal of the Scheme Enhancing the  
Global Competitiveness of Capital Goods Sector for development of advanced 
manufacturing technologies is pending with the Ministry of Finance for approval. The 
Committee recommends that DHI may pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of 
Finance for approval of Phase-II proposal and apprise the Committee of the outcome.  
 
(Para 58) 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Finance has granted in principle approval to the concept note 
prepared  for the Phase-II of the Scheme for Enhancement of the  Competitiveness  in the 
Indian  Capital  Goods  Sector. Further, the proposal for seeking approval of Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by Secretary, Expenditure, has been prepared in 
consultation with the concerned stakeholders.    EFC note has been approve d by Hon‟ble 
Minister (HI&PE).  The draft EFC note is under circulation for seeking comments of 
Ministry of Finance, NITI Aayog and other concerned Ministries/Departments.   After 
obtaining the approval of the EFC, the approval of the Competent Authority wo uld be 
solicited.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee notes that DHI is developing web -based open manufacturing 
Technology Innovation Platforms under the ongoing Capital Goods Scheme for 
enhancing India‟s technological capabilities. The Committe e hopes that this initiative 
would facilitate more start -ups and angel funding of innovations in India as well as 
development of mother manufacturing technologies indigenously through Grand 
Challengers on the Platform. The Committee recommends that the six  Technology 
Platforms which are presently under trial runs may be formally launched on priority to 
promote industrial investments. Further, the Committee recommends that DHI should 
take all out efforts to promote the development of Technical Platforms unde r the Capital 
Goods Scheme in order to ensure their optimum utilization by experts including 
academia, technology students, manufacturing experts, etc.  
 
(Para 61) 
Action Taken Replies 
Department has embarked on innovative path to engender R&D in manufactu ring 
by developing six Technology Innovation Platforms which shall be   accelerators for 
making India self-reliant in various fields of the Capital Goods Sector with focus on 

 5 
bridging technology gap  . The Department has developed web based open 
manufacturing technology innovation platforms under the ongoing Capital Goods 
Scheme. These platforms will help in bringing all India‟s technical resources and the 
concerned Industry on to one platform to kick start and facilitate identification of 
technology problems faced by Indian Industry and crowd source solutions for the same in 
a systematic manner so as to facilitate start -ups and angel funding of Indian innovations. 
This includes the development of the key „mother‟ manufacturing technologies' 
indigenously through „Grand Challenges‟ on the Platforms to help achieve the vision of 
an Aatmanirbhar Bharat and a globally competitive manufacturing sector in India. 
 
Six Technology Platforms have been developed by IIT Madras,  Central 
Manufacturing Technology Institute (C MTI), International Centre for Automotive 
Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research    Association of India (ARAI),BHEL and 
HMT. These platforms will focus on development of technologies for the globally 
competitive manufacturing in India.  
 
  Hon'ble Minister  of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises through a virtual 
ceremony has  inaugurated the Technology Innovation Platforms on  2nd July , 2021. 
 
                So far, the technology and innovation platforms have developed a strong user 
base of about 40,000 users from industry, academia, R&D institutes, and retired industry 
experts. Around 23 grand challenges have been posted on these portals for seeking 
technological solutions. 58 webinars have been conducted in order to enhance the 
outreach of the initiative. 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.    It has been stated that the project had been delayed due to several reasons as 
there were a number of First time activities. The most important reason was the need for 
steam turbine design updation, as a result of de sign review by an internationally reputed 
organization in Germany. The steam turbine was being designed by BHEL for the first 
time, and a number of improvements and additional studies were identified as a result of 
the said design review. A number of India n and foreign consultants have been appointed 
to realise a reliable design. The target date for completion was to end by September 
2020. However, this got impacted due to Covid -19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown. 
The entire allotted fund for the project h as already been released by the Government in 
the FY 2020-21.  
 
DHI, in its written reply, have stated that the AUSC Project achieved its physical 
closure on 31st December 2020 and that its financial closure is scheduled on 31st March 
2020. The Committee n otes the efforts put in by DHI together with its flagship PSU, i.e  

 6 
BHEL, NTPC, IGCAR and the DST in completion of the AUSC Project, despite facing a 
number of hurdles and failing of meeting targeted timelines. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry along with other stakeholders may come up with more such technology 
projects so that power efficiency is improved and emissions get reduced.  
  
(Para 66)   
Action Taken Replies 
The point is noted and Ministry will look into any future opportunities in this 
regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. While going through the history of allocation to CMTI, the Committee observes 
that the funds allocated over the years in BE has not been adequate to meet the actual 
expenditure of the Institute, thus necessitating the need  for allocation of enhanced RE 
every year. The Committee is perturbed to observe the poor under -utilization by the 
Department in the current financial year, which had a good track record of utilizing the 
fund optimally for the R&D activities of CMTI. The C ommittee, therefore, strongly 
believes that the Department will leave no stone unturned in utilizing the entire balance 
fund in the FY 2020-21.  
(Para 75) 
 
Action Taken Replies  
The Ministry fully supports the R&D activities of CMTI.  It may be noted that the 
funds allocated for RE 2020-21 to CMTI of Rs. 18 crore has been fully utilized and Rs.18 
crore were released to CMTI in the financial year 2020 -21 as per the allocation at RE 
stage.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee also recommends that the  DHI should monitor the CPSEs under 
its administrative control to ensure timely payment to MSMEs i.e., within 45 days from 
the date of acceptance of goods and services from them in compliance to the stipulation 
announced by the Government under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan.  
  
(Para 85) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The matter related to timely payment to MSMEs have been given utmost priority 
and necessary instructions are issued time to time by MHI to all its CPSEs in this regard. 

 7 
Furthermore, it is also reviewed on weekly basis. Efforts being made by some CPSEs are 
highlighted below:- 
i) HMT:  HMT Group of Companies are making their best efforts to pay the MSME‟s 
on time even though its customers including Government Sector have deferred their 
payments to the Company. 
 
ii) BHEL: Even during the prevalence of COVID pandemic, prompt payments have 
been made by BHEL to MSMEs with enhanced focus to channelize liquidity in the 
system. In addition, BHEL has also ensured timely payment in respect of the dues 
related to TReDS (T rade Receivables Discounting System), GEM (Government e -
Marketplace) procurement, suppliers and contractors which is evident from the fact 
that the Trade Payables of the Company have been reduced in FY 2020 -21 as 
compared to previous financial year. 
 
BHEL not only monitors release of timely payment to MSMEs within the 
specified period but also regularly submits monthly report to Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (M/o HI) on pending payments to MSMEs. 
 
Government has taken various steps to ensure faster payment f or MSMEs and 
facilitate financing for their receivables, and these include: 
 
(i) Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) has been operationalised, which 
facilitates financing of trade receivables of MSMEs from corporate and other buyers 
including government departments and Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs). 
(ii) Ministry of MSME has created SAMADHAAN Portal for monitoring of 
outstanding dues to the MSEs from the buyers of goods and services. CPSEs are also 
required to upload information regarding their dues on the portal. 
 
BHEL has on -boarded itself on the TReDS platform of M/s RXIL (Receivables 
Exchange of India Ltd.). Further, necessary information is also uploaded on the 
SAMADHAAN portal by BHEL. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee recommends that DHI should make concerted efforts to relieve the 
company from its dependency on Chinese raw materials and co -ordinate with concerned 
Indian stakeholders, who are able to provide the Company with adequate raw -materials, 
so as to enable the Company to engage in production seamlessly and realise the vision of 
an „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟.  
  (Para 94) 
 
 

 8 
Action Taken Replies 
To enable the company to engage in production seamlessly and realise the vision 
of an Atmanirbhar Bharat, efforts are being mad e under MHI by advising divisions 
dealing with schemes/ CPSEs to make concerted efforts to relieve the company from its 
dependency of Chinese raw materials and to co-ordinate concerned Indian stakeholders to 
provide the Company with adequate raw-materials. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee desires to be updated about the status and action taken by the 
Department with regard to the following CPSEs which have been considered/approved 
for closure/disinvestment/ transfer/merger and long pending for final settlement/closing:  
(i) Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd.,  
(ii) Scooters India Limted 
(iii) HMT Machine Tools Ltd.  
(iv) Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.  
(v) Nagaland Pulp & paper Corporation  
(v) Hindustan Newsprints Ltd.  
(vi) Sambhar Salts Ltd. 
(vii) BHEL-EML  
(viii) Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd.  
(ix) Engineering Projects (India)  
(Para 97) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
i).  Bharat Pumps & Compressors Ltd.: - Cabinet has approved the closure of this 
company. The operation of BPCL has, therefore, been closed a nd all the employees 
of BPCL has since been given VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other 
dues, delisting of shares, etc. is under progress, as per the decision of the Cabinet. 
 
ii).   Scooters India Limted: -Cabinet has approved the closure of this company. The 
operation of SIL has, therefore, been closed and all the employees of SIL has since 
been given VRS. The other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of 
shares, etc. is under progress, as per the decision of the Cabinet. 
 
iii) HMT:- Three loss making subsidiaries of HMT i.e. HMT Bearings Ltd., HMT 
Chinar Watches Ltd., and HMT Watches Ltd. have been closed in  pursuance of 
CCEA decision dated 06.01.2016 and Tractor Division of HMT Ltd. has also been 

 9 
closed as per Cabinet decision da ted 27.10.2016. The revival/restructuring of HMT 
will be carried out as per Govt. Guidelines. 
 
iv) Hindustan Paper Corp Ltd : Company is under liquidation after undergoing the 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) under  Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code ( IBC), 2016, in compliance of order dated 02.05.2019 of the National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), Delhi. 
 
v) Nagaland Pulp & Paper Corporation: Approved closure of NPPC has been put on 
hold on the advice of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Ministry of Law & J ustice 
as its holding company viz. Hindustan Paper Corporation (HPC) is under liquidation 
as per order dated 02.05.2019 of   National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT). 
v). Hindustan Newsprints Ltd.: The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), 
on 27.10.201 6, had approved the proposal for the strategic disinvestment  of 
HNL. Expressions of Interest (EoI) were invited for disinvestment of 100% 
shareholding of HNL  by HPC. No bids were received despite several extensions in 
the last date. Subsequently, the disinvestment process was put on hold on the basis of 
advice of M/o Corporate Affairs and D/o Legal Affairs due to the initiation of 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) against Hindustan Paper 
Corporation (HPC), the parent company, w.e.f. 13.06.2018 before National 
Company Law Tribunal ( NCLT), New Delhi. The operations of HNL stand 
suspended since 01.01.2019 due to various reasons. The parent company i.e. HPC is 
under liquidation w.e.f. 02.05.2019 as ordered by the NCLT, New Delhi. 
  
               On 25.11.2019, the NCLT granted permission to the Official Liquidator, HPC to 
sell HPC‟s holding in HNL to the Govt. of Kerala for a sum of Rs.25 crores to be 
paid by GoK within the timelines permitted as per IBBI (Liquidator process) 
Regulation, 2016. However, the NCLT, Kochi Bench, on 28.11.2019 in application 
filed by M/s Ratnakar Bank Limited (RBL), one of the creditors of HNL, directed 
for initiation of Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) against HNL and 
appointed an Interim Resolution Professional (IRP) for HNL. 
  
              After the passing of the order dated 28.11.2019 by the NCLT, Kochi regarding 
initiation of CIRP against HNL, the Liquidator, HPC had filed an Interlocutory 
Application (IA) No. 1297/2020 before the NCLT, New Delhi in Fe bruary, 2020 
wherein he had inter-alia prayed before the the Hon‟ble Tribunal to direct the Kerala 
Government to comply with the order dated 25.11.2019 passed by the NCLT, New 
Delhi and to make payment of Rs. 25 crores to HPCL (in liquidation) for shares o f 
HNL. 

 10 
 
               Subsequently, on 29.01.2021, the NCLT, Kochi approved the resolution plan for 
HNL submitted by the Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation 
(KINFRA) and directed that the resolution applicant (KINFRA) together with it s 
nominees shall hold 100% shareholding in the restructured share capital of the 
corporate debtor (HNL) under the new management. 
  
               The Liquidator, HPC has filed another application in the IA No. 1297/2020 
before NCLT, New Delhi to bring on record the order dated 29.01.2021  passed by 
the NCLT, Kochi and for appropriate order. The matter is sub-judice. 
 
vi) Sambhar Salts Limited: - “As per the recommendation of NITI Aayog, a Joint 
Negotiation Mechanism Committee was constituted with the Officers o f Govt. of 
Rajasthan, MHI and HSL/SSL, to work out the modalities for transfer of SSL. As 
per the directions of JNM to get the valuation of the assets done by an independent 
agency, the company has appointed as Asset Valuer. 
 
vii) BHEL-EML:-Ministry of Heavy In dustries vide its letter dated 11 th May 
2021 conveyed to Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) the approval of the 
Competent Authority to sell off BHEL‟s 51% stake in BHEL Electrical Machines 
Limited (BHEL-EML), Kasaragod to the Government of Kerala (GoK). Government 
of India approval was communicated to the Principal Secretary (Industries) of GoK 
by BHEL on 11 th May 2021, and was also followed up by sending other relevant 
documents/ communications to GoK from BHEL on  12 May 2021, including for 
execution of “Agreement of Sale”, under the earlier mutually agreed terms and 
conditions, duly signed by authorized signatories of BHEL. Subsequently, GoK 
issued G.O.(Rt)No.613/2021/ID dated 25 th June 2021 inter -alia authorising and 
naming its Principal Secretary -II,  Industries Department, to sign the “Agreement of 
Sale” for and on behalf of GoK, besides nominating him as Chairman cum 
Managing Director in the resultant company formed thereof.   The agreement of Sale 
has been signed by Government of Kerala and BHEL on 28 July, 2021. 
 
viii) Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd. (HPCL): - “Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd. was a wholly -
owned subsidiary of M/s Andrew Yule Company Ltd (AYCL). The Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS), in September, 2018, was recommended closure of its operations 
and merger  of assets and liabilities into its holding company, namely, AYCL. 
HPCL‟s operations were closed from 25 January, 2019.  The employees of HPCL 
were transferred to its parent company – AYCL.  As per the directions of the 
Registrar of Companies, Kolkata, the  merger process was underway at NCLT. Now, 

 11 
AYCL has informed that Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd. (HPCL) has been merged with 
AYCL effective from 4th June, 2021, which is the Effective Date as well as the 
appointed date of the said merger as defined in clause 1. 1.6 of the Merger Scheme. 
Status of Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd. (HPCL) in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
Portal also shown as 'Amalgamated'. As per CCEA decision, closure of operations of 
Hooghly Printing Co Ltd. and its merger with AYCL, the holding comp any, has 
been completed”.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee desires that DHI may take corrective and coercive action to infuse 
more working capital into these loss making CPSEs, provide more B2B interface between 
CPSEs and clients, to enhance order bookings, bring in handsome and attractive 
VRS/VSS compensation schemes in co -ordination with DPE and encourage them to 
replace their obsolete machinery with new and state -of-the-art ones so as to nurse them 
back to good financial health. 
(Para 99) 
Action Taken Replies 
Observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted for  compliance. 
Ministry will put its best efforts in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee is aware that under the Public Procurement Policy (PPP), the 
MSEs are promoted to improve their market accessibility and competitiveness through 
increased participation in Government procurements and encouraging development of 
linkages between MSEs and PSEs. As per the mandate of the Public Procurement Policy 
for Micro  and Small Enterprises (MSEs) Order 2012, every Central Ministries/PSEs 
should set an annual target of minimum 25% procurement of goods & services from MSE 
Sector. Out of 25% annual procurement, a sub -target of 4% & 3% should be from MSEs 
owned by SC/ST an d Women entrepreneurs, respectively. Keeping in view the 
extraordinary situation, the Committee is of the view that the PSUs may procure more 
than the prescribed limits laid down under the PPP for MSEs Order 2012 from the MSEs, 
especially the SC/ST and women owned MSEs, so as to give further boost to the localised 
production and fulfilment of the PM‟s vision of an „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟.  
(Para 102) 

 12 
Action Taken Replies 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises has informed  that they have 
taken various i nitiatives to improve the market accessibility and competitiveness of 
MSEs through increased participation in Government procurement and encouraging 
development of linkages between MSEs and CPSEs. In FY 2020 -21, 141 CPSEs had 
procured Rs.39,557.34 crore (3 1.69%) of goods and services from MSEs (including 
SCs/STs), which is more than the mandated target of 25%. Furthermore, the 
recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to all the Ministries/Departments 
and also to CPSEs by DPE to take note of it for consideration and compliance. 
  
 
 

 13 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Finance Minister in the budget speech has emphasised  on strong 
infrastructure building for which higher capital expenditure is required. However, the 
Committee notes that the Department, as per their actual demand, has been allocated a 
sum of Rs.67.42 crores only for capital expenditure. The projection for a small allocation 
reflects that no major initiatives/project have been outlined by the Department for 
infrastructure building. The Committee, therefore, recommends, that the Department 
needs to be pro -active to chalk out  a comprehensive blue -print particularly in the post 
Covid-19 times for building strong infrastructural base.   
                      (Para 9) 
Action Taken Replies 
As regards Capital Expenditure, it is mentioned that a fund of Rs.67.42 crore has 
been allocated under Capital Section in respe ct of Demand No.46 - MHI for the year 
2021-22. The major portion of allocation is for Loans for NATRiP (Rs.67.22 crore). The 
reason behind projection of smaller allocation under Capital Expenditure is that the funds 
under MHI are released to Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) as per their 
requirement only on specific approval of the Union Cabinet/CCEA. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee further notes that the Department has been unable to fully utilize 
the reduced revised allocation of Rs.1308.61 cr. for the financial year 2019-20. Similarly, 
in the current financial year 2020 -21, the Department has been able to utilize only 73% 
of the much reduced RE up to 31.01.2021. Committee is given to believe that under -
utilization of funds by the Department reflects lack of resilient monitoring mechanism for 
optimal utilization and achievements of the set targets. The Committee, therefore, urges 
that the Department should strive to fully utilize the balance amount of 27% in the 
remaining two months of FY 2020-21.                          
(Para 10) 
Action Taken Replies 
In the Financial Year 2019 -20, Budget allocation of Rs.1367.00 crore was 
reduced to Rs.1308.61 crore at RE stage, against which the actual expenditure was 
Rs.1306.28 crore which is 99.83% of the RE. 

 14 
 Similarly, in the Financial Year 2020 -21, Budget allocation of Rs.1489.98 crore 
was reduced to Rs.900.00 crore at RE stage, against which the actual expenditure was 
Rs.896.66 crore which is 99.63% of the RE. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
15. From the above information furnished by the DHI, the Committee observes that 
there is discrepancy in the expenditure made under NATRiP. The DHI, during the 
examination of Demands for Grants 2020 -21, apprised the Committee that the 
expenditure incurred up to 3 1.01.2020 was Rs.3,660.12 cr. Now the Committee is being 
informed that the actual expenditure incurred up to 31.01.2021 is Rs.3,222.82 Cr. The 
Committee wonders as to how the expenditure incurred upto 31.01.2021 could be less 
than that of the previous year . The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department 
should look into the mismatch between the expended figures and clarify the reasons for 
the difference.  
 
 (Para 21) 
Action Taken Replies 
As mentioned in Para-18 of the Report, the expenditure incurred by NATRiPas on 
31.01.2020 was reported as Rs.3,360.12crore,and not Rs.3,660.12 crore as mentioned 
above. It is submitted that actual expenditure incurred by NATRIP up to 31.01.2021 
is ₹3,490.65 crore, which is more than  ₹3,360.12 crore reported till 31.01.2020. While 
giving the reply,  Rs.3,222.82 crore was inadvertently mentioned as “expenditure” till 
31.01.2021, whereas Rs.3,222.82 crore was fund released by MHI to NATRIP. The 
inadvertent error is deeply regretted.  
 
Further, it is submitted that actual expenditure by NATRIP as on 31.03.2021 
is ₹ 3,496.57 crore. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee also notes that for the financial year 2020 -21, as against the 
actual required fund of Rs.300.00 crores, the Department had proposed only Rs.150.00 
crores. However, the MoF had allocated the entire balance amount of Rs.300.00 crores 
as final instalment  for meeting the expenses of two unfinished projects vizthe High-Speed 
Test Track at NATRAX, Indore and the Advanced Passive Lab at GARC/Chennai which 
were supposed to be completed by the extended date of March 2020. Due to under -
utilization of funds, in the RE 2020 -21, the fund was reduced to Rs.114.30 crores which 
has already been exh austed by the Department as on 31.01.2021 leaving no fund for 

 15 
meeting expenses in the remaining period of FY 2020 -21. The Committee also notes that 
the Department had projected only a sum of Rs.67.22 crores for BE 2021 -22 against the 
balance requirement of Rs.185.70 crores. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for projecting a lesser demand against a higher balance requirement. The 
Committee therefore, recommends that DHI should be more pro -active and persuade the 
Ministry of Finance for a llocating the entire balance amount at the RE stage for 
completion of the pending project within the targeted period.  
(Para 22) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is informed that up to 31.03.2020, NATRIP has accounted for the total Project 
Grant amount of Rs. 3427. 30 Crore as Grants -in-aid including loans, user charges and 
internal accruals against the total approved project cost amount Rs. 3727.30 Crore. The 
amount of Rs. 300 Crore as residual/balance fund (3727.30 Crore less 3427.30 Crore), 
that was proposed as BE  for FY 20 -21 as it was given to understand that the Project 
period was getting over. Since, NATRiP Project was extended for one year i.e. up to 
31.03.2021, hence the fund amount of Rs.114.30 Crore was given to NATRIP as per 
progress of work and committed liabilities as per contract provision against executed 
contracts. The above fund was sufficient for NATRIP for the FY 20 -21 to meet out the 
project expenditure. Further, amount Rs. 67.22 Crore (out of residual/balance fund Rs. 
185.70 Crore) was proposed as  BE for FY 21-22 for committed liabilities as per contract 
provision against executed contracts. The remaining fund will be allocated to NATRIP in 
next FY or consider at RE stage as per progress of work. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee in its  earlier report on DFG-2020-21 (299th), had desired for the 
CAG report on the performance audit of NATRiP which was then pending from CAG. 
DHI in their ATN furnished to the Committee, had forwarded a copy of the CAG Report 
and on scrutiny of the said Repor t, it was observed that many discrepancies have been 
pointed out by the CAG on the record management of funds under wrong Account Heads. 
The Committee, therefore, in its ATR on DFG (302nd) desired the Department to take 
remedial action to comply with the o bservations raised by CAG and apprise the 
Committee. However, in their written reply, the DHI has stated that the CAG Report on 
the performance audit has not yet been received from CAG and the same would be 
furnished as and when it is received from them. I t, therefore, appears that the 
Department has furnished replies without checking their records. The Committee again 
reiterates that its earlier recommendation that the remedial action taken on the 
observations made by the CAG may be brought to its notice.  
 
(Para 24) 

 16 
Action Taken Replies 
MHI has rightly furnished a reply to the Committee that the relevant CAG Report 
on the performance audit of NATRIP has been placed in the Annual Report 2018 -19 of 
NATRIP.  
  
It is also submitted that  questions raised by C&A G and their replies furnished to 
them are also available in the Annual Report   2018-19 of NATRiP at pages 86 -93 of the 
said report and final report of C&AG, regarding acceptance of NATRiP's replies on those 
questions, is yet to be received. 
  
However, as p er assurance given to C&AG, NATRIP has complied the above 
audit Paraduring the preparation of Books of Accounts for the FY 2019 -20. As 
recommended by C&AG, NATRIP has shown the loan portion of Grant -in-aid under 
separate schedule under the “Loans & Borrowi ng” during the preparation of annual 
accounts of NATRIP of F.Y. 2019 -20 and the same procedure will be followed in next 
financial year.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. Setting up adequate Charging infrastructure is a key to encourage large users to 
consider switching over to EVs. As most of the EV sales are taking place in lighter 
mobility categories, there is a necessity of charging infrastructure at the neighborhood, 
parking lots, commercial establishments etc. To promote EV, the Committee desires that 
charging infrastructure should be made available in cities with closer proximity and on 
Highways as well, for easy access to the Users.  
(Para 30) 
Action Taken Replies 
The FAME-India Scheme Phase -II envisages support for setting up of adequate 
public chargi ng infrastructure to instil confidence among EV users, through active 
participation and involvement of various stakeholders including Government agencies, 
industries and Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs). A budget provision of Rs. 1000 Crore 
has been earmar ked for establishment of charging infrastructure under this Phase of 
FAME Scheme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Government has introduced Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
auto sector. The PLI scheme is expected to make the Indian Automot ive Industry more 
competitive and enhance globalization of the Indian Automotive sector. The 

 17 
administrative Ministry i.e., the Department of Heavy Industry is to roll out the plan soon 
detailing the eligibility criteria based on turnover, exports and growt h history of the 
company. The Committee is hopeful that the blueprint of the scheme would be worked out 
expeditiously and implemented soon by the DHI for the benefit of the Automotive Sector.  
(Para 42) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Government on 12 th May, 2021  approved a Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) Scheme for manufacturing of Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) in the country. The 
total outlay of the scheme is Rs.18,100 crore for 5 years. The scheme envisages to 
establish a competitive ACC battery manufacturing set up in the country (50 GWh). 
Additionally, 5GWh of niche ACC technologies is also covered under the scheme. The 
scheme proposes a production linked subsidy based on applicable subsidy per KWh and 
percentage of value addition achieved on actual sales mad e by the manufacturers who set 
up production units. Under the PLI Scheme for ACC, an applicant can apply for a 
minimum of 5GWh upto a maximum of 20 GWh. 
 
2) The Ministry of Heavy Industries on 22 nd November, 2021 has released Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for inviting bidders under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
for setting up manufacturing facilities for Advance Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery 
Storage in India. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. From the written reply of the DHI, the Committee observe s that during the 
financial year 2020 -21 about Rs.10.97 crores has been released for funding various 
projects (UNIDO-ACMA-DHI partnership project, R&D Projects in collaboration with 
ARAI &IISc Bengaluru). However, the details of the project and project -wise expenditure 
incurred have not been furnished. The Committee further notes that the funds allocated 
under RE for the years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 for the Scheme DCAAI is lesser than the 
actual expenditure of the year 2018 -19. The fund allotted under BE for 2 019-20 was 
reduced to Rs.8.80 crores in RE which was fully utilised. However, the RE for 2020 -21, 
which was reduced to Rs.13.51 crore from BE of Rs.15 crore, could be expended only to 
the tune of Rs.10.97 crore till end of January 2021. The Committee desir es that the 
remaining amount may be fully utilised especially for R&D activities by March end. 
Today in times of faster technological advancement, more emphasis needs to be given for 
R&D activities. The Committee therefore, is of the view that the Departme nt should take 
up more R&D activities/projects and seek more funds from the Government in this 
regard.  
 
(Para 45) 

 18 
 Action Taken Replies 
During the Financial year 2020 -21, a fund of Rs.15.00 cr. was earmarked to 
DCAAI which was reduced to Rs.13.51 cr. at R E Stage.Entire fund of Rs.13.51cr. 
allocated at RE Stage was utilized by 31.03.2021.  Further, a fund of Rs.15.00 Cr. has 
been allocated in BE 2021-22 for the Scheme DCAAI. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
21. The Committee notes that the Capital Goods Sector is the backbone of the 
manufacturing sector as it produces machines required for industrial production. Due to 
technology gaps in Capital Goods being manufactured in India, this sector is importing 
high-end machines required for manufacturing. The Committee is of the view that there is 
an urgent need to address the gaps in technology needs, skill and infrastructure 
development for Capital Goods Sector. The Committee strongly believes that the 
Government should formulate a concrete contingent plan to make In dia investment-ready 
and investor friendly and also create an environment congenial for R&D and innovation 
for achieving the goal of self-reliance.  
 
(Para 49) 
Action Taken Replies 
In order to address the skill  gaps and  infrastructure development and 
technology needs for the Capital Goods Sector, Phase I of the Capital Goods scheme was 
rolled out by the Department in 2014. Phase I of the scheme fostered partnerships 
between Academia and Industry for engendering technology development with 
Government support . The outcomes of the Scheme have proved the efficacy of the 
strategies deployed for technology and industrial infrastructure 
development.  Nine Common Engineering Facility Centres  (CEFCs) including four 
Industry 4.0 SAMARTH centres, Eight Centres of Excel lence (COEs) for Technology 
Development, a 500 acres world class Machine Tool Park in Tumakuru, Karnataka in 
partnership with the Government of Karnataka have been established under the scheme. 
25 new technologies in the field of machine tools, textile mac hinery, earth moving 
machinery, nano and sensor technologies, are being developed at national research 
institutes of eminence such as IITs, IISc, CMTI, etc. and are undergoing 
commercialization. 
  
2.       In addition, six Web-based open manufacturing tech nology innovation platforms 
have also been  developed by IIT Madras,  Central Manufacturing Technology Institute 
(CMTI), International Centre for Automotive Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research   
Association of India(ARAI), BHEL and HMT under the  phase I of the  Capital Goods 

 19 
scheme. These Platforms will bring all India‟s technical resources and the concerned 
Industry on to one  network to kick start and facilitate identification of technology 
problems faced by Industry and crowd source solutions for the sa me in a systematic 
manner. These platforms will identify technological solutions to the problems and 
challenges posed by the Industry. The identified technologies shall subsequently be 
developed with the help of the industry and premier academic institutio ns in the existing 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) established under Phase I and new  CoEs to be developed 
by the Department  under Phase II of the Capital Goods scheme. 
  
3.       The department is also planning to promote skilling in Capital Goods Sector 
by creation of skilling packages for skill levels 6 and above, in association with Skill 
Councils and imparting of skill training in the Samarth Udyog and Skill Centres 
developed under Phase -I of the Capital Goods Scheme and other identified institutions. 
The same would also be done for the technologies identified through the Technology and 
Innovation platforms in association with Skill Councils, CPSEs, Autonomous bodies. 
  
4.         Embassy of India, Tokyo, the Ministry of Heavy Industries and the Governmen t 
of Japan organized a webinar on Investment Opportunities in India in Capital Goods 
sector with 150 prospective companies from India and Japan on  June 24  2020.  The 
Secretary (Heavy Industry) and Hon‟ble Ambassador, Embassy of India, Tokyo co -
chaired the said webinar. At the end of the webinar, one to one contact sessions were held 
between Indian and Japanese participants.  State Governments also participated. B2B 
meetings followed. Now individual one to one meetings are being held by the 
Department and th e Mission with investors. This webinar generated a large number of 
leads besides awareness in the catchment area about opportunities in India. Positive long 
term impact is expected.  The Dept also plans to organize/participate in similar 
webinars in collaboration with Indian Missions abroad to promote  industrial  investments 
 for the development of high-end technology, skill and infrastructure. MHI would work to 
make India investment -ready and investor friendly. Further, MHI plans to prepare a list 
of poten tial clusters, potential sectors and potential investments with several State 
government, so as to facilitate the grounding of investments and creation of investible 
projects.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. From the table above, it can be seen that the RE for FY 2020-21 has been slashed 
to one-third of the allocated BE. However, the Department has been able to utilize only 
66% i.e., Rs.36.90 crores upto 31.01.2021 out of the RE of Rs.55.52 crores. The 
Committee is of the view that under -utilization of th e allocated funds only reflects weak 
overseeing capacity by the executing authorities of the Department in implementing the 

 20 
schemes and projects. The Committee expects the Department should strive to fully utilize 
the 33% of the remaining fund in the FY 2020-21.  
 
(Para 53) 
Action Taken Replies 
The total Funds utilized,  under the Scheme for Enhancement of Competitiveness 
in Indian Capital Goods Sector in the financial year 2020 -21 is Rs.54.22 crore. 
Therefore, the total utilisation of funds is about 98% out  of the Revised Estimate for 
2020-21.  Hence, almost entire available fund under the above Scheme have been utilized 
by the Ministry.   
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the DHI regarding 
promotion of technological development and innovation and suggests that a master list of 
all the imported items used by CPSEs in assembly of their products should be prepared 
and shared with all the national research centres and educational institutions indulged in 
R&D acti vities, design and scientific innovations. Further the Committee desires that 
such research institutions should be provided financial assistance to support R&D 
activities for creation of a healthy manufacturing ecosystem.  
(Para 60) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is the constant endeavour of the Ministry to engage premier R&D institutions in 
helping the Industry to develop indigenous technologies and products, to minimise 
dependence on imports. Further, in order to address the technology  needs for  the 
Capital Goods Sector,  Phase I of the Capital Goods scheme was rolled out by the 
Department in 2014. Phase I of the scheme fostered partnerships between Academia and 
Industry for engendering technology development with Government support. The 
outcomes of the Scheme hav e proved the efficacy of the strategies deployed for 
technology and industrial infrastructure development.   Nine Common Engineering 
Facility Centres(CEFCs) including four Industry 4.0 SAMARTH centres, Eight Centres 
of Excellence (COEs) for Technology Devel opment, a 500 acres world class Machine 
Tool Park in Tumakuru, Karnataka in partnership with the Government of Karnataka 
have been established under the scheme. 25 new technologies in the field of machine 
tools, textile machinery, earth moving machinery, n ano and sensor technologies, are 
being developed at national research institutes of eminence such as IITs, IISc, CMTI, etc. 
and are undergoing commercialization.   Alongside, six Web -based open manufacturing 
technology innovation platforms have been  developed by IIT Madras,  Central 
Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI), International Centre for Automotive 

 21 
Technology (iCAT), Automotive Research    Association of India(ARAI),BHEL and 
HMT under the  phase I of the  Capital Goods scheme.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee appreciates the new initiative taken by DHI for constitution of 
Project Development Cell (PDC) for attracting investments and development of investible 
projects in India in coordination with various other Ministries/Departments a nd State 
Governments. However, it is observed that the efforts made by DHI have not been able to 
achieve tangible results for large -scale investment. The Committee, therefore, desires 
that the DHI should explore new avenues and also equip the PDC to cater a better 
coordination and wider outreach.  
 
(Para 63) 
Action Taken Replies 
  Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) through PDC Cell has met with 13 investor 
Companies across the automotive, electric mobility and Capital goods Sector. These 
investors have a to tal investment potential of ~US$ 4.4 billion. Out of these, 13 
Companies, 2 Companies have commenced Production, 2 Companies have commenced 
construction, 3 Companies have acquired land, one Company has signed MOU with 
Govt. of Karnataka for the said Invest ment and remaining, 5 other companies plans are 
under evaluation. 
 The PDC at MHI has also hosted/participated in more than 10 investment 
webinars. 
 MHI has conducted 4 stakeholder consultations with more than 15 companies on 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI ) scheme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
Batteries to attract investments in India. 
Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the poor utilization of the allocated 
funds for development of Industry Association and PSUs f or undertaking promotional 
activities. Analysis of the utilization trend under this account for the past years, reveals 
that the expenditure has been made sparsely in spite of scanty allocation too. Today wide 
publicity and awareness hold key for beneficia ry to tap the benefit of the schemes of the 
Government available for promotion of manufacturing and technological avenues of 
Capital Goods Sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department 
should seek more funds for promotional activities an d at the same time pro -actively 
utilize the entire allocation by arranging effective promotional activities in large 
numbers to create vast awareness of the benefits of Capital Goods Sector.  
(Para 70) 

 22 
Action Taken Replies 
The promotional activities under the scheme industry associations and PSUs for 
undertaking promotion activities were substaintially hampered during the last financial 
year and the current financial year due to the ongoing pandemic situation in the country.  
However, the activities have now been initiated under the scheme and the proposals have 
been sought from CPSEs/autonomous bodies under MHI, Industry Associations and the 
prominent academic institutions like IITs/NITs.   They have been requested to submit 
their proposals for conducting aw areness events/workshops/seminars/webinars for 
spreading awareness about the Capital Goods Sector and the Government initiatives in 
the Capital Goods Sector.  With this initiative, Ministry would be able to utilise the 
allocation for the scheme for the current financial year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. The Committee observes that the operating CPSEs , this year has come down to 
17 from 22 in the previous year and further two more CPSEs viz., Scooters India Ltd. 
(SIL) and Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd . (BPCL) have also been approved for 
closure by the CCEA. The Number of Profit making CPSEs have also come down to six 
this year from 10 in the previous year. The Committee expresses its concern over the 
poor performance by the CPSEs, which also reflects the DHI‟s unsuccessful endeavour to 
extend proper support and handholding to those CPSEs slipping into loss mode. The 
Committee recommends that DHI should undertake periodical performance evaluation of 
each CPSEs and extend the required supportive intervent ion from time to time in 
enhancing the capacity building capability of the sick and incipient sick CPSEs. 
  
(Para 83) 
Action Taken Replies 
MHI undertakes appraisals of each loss -making CPSEs wherein appropriate 
response to the performance of individual CPS Es is determined in consultation with 
stakeholders after periodic appraisal. CPSEs  found chronically sick and not having 
potential to turn around are closed down after payment of attractive Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme (VRS) / Voluntary Separation Scheme (V SS) and due compensation to 
employees.  Government has decided to close some CPSEs which were incurring huge 
losses since long and had no potential to turn-around in the current economic scenario. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
27. BHEL a Maharatna Company which had a high turnover and profit making PSU 
has slipped into loss making since FY 2019 -20. BHEL has immense potential to cater to 
indigenous production. The Committee takes note of the efforts put in by BHEL as well as 

 23 
the innovative measures taken to combat Covid-19 and developed/manufactured products 
such as (i) BHEL Mister (equipment for mass sanitization), (ii) Electrostatic Disinfection 
Machine for disinfection/sanitization of offices, hospitals etc., (iii) Full Body Sanitization 
Chamber etc. The C ommittee is of the view that BHEL should also take initiatives to cut 
its fixed costs and diversify beyond power into areas like defence, transportation, 
aerospace, e -mobility batteries, oil & gas etc. for revenue generation post -Covid-19 
Pandemic to achieve the vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat and become a Global engineering 
organization.  
(Para 86) 
Action Taken Replies 
Optimisation of costs is an ongoing and continuous process in BHEL. Various efforts 
undertaken towards optimisation/ rationalisation of fixed costs in the recent past include 
in the areas of: 
  
 contracting of outsourced services, payment to agencies providing security 
services 
 repairs and maintenance 
 office expenses 
 rent payment 
 insurance coverage, bank charges 
 equipment/ machinery hire charges, electronic data processing (EDP), software 
and lease line services 
 power & fuel (fixed component) 
 
In addition, Cost Optimization Cell (COC) has been formed at Corporate level to 
inter-alia drive cost reduction initiatives in the company. 
  
BHEL is actively pursuing for diversification of its revenue, and in this direction has 
formed focused business groups to strengthen diversification efforts and harness related 
opportunities viz. „Hydro Business Group‟, „Nuclear Business Group‟, „Transportation 
Business & Systems Group‟, „Defence & Aerospace Business Group‟, „Energy Storage 
Solutions Group‟ including e -Mobility, „Make in India Business Development Group‟ 
(MII-BDG),„NTPC Business Group‟ (NTPCBG),and „Solar Business Division‟ (SBD). 
Furthermore, market opp ortunities in the Oil & gas segment and new business areas 
covering Rail track electrification, Water business, Medical Oxygen Plant etc. are being 
tapped. In 2020 -21, BHEL forayed into Downstream Oil & Gas business as part of 
diversification initiatives. In addition to these, the Company is making endeavours in 
expanding its offerings in the power sector business as well. 
 

 24 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee notes that 40% of the component required for HMT Machines viz. 
CNC Controllers & Drivers, Spindle Bearings, Linear Motion Guides etcwere imported. 
However, disruptions in import due to lockdowns and closure of ports have adversely 
affected the productions. Efforts have been made by HMT to provide technical support to 
Domestic Manufacturers and utilize its infrastructure facilities for production of import 
substitutions. The Committee recommends that new avenues may be explored for 
alternate manufacturing hubs for import substitution and technology transfer from other 
countries to meet the requir ements of HMT so that the production process is back on 
track.  
 
(Para 88) 
Action Taken Replies 
 
HMT Limited has been looking for alternate sources and is encouraging domestic 
manufacturers to take up manufacture of items which were hitherto imported. 
 
With the easing of disruptions due to lockdown and opening of ports, the 
production process has been back on track in the third and fourth quarters of FY 2020-21. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Committee notes that BPCL has imposed a ban on Capital Expe nditure to 
manage its cash crunch caused due to the Covid -19 Pandemic lockdowns. However, with 
the opening of lockdown, economic activities have resumed in a large scale improving 
the earnings. The Committee is of the view that as the Capital Expenditure i s a critical 
driver for economic growth and employment generation; BPCL should strive to meet its 
targeted Capital Expenditure set for the FY 2020-21.  
(Para 92) 
Action Taken Replies 
Cabinet has approved the closure of this company. The operation of BPCL h as, 
therefore, been closed and all the employees of BPCL has since been given VRS. The 
other formalities like settlement of other dues, delisting of shares, etc. is under progress, 
as per the decision of the Cabinet. 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee notes that most of the contributions to the PM CARES Fund by the 
CPSEs have been made from their CSR Funds, thus diverting a large share that would 
have otherwise been utilized towards theme based CSR activities in their local areas. The 
Committee recommends that efforts should be made to ensure that the CPSEs utilize their 

 25 
CSR Funds particularly during the Covid -19 Pandemic fully to meet the targets set for 
the theme based activities in their respective areas, in consultation with the local 
Representatives of the area (MLA, MLCs, MPs).  
(Para 101) 
Action Taken Replies 
DPE has informed  that it has already issued the instruction for the financial year 
2021-22 that the common theme is “ Health & Nutrition, with special focus on COVID 
related measures incl uding setting up makeshift hospitals and temporary COVID Care 
Facilities”.  During the year DPE will continue to sensitize and follow up with the 
CPSEs for undertaking CSR activities in accordance with the above-mentioned theme. 

 26 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31.  From the Statement, it can be seen that the BE allocation of Rs.995.27 crores for 
the year 2021 -22 is the lowest ever in the past many years.  Besides, the allocation has 
even been less than 50% of the amount actually demanded by DHI.  If the 
schemes/initiative of the Department are not allocated sufficient funds, it can have 
serious repercussions and undermine the desired outco mes. To promote efficiently the 
development and growth of the three Sectors viz., Capital Goods, Automobile & Heavy 
Electrical Equipment, the Committee recommends that sufficient funds be allocated to 
DHI at the RE stage so that the ongoing projects/scheme s/initiatives of the Department 
that had already taken a beating due to the pandemic, do not get hindered any further 
due to lack of funds.   
 
 (Para 8) 
Action Taken Replies 
For the Financial year 2021-22, the requirement of funds of Rs. 2038.61 crore was 
projected as against the allocation of Rs.1489.98 crore (BE 2020 -21) in the previous 
Financial Year. The major requirements were for FAME India -II (Rs.1800.00 crore), 
NATRiP (Rs.67.22 crore), DCAAI (Rs.15.00 crore), CMTI (Rs.15 crore) and Capital 
Goods Scheme (Rs.97.59 crore).  Against the projection of Rs.2038.61 crore, Ministry of 
Heavy Industries have been allocated a sum of Rs.995.27 crore in the BE 2021 -22 which 
is less than 50% of the projection.  Out of the allocation of Rs.995.27 crore, major 
allocations have been made to FAME India -II (Rs.756.66 crore), NATRiP (Rs.67.22 
crore), DCAAI (Rs.15.00 crore), CMTI (Rs.15 crore) and Capital Goods Scheme 
(Rs.97.59 crore).  The major shortfall in allocation is for FAME India -II (Rs.1043.34 
crore). 
MHI is in th e process of demanding more funds for FAME India -II through 
Supplementary Demands at RE stage so that the ongoing projects/schemes/initiatives of 
the FAME India-II Scheme could not be affected.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee observes from t he information furnished by the DHI that the 
Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs.995.27 cr. for BE 2021 -22 i.e., about 51% less 
vis-a-vis the projection of  Rs. 2038.61 by the Department. The Committee, therefore, 

 27 
recommends that DHI should convince t he M/o Finance for enhanced allocation at RE 
stage, so that the schemes/Projects are implemented seamlessly and effectively as per the 
set target.  
 (Para 12) 
Action Taken Replies 
Against the projection of Rs.2038.61 crore, Ministry of Heavy Industries hav e 
been allocated a sum of Rs.995.27 crore in the BE 2021 -22 which is less than about 51% 
of the projection.  Out of the allocation of Rs.995.27 crore, major allocations have been 
made to FAME India -II (Rs.756.66 crore), NATRiP (Rs.67.22 crore), DCAAI (Rs.1 5.00 
crore), CMTI (Rs.15 crore) and Capital Goods Scheme (Rs.97.59 crore).  The major 
shortfall in allocation is for FAME India-II (Rs.1043.34 crore). 
 
Additional fund requirements for FAME -India-II has been projected by MHI at 
RE stage 2021-22 and BE 2022-23 so that the ongoing projects/schemes/initiatives of the 
FAME India-II Scheme are not affected.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation (Para 8 and 12) 
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry is not able to persuade 
the Government for allocat ion of sufficient funds required for effective 
implementation of the schemes being run  under the purview of MHI.  FAME India-
II, despite being the flagship scheme of the Ministry the fund allocation for the 
scheme is quite insufficient .  Therefore, the Committee recommends that MHI 
should be more  vigilant and play a dynamic role for the allocation of the 
appropriate funds for the schemes and persuade the Ministry of Finance for 
allocating sufficient funds for completion of the pending projects within the targeted 
period. The Committee is of the view that Ministry of Heavy Industries should make 
a blue-print of the outlay for the schemes and accordingly demand the allocation of 
budget from M/o Finance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee has been informed that out of 22 approved facilities, 21 have been 
completed and one facility at Advanced Passive Safety Lab at GARC, Chennai is still 
under construction. The Department in their written reply has stated that the facility 
targeted to be completed by th e extended date of March, 2020 has been further extended 
up to 31.03.2021 due to Covid related disruptions and contractual related issues. The 
pending facility comprises 3 Labs – Pedestrian Lab, Airbag Lab and the Crash Lab. In 
the Crash Lab, the Civil, el ectrical and the utility works have been completed. The crash 
instrumentation work is not complete as one of the contractors M/s Kistler has invoked 

 28 
arbitration and the same is in progress. The overall physical progress of work/facilities 
of 99% has been c ompleted. The Committee expects the Department to resolve the 
contractual and litigation issues expeditiously and ensure completion of the remaining 
work within the extended timeline i.e., 31.03.2021.  
(Para 23) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Advance Passive Safety (APS) lab (Crash lab) consists of two other facilities 
viz Pedestrian and Airbag labs which were completed long back and opened for 
commercial operation since November 2013.  
 
The completion of the Crash lab was contingent on the completion of Civil, 
Utility and Machine &Equipment (M&E) Works pertaining to the APS lab. The Civil and 
Utility works have been completed. The M&E Works consisting of two contracts (Crash 
Core and Crash Instrumentation) as stated below were awarded to the foreign supplier 
and could not be completed due to COVID crisis and unanticipated contractual disputes. 
Core Crash Equipment of APS lab (PaS3):  The contract was awarded to M/s Messring 
GmbH, Germany. The contract encountered several contractual issues attributable to non-
readiness of lab building and other issues. However, with the dedicated effort the same 
had been resolved amicably and the installation and commissioning (I&C) „Works‟ were 
commenced in April 2019. The I&C was scheduled to be completed by 31st March 2020 
but the same could not be achieved due to various restrictions imposed across the globe 
since Jan 2020 in order to curtail the spread of COVID -19 pandemic. As a result, M/s 
Messring called back their engineers from Site (GARC -Chennai) in Jan 2020 stating that 
work will be resumed after ease in lockdown and international travel restriction between 
Germany and India. It is pertinent to highlight that when the team was demobilized, the 
work was at a very advanced stage and installation was almost done. After continu ous 
follow up with their top management, M/s Messring resumed the I&C activities remotely 
on 20th Jan 2021 by deploying their Indian team at the project site (GARC -Chennai) and 
the German engineers supported via video conferencing. However, due to speciali sed 
nature of work and limitation of the Indian team to handle it, the German team is required 
to travel to the project site to conduct final commissioning and acceptance testing. Thus, 
the pending activities shall be undertaken only after the ease in inte rnational travel 
restriction between Germany and India which is still continued due to Covid -19 
pandemic outbreaks. 
 
However, NATRiP is putting all the efforts for the completion of the acceptance 
of Crash core equipment by December, 2021 subject to easing of in international travel. 

 29 
 Crash Instrumentations of APS Lab (PaS2):  The contract was awarded to M/s 
KistlerInstrument AG, Switzerland wherein Crash instrumentation equipment was to be 
supplied, commissioned, and integrated with the other core crash fa cility. Like the PaS3 
contract, many of the contractual issues were raised by the supplier.  Despite NATRIP's 
dedicated effort and prolonged series of meetings including amicable & reconciliation 
meetings with the supplier, issues could not be settled. M/s Kistler invoked the arbitration 
proceedings on 13th May 2020. 
The Arbitral tribunal's first meeting was convened on 5 th Aug 2020 wherein 
tribunal has decided the schedule of pleading and list of documents to be submitted 
before the tribunal.  
  
Accordingly, both the parties‟ claimant and respondent submitted their pleading 
documents statement of claim and statement of defence and counter claims, rejoinder etc. 
within the prescribed date of 4th Jan 2021.  
 
The claimant‟s counsel has concluded their arguments . The Respondent's 
argument is scheduled for November, 2021. 
  
NATRiP has requested M/s Kistler to support in completion of the balance work 
and enable NATRIP to operationalize the state -of-the-art crash facility. However, there 
was no positive response. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 The Committee hopes that NATRIP would be able to resolve the contractual 
issues and arbitration proceedings with M/s Kistler regarding Crash 
Instrumentations of Advanced Passive Safety Lab  without delay, so that NATR IP 
can operationalise the state-of-the-art crash facility in the country.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. From the Fund Allocation for the flagship scheme FAME -India-II, it has been 
observed that out of the total outlay of Rs.10,000 crores earmarked for the  Scheme, only 
a sum of Rs.1575.02 crores have been allocated so far including the BE for FY 2021 -22. 
The Committee notes that the allocated fund for Rs.500 crores for the first year i.e., 
2019-20 was fully utilized by the Department. However, for the next year 2020-21 vis-a-
vis the proposal of Rs.2,500 crores by the Department, the Ministry had allocated 
Rs.692.94 in BE which was reduced to Rs.318.16 crores in the RE. The Committee notes 
with concern that, out of the much -reduced fund of Rs.318.16 crores, t he Department 
could utilize only Rs.266.16 crores up to 31.01.2021. The Committee has been informed 
by the DHI that under the Phase -II of FAME India Scheme, 6265 electrical buses have 

 30 
been sanctioned to various State/City Transport Undertakings which invol ves 
Government incentive of around Rs.3000 crores, which excludes the incentive on other 
segment of vehicles. In addition, approximately an amount of Rs.500 crore has been 
sanctioned by DHI for Electric Vehicles (EVs) Charging Stations in 68 cities across 25 
States/UTs. The Committee further notes that due to poor allocation of funds, the 
Flagship Scheme is already stagnating at its nascent stage. In the present scenario of 
high fuel prices, it is imperative that FAME India Scheme is promoted extensively. T he 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should give more impetus on 
FAME India Scheme and convince the Government for allocating sufficient funds at the 
RE Stage. It may also ensure that the funds allocated are expended fully.  
 
 (Para 28) 
Action Taken Replies 
It is informed that fund of Rs.318.36 cr. was allocated to FAME -India Scheme at 
RE stage in the financial year 2020 -21 and the entire amount of RE was utilized as on 
31.03.2021.  
Further, Rs. 756.66 Cr. has been allocated in BE 2021 -22 for FAME -India 
Scheme. With a view to boost the struggling Automotive Sector due to Covid -19 
Pandemic and consequent lock downs, necessary requirement of fund has been sought at 
RE stage 2021-22 for implementing the scheme seamlessly and effectively as pe r the set 
targets. MHI has  also taken all measures, including extension of scheme for two more 
years upto FY  2023-24, to ensure that the targets are met. Further, incentive under 
FAME-II Scheme has been increase to Rs.15,000/kwh from Rs.10,000/kwh for e -2W 
with an increase in cap from 20% to 40% of the price of e-2W w.e.f. 11th June, 2021. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
The Committee notes that under FAME-II scheme, the incentive in respect of 
electric two wheeler(e-2w) segment only has been increased  from Rs. 10,000/- kwhr 
to Rs. 15000/kwhr. The Committee, therefore, recommends that similar incentives 
should also be offered to other segments such as e -3w and e-4w (private vehicles) so 
that consumers feel encouraged to opt for EVs instead of ICE vehicl es, thereby 
expediting Electric Vehicle penetration in Automotive Sector in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. Of late, the Government has announced the much -awaited voluntary vehicle 
scrapping policy to phase out old polluting vehicles. It is sa id that with the approval of 
scrapping policy, India will become an automobile hub and the recycled material from 
old vehicles will help reduce prices. DHI in their written reply has informed that as per 

 31 
the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways, the sc rapping policy would cover an 
estimated 51 lakh Light Motor Vehicle (LMVs) that are above 20 years of age, besides 
another 34 lakh LMVs that are above 15 years. It would cover 17 lakh medium and heavy 
motor vehicles which are above 15 years. Hence the scra pping policy would give an 
impetus to sales in the automotive industry. However, the Auto Associations are of the 
view that the scrapping policy will not work without fiscal incentives in the form of 
rebates in GST, road tax and registration changes. The d etails of the policy are yet to be 
released. The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the Auto Associations 
and urges for inclusion of fiscal incentives in the policy like rebates in GST, roadtax and 
registration charges as done in the case of EVs in states like Delhi, to encourage 
replacement of old vehicles with newer ones.  
(Para 40) 
Action Taken Replies 
To boost demand,  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is encouraging 
replacement of old vehicles with newer ones. MoRTH has taken out the  following 
notifications: 
 
i) Draft GSR Notification 190(E) dt 15.03.2021 – 
The Draft Notification provides Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle 
Scrapping Facility) Rules, 2021 for establishment of Registered Vehicles Scrapping 
Facility (RVSF). 
 
ii) Draft GSR Notification 177(E) dt 12.03.2021-  
The Draft Notification provides that Certificate of Registration of Government -owned 
Vehicles would be non-renewable on lapse of 15 years. 
  
iii) Draft GSR Notification 191 (E) dt 15.03.2021- 
 The Dr aft Notification provides for revision of registration fee, fitness testing fee and 
fitness certification fee of vehicles. The initiative is towards creation of an ecosystem for 
phasing out of older polluting vehicles. 
  
iv) Draft GSR Notification 220 (E) dt 26.03.2021- The Draft Notification provides for 
concession in the motor vehicle tax for the vehicle registered against submission of 
"Certificate of vehicle scrapping".  
 
v) Draft GSR Notification 278(E)  dt 08.04.2021-  
The Draft Notification provides for recognition, regulation and control of Automated 
Testing Station. 
  
 
 

 32 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
 The Committee finds from the reply of the Ministry that there is no mention 
of Voluntary Vehicle Scrapping Policy. More over, the Notifications are  silent on 
rebates in GST.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the same in detail as it 
would bring clarity on this important issue.  Further, the Committee recommends 
again that Government should offer f inancial incentives to consumers who opt for 
EVs and are willing to scrap their old ICE vehicles at authorised scrappage centres, 
in order to fast track the transition to Electric Mobility. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee was informed that PSUs vizBridge and Roof Ltd., has outstanding 
dues to the tune of Rs.74.25 crores towards MSMEs for the goods and services received 
from them. The Committee recommends that Government may direct the PSU concerned 
to ensure that the pending dues to the MSMEs are released expeditiously. The Committee 
also desires to be updated of the action taken in this regard.  
(Para 84) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Status of outstanding dues related to Bridge & Roof Co. (l) Ltd. towards MSME 
as on 21.09.2021 as per the MSME Samadhaan Portal is given hereunder:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
ITEM Rs. in Crores Nos. 
I Total Pending (Application + Cases) 35.99 56 
II Details of (l)   
a) Payment made but yet to be 
acknowledged by vendor on portal 
6.91 19 
b) Disputed claims 29.08 37 
c)                  Total (II) 35.99 56 
III Undisputed Outstanding dues to MSMEs 
as on 21.09.2021 (III=I-II) 
NIL NIL 
 
 The undisputed outstanding dues to MSME as on 21.09.2021 is NIL. 
 

 33 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee recommends that MHI should play an active role in sett ling 
the disputed claims between the PSUs and MSME s with regard to outstanding dues 
so that the payment can be released to MSMEs for the goods and services received 
from them, without any further delay. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Committee notes with distress that in the dilly -dally approach of the 
stakeholders, the performance and efficiency of HEC is deteriorating and resulting into 
the Company incurring further losses. The Committee is apprehensive that, if this 
lethargic attitude continues, then HEC is likely to face the sa me fate as other PSUs 
decided for closure. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that DHI should 
vigorously pursue the matter with all the stakeholders concerned for revival/re -
structuring of HEC expeditiously.  
 (Para 96) 
Action Taken Replies 
On the direction of the Core Group of Secretaries (CGD), it was recommended to 
transfer HEC from Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) to Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) on “as is where is” basis. Subsequently, Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) had 
accorded “In Principle” approval to constitute a Group/Committee led by DAE, in order 
to evaluate modernization -revival of HEC. Accordingly, the said Committee had 
submitted its report, wherein it was decided that the status quo should be maintained for 
the administrative control of M/s HEC with Ministry of Heavy Industries and that M/s 
HEC should not be privatized. 
 The above status was informed to DIPAM for further direction from their end. 
The matter is under the consideration of DIPAM. 
   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
The Committee notes that in the Report of the Committee led by DAE it has 
been recommended that status quo should be maintained for administrative control 
of M/s HEC with M/o Heavy Industries and that M/s HEC should not be privatized 
and further the matter was under the consideration of DIPAM. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry may play a pro-active role in revival/restructuring of HEC, 
without further delay and take all possible necessary measures in this regard.  

 34 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. As part of examination of the DFG 2021 -22, some of the Automobile Association 
had submitted before the Committee the following concerns and  challenges facing the 
Industry that requires attention of the Government. The Committee recommends that DHI 
may suitably intervene with the Ministries concerned for addressing these issues:  
 Acute shortage of steel being supplied by domestic suppliers, le ading to increase 
in steel prices in the Country.  
 Acute shortage of containers and significant increase in price of international 
logistics.  
 Mandatory certification of some of the components like Safety Glass (for QCO) 
has been enforced. The implementati on of QCO for Safety Glass has deferred 
partially till 1st April, 2021 which needs to be extended further.  
 Implementation of Quality Control Orders (QCOs) and BIS licensing for auto 
components.  
 Hardships being faced due to delay in customs clearance post  implementation of 
CAROTAR.  
 Surge in price because of implementation of BS-VI emission norms.  
 Shortage of semiconductor and chips  
 To make Dealer's entire Auto Business (Dealership + Workshop) a part of 
MSME. Presently only 2 wheeler and passenger vehicl e dealers workshops are 
under MSME. 3 wheeler, commercial vehicle, tractors and construction 
equipment categories also needs to be included in MSME category.  
 Need of Auto Zone to redress the issue of Land Classification. Presently 
showroom land is conside red as commercial land and Workshop land is 
considered as Factory land. There are many Dealerships where showrooms and 
workshops are together and hence they face the brunt of local authorities in terms 
of defining their land use as both commercial and factory land.  
(Para 36) 
Action Taken Replies 
  It is informed that the recommendations/ observations along with the views of 
Automobiles Associations (SIAM/ACMA) regarding shortage of steel and containers etc 
are forwarded to Ministry of Steel and other conce rned Ministries for appropriate support 
to the industry. 

 35 
Further, it is informed that Automobile Wheel Rim Component (Quality Control) 
Order, 2020 was issued by the Ministry of Heavy Industries .   The implementation date 
has been extended   from earlier 21/ 09/2021 to 21/03/2022 due to the hardships being 
faced due to Covid. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
39. The Committee has been informed by the Auto Associations that the fast -tracking 
of emissions and fuel efficiency in India has resulted in large investments  and cost 
increase. Further the two big regulations which include CAFE Phase 2 and BS VI phase 
2 are to be implemented from April, 2022 and April, 2023 respectively. These regulations 
will have major economic impact leading to further cost increase affecti ng adversely the 
already stressed automobile industry. The per capita income of our country has not 
increased in the same tandem as the increase in cost. It was further informed that the 
Indian fuel emission standards are now equivalent to standards of man y automobile 
manufacturing countries globally and the fuel emission levels have gone down and also 
the fuel efficiency has improved significantly. The Auto Associations, therefore, suggested 
for deferment of the following emission regulations. The Committe e, with a view to boost 
the struggling Automotive Sector, the following suggestions of the Automobile 
Associations for temporary deferment in the emission regulations is forwarded for 
consideration of the Government:  
 
 BS VI Phase 2 Emission regulations, i ncluding RDE and PEMS which are 
notified for implementation from 1st April, 2023 may be deferred to 1st April, 
2024 for new models and 1st April, 2025 for existing models.  
 Phase 2 Fuel Efficiency Regulations for Passenger Vehicles notified for 
implementation from 1st April, 2022 may be deferred for implementation from 1st 
April, 2024.  
 Fuel Efficiency Regulation for Light, Medium and Heavy - Duty BS VI vehicles 
may also be implemented from 1st April, 2024.  
 OBD II Regulation for two Wheelers and three Whee lers scheduled for 1st April, 
2023 may be deferred and implemented in two phases, 1st Phase from 1st April, 2024 
and 2nd Phase from 1st April, 2026. 
 
(Para 37) 
 
 
 

 36 
Action Taken Replies 
It is informed that suggestions received directly from Automobiles Assoc iations 
regarding deferment in the emission regulations have been forwarded to the concerned 
Ministry/Department for favourable consideration.    Present recommendations of the 
Committee have also been shared with them. 
 
Background: 
 
(a)  India has submitte d its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in 2015 for 
the implementation of Paris Agreement in the post 2020 period. The NDC has 8 goals, 
including 3 quantitative goals, one of which is: reduction in emission intensity of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) by 33% to 35% by 2030 from 2005 levels. 
(b) Government has set a target of reducing import of crude oil by 10% for the year 
2022. 
(c) Ministry is trying to align Indian automotive standards to European standards for 
enhancing India‟s global competitiveness. 
(d) There is a dire need to reduce air pollution. 
CAFÉ Norms (Fuel Efficiency for Passenger vehicles) 
 
In order to meet the global commitment, the Ministry of Power, under the Energy 
Conservation Act, issued notification S.O. 1072(e) 23 rd April 2015 to e nsure that motor 
vehicle types approved under Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR) 1989 up to 3.5 tons 
gross vehicle weight follow the energy consumption standard for the purpose of 
manufacturing or importing for sale in the following manner:- 
 
 Each manufac turer shall comply with Energy consumption standard in the 
following phases: (i) The 1st phase was applicable from 1st April 2017 to 31st March 2022 
with a target CO 2 Emission of 13 gm/km. (ii) The second phase, effective from 1 st April 
2022, laid a target of CO2 emission equal to 113 gm/km. 
 
Therefore 7 years of preparation lead time was given to the auto manufacturers in mutual 
agreement with all the stake holders, including the automobile industry. 
 
Global Experience: 
The target of Japan for the year 2020 was 115gm/km. 
The European Union has set a target of 95gm/km for 2021. 
 

 37 
Fuel Efficiency norms for Light, Medium and Heavy Duty Motor Vehicles 
Fuel Efficiency norms have not been implemented so far. 
 
Inter-Ministerial Committee under MoPNG has already fin alized the fuel 
efficiency norms. However, due to BS VI and revision of axle loads, the correction 
factors have been finalized with the participation of the industry. It is under approval. 
 
Real Driving Emissions (RDE): 
To reduce emission performance gap o f vehicles between lab and real driving 
conditions, Real Driving Emission (RDE) regulation was introduced with Bharat Stage 
VI (BS VI) norms, vide GSR 889(E) dated 16 th Sept. 2016. India also made RDE 
measurement mandatory during type approval and COP (Con formity of production) 
applicable from 1 st April, 2020 for data collection and from 1 st April, 2023 for meeting 
Conformity factor (CF). Europe has made these regulations applicable from September, 
2017. Therefore, sufficient lead time has been given to the  automotive industry to meet 
the timeline. 
 
On Board Diagnostics 
 
On-board diagnostics („OBD‟) is essential for timely repair and maintenance of 
vehicle. It is required to review the list of devices monitored for electric circuit 
malfunctions, including excess emissions. 
 
OBD requirements for BS-VI compliant 2W in India 
OBD system specifications for two-wheelers have been included for the first time 
in the BS VI regulation in September 2016. 
 
India has introduced OBD -I for Wheelers from 1 st April 2020. The applicable 
requirements are circuit continuity checks, MIL (Malfunction Indicator Lamp) 
requirement, electrical disconnection of EVAP (Evaporative purge control) system and 
EGR (Exhaust Gas Recirculation) monitoring. 
 
OBD-II goes a step ahead. Apart from O BD-I requirement, it proposes to include 
catalytic converter monitoring, misfire detection and oxygen sensor monitoring for 
deterioration along with OBD threshold emission requirements. The requirements of 2W 
OBD I and II are summarized in the table below:- 
 

 38 
OBD Functions and Associate 
Monitoring Items OBD Stage I (BS VI) 
1st April, 2020 
OBD Stage II (BS 
VI) 1ST April, 2023 
Circuit continuity for all emission 
related power train component (if 
equipped) 
 
 
 
Distance travelled since 
MIL(malfunction indicator lamp) ON 
  
Electrical disconnection of electronic 
evaporative purge control device (if 
equipped and active) 
 
 
 
 
Catalytic converter monitoring    
EGR system monitoring   
Misfire detection   
Oxygen sensor deterioration   
 
OBD II Threshold limits: 
The OBD system shall indicate the failure of an emission -related component or 
system when that failure results in emissions exceeding the OBD emission threshold 
limits of CO (Carbon Monoxide), NMHC (Non -methane hydrocarbons) and NOx 
(Nitrogen Oxide). 
 
Conclusion: 
Due to global commitments, to reduce air pollution, to align with global standards 
and with sufficient time having already been given to the automobile industry, it would 
be challenging to extend the deadline. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
40. The GST rates on automobiles are at the highest level of 28%. Indian industry 
and suppliers have invested significant resources to migrate to BS -VI. As far as two -
wheelers are concerned, in leapfrogging from BS -IV to BS -VI, Industry has recorded a 
35% increase in cost in the last quarters. Small engine size two -wheelers are used by a 
major population of self -employed, entrepreneurial common people. Hence there is need 
to consider the affordability for end -customer. Reduction in GST rate would help 
sustained growth in the industry and accelerate the adoption of BS -VI and improve GST 
collection accruing from increased sale. The Committee, therefore, recommends that to 
improve affordability of the customers and simultaneously boost the automobile sector, 
the GST rate on all segments may be reduced from 28% to 18%. The decreased GST rate 
would prove to be an impetus to enhance the sales and thereby, would offset the losses, if 
any, to the Exchequer kitty.  
(Para 39) 

 39 
Action Taken Replies 
To overcome the issu es faced by the automotive industry, Department had a 
meeting with leaders of the auto industry SIAM, ACMA and several OEMs 
manufacturers for suggestions. Department has forwarded the recommendation to the 
Department of Revenue for reduction of GST. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
41. The Committee notes that presently, there is no parity in the Road Tax imposed by 
different States. The Committee has been informed that the MoRTH has been discussing 
this issue with States and is proposing an agenda of “One Natio n One Tax” as per the 
recommendation of the Committee made in its report on Demands for Grants (299th). 
The Committee is hopeful that the Government will introduce one Nation-One Tax for the 
benefit of the people across the country. 
(Para 41) 
Action Taken Replies 
Matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and is 
under consideration. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
42. The Committee notes that in October, 2018 the Government had approved the 
Revival and Mill Development Plan (RMDP)  of NEPA Ltd. which was slated to be 
completed in December, 2019 with a total financial package of Rs.469.41 crores. 
However, the RMDP missed its first deadline and, as intimated by DHI, was likely to be 
completed in September, 2020 as it has been designed  to boost production and 
support/generate local employment. On completion of RMDP, NEPA is expected to 
produce 1,00,000 MT p.a. of Writing & Printing Paper and Newsprint paper which will 
help minimise imports and increase exports. Since the lockdown has be en eased almost 
completely, the manpower and other facilities are available for carrying out RMDP 
works in full swing. DHI had apprised the Committee that a Monitoring Committee under 
the Chairmanship of AS&FA, DHI has been constituted to regularly review the progress 
of the implementation of the RMDP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts 
should be made on a priority basis to complete the RMDP of NEPA expeditiously. A 
compliance report on this aspect may be furnished to the Committee.  
(Para 90) 
 

 40 
Action Taken Replies 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
03.10.2018 approved the proposal for providing additional budgetary support of Rs. 
469.41 crores to NEPA Limited to meet the revised cost estimates of the RMDP, payment 
of pending salary/wage and statutory dues and for funding VRS of about 400 employees 
of NEPA Ltd.  
 
As directed by the CCEA, a monitoring committee under the chairmanship of the 
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor, Ministry of Heavy Industri es was constituted 
to periodically review the progress of the implementation of RMDP of Nepa Ltd. A 
technical committee comprising of the field experts from other CPSEs under MHI and 
CPPRI was also constituted by the MHI to assist the monitoring committee. 
As on 31 st October, 2021, 22 meetings of the aforesaid monitoring committee 
have been held and efforts are being made to complete the RMDP at the earliest despite 
impediments like delayed/insufficient supplies of the paper machines and rewinders etc. 
by foreign supplier who had gone i nto insolvency proceedings and countrywide lock -
down due to Covid -19 pandemic which resulted into unavailability of sufficient skilled 
manpower at Nepa site to execute the project activities. 
 
***** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 

IV 
Fourth Meeting  
 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry 
met at 10:30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 21st December, 2021 in Committee Room 
„A‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
        1.        Dr. K. Keshava Rao         -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.    Shri Hardwar Dubey 
3.    Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
4.    Shri Shwait Malik  
5.    Shri Sanjay Seth 
6.   Shri Abdul Wahab  
7.    Dr. Amee Yajnik 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
8.    Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
9.    Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
       10.    Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
       11.   Shri Ramprit Mandal 
       12.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
       13.   Shrimati Gomti Sai 
       14.   Shri Sunil Soren 
       15.   Shri  Thirunavukkarasar S.U.   
       16.   Shri Vijay Kumar (alias) Vijay Vasanth 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Pratap Shenoy, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
42 

At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. 
Thereafter, the Committ ee took up for consideration the draft 3 10th and 311th 
Action T aken Reports on the 304 th and 306 th Reports of the Committee 
pertaining to Demand for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises and Ministry of Heavy Industries respectively and 3 12th 
Report on the “Impact of COVID -19 Pandemic on MSME Sector and 
Mitigation Strategy adopted to counter it” . After a brief discus sion, the 
Committee adopted the draft 310th, 311th and 312th Reports unanimously. 
 
2. The Committee then decided to present/lay the above Reports in both the 
Houses of Parliament on Wednesday, the 22 nd December, 2021. It was decided 
that the Reports may be presented in the Rajya Sabha by the Chairman and in 
his absence by Shri Sanjay Seth , MP and in his absence by Shri Narain Dass 
Gupta, MP. Likewise, the Comm ittee decided that in the Lok Sabha, Shri 
Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi, MP and in his absence Shri Vincent H. Pala, MP 
would lay the Reports. 
  
3.  The Committee then adjourned at 10.55 a.m 
 
                      
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 