PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
  
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
  
  
ONE HUNDRED - EIGHTH REPORT 
  
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 91st REPORT 
OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON COIR BOARD 
A PERFORMANCE REVIEW PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF 
AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA) 
  
Website:http//rajyasabha.nic.in 
E.mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (i) CHAPTER --- I 
  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government 
  (ii) CHAPTER --- II 
  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's Replies 
  (iii) CHAPTER --- III 
  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
Page 1 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
     *1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander     -----     Chairman 
           RAJYA  SABHA 
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
     3.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed 
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot 
     5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram 
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
    10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
    11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy 
    12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
    13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi 
    14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
           LOK  SABHA 
    15.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
    16.   Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
    17.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty 
    18.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
    19.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
    20.   Shri Deepak Kumar 
    21.   Shri Thomas Hansda 
    22.   Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan 
    23.   Shri A. C. Jose 
    24.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
    25.   Shri Brijal Khabri 
    26.   Shri Sunil Khan 
    27.   Shri Manjay Lal 
    28.   Dr. K. Malaisamy 
    29.   Shri A. Narendra 
    30.   Shri Ananta Nayak 
    31.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel 
    32.   Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel 
    33.   Shri Uttamrao Patil 
    34.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah 
    35.   Shri P. Rajendran 
    36.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
    37.   Shri Tarachand Sahu 
    38.   Shri Ramanand Singh 
    39.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
  (iv) CHAPTER --- IV 
  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final Replies of the Government have not 
been received 
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
5. MINUTES 
Page 2 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

    40.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain 
    41.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur 
    42.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
    43.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma 
           SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
           Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary  
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing  Committee on Industry, having been
authorised by the Committee, hereby present this One Hundre d-eighth Report on the Acti on Taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 91st Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry on Coir Board---A Performance Review pertaining to Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries. 
2.      The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered  and adopted the Draft report
at its meeting held on the 17th December, 2002. 
3.      The 91st Report of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to the 
Hon'ble Chairman Rajya Sabha on 20th August, 2002 and to Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2002 and laid on the
Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2002.
 
REPORT 
        The One Hundred-eighth Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 91st Report of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on 
Industry on the Coir Board---A Performance Review pertaining to the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries which was 
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 11th December, 2002. 
2.     Action Taken Notes have been received from the Gove rnment in respect of the reco mmendations contained in the
Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
(i)    Recommendations/Observations, which have been accep ted by the Government:- Paras: 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.6, 4.12, 
4.14, 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22, 4.23, 5.1, 5.2, (Chapter-I).  
(ii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view of the government's 
replies: - Paras : 4.8, 4.11 (Chapter - II). 
(iii)   Recommendations/Observations in repect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Government: -
Paras: 4, 4.4, 4.13, 4.15, 4.19, 4.25, (Chapter - III). 
(iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been received: -
Para: 4.24 (Chapter - IV). 
(v)   Observations/Recommendations at a Glance. (Chapter - V).  
3.     The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries has accepted its
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter -I of the Report.  
4.     In respect of the recommendations made in Chapte r-II the Committee is convinced wi th the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries and therefore does not want to pursue further.  
5.     The Committee expresses its concern over the no n-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapte r-III 
NEW DELHI 
17 December, 2002 
  
DR.  P.C. ALEXANDER
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry
 
Page 3 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

and therefore the Committee desires that the Ministry of Ag ro & Rural Industries would furnish logical explanation in
respect of these recommendations. 
6.     In respect of recommendation placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries has either furnished
the interim replies or couched its language in vague terms li ke the ministry's views have been conveyed to concerned
agencies, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry  of Agro & Rural Industries  would furnish Action Taken
Note in respect of recommendat ions categorized in Chapte r-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit
of the recommendations of the Committee. 
7.     The details of the ATR is being discussed in various chapters in the succeeding pages.  
CHAPTER - I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
PROBLEM  FACED  BY  THE  WHITE  FIBRE  MANUFACTURERS  
Para 4.2 
Recommendation 
        Government should explore ways and means to solve the problem faced by the white fibre manufacturers in the 
absence of proper retting facilities. 
Action Taken Note 
        As a result of the pressure on  retting sites as well as the arduous nature  and drudgery involved , traditional retting
of coconut husk has been on the decline. Instead of retting the whole husk, for considerably long period prior to
defibering, technology has been developed by the Coir Boar d to ret the mechanically extr acted fibre for improving its
quality. This pollution free retting pro cess of green husk fibre using "Coirret", a bacterial consortia, developed by the
Central Coir Research Institute of the Co ir Board, reduces retting period of coir fibre to 3 days. Retting of green hus k
fibre using Coirret has been successfully demonstrated in the white fibre sector. A large quantity of coir fibre and
coconut husk has been retted using Coirret and the popularisation of Coirret retting are being extended to other areas
also. The industry is being encouraged to set up such common facility centres for retting fibre using Coirret. 
EXPORT OF COIR PITH 
Para 4.3 
Recommendation 
        The Committee observed that extraction of 1 Kg. fibre gene rates 2 Kgs. of coir pith. Of late, there are signs o f
booming export market for the product as  it can be converted into organic ma nure. "The coir in dustry should take
opportunity to exploit the untapped export market and the Go vernment should provide all assistance to such exporters".
Action Taken Note 
        Besides offering financia l assistance for setting up coir pith processi ng units, coir pith te sting and certification 
facility has also been provided by the Board. The Board is extending assistance to promote export of coir pith through
several schemes like assistance to exporters for participating in exhibitions, fairs, business tours, etc. 
SETTING UP OF COIR INDUSTRIAL CLUSTERS  
Para 4.5 
Recommendation 
        In all major coconut growing areas, cluster may be identifi ed where coir industrial activities could be established. 
In these clusters, coir industri al infrastructure should be set up, preferably in the priv ate sector. Coir Board can give
basic techno-economic feasibility for setting up such production infrastructure. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Ministry through Coir Board has been implemen ting a UNDP funded project "Technology Transfer, 
Page 4 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

Modernisation and Capacity Building in the Indian Coir Se ctor" Under this programme, 6 coir industrial clusters at
Alleppey and Quilon in Kerala, Pollac hi and Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu, Arsikere in Karnataka and Rajahmundry in
Andhra Pradesh have been identified and various promotio nal and developmental activities are being implemented. The
Board is also providing techno-economic consultancy to the prospective entrepreneurs. 
IDENTIFYING  THE  POTENTIAL  COIR  MACHINERY  MANUFACTURERS  
Para 4.6 
Recommendation 
        Special efforts have to be made to identify the potentia l coir machinery manufacturer s who can be supported with 
appropriate technology transfer from any available areas. This activity may be taken up as joint venture programmes
with greater emphasis on private sector participation ensuring faster commercialisation. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Ministry through Coir Board has initiated co llaborative projects involving pr ivate sector participation and
reputed research institutions for develo pment of coir machinery. Such projects include development of a versatile coi r
yarn spinning machine, loom for weaving of blended fibre products, mobile defibering units etc.  
MODERNISATION  OF  COIR  INDUSTRY 
Para 4.12 
Recommendation 
        The Government should aim at rapid modernisation for th e overall sustainable developm ent of the coir industry, 
focusing on research and development, quality improvem ent, human resource development, better marketing o f
products and welfare support to the needy, particularly the less privileged group like women coir workers who
constitute more than 80 per cent of the work force.  
Action Taken Note 
        The Board, in the Tenth Plan, has proposed several schemes for research and development programmes focusing 
on modernisation of extraction and processing of fibre, development of coir machinery, product development and
diversification, testing and service facility, training, ex tension and quality improvement , export market promotion,
domestic market promotion, development of production in frastructure, cluster developm ent and welfar e measures fo r
the overall sustainable development of coir industry. 
R&D  PROJECTS  IN  COIR  INDUSTRY 
Para - 4.14 
Recommendation 
        The Coir Board in coordination with State Government should make an endeavour to undertake more sponsored
R&D projects in association with reputed agencies in both the public and private sectors.  
Action Taken Note 
        The Board has taken several initiatives for collaborative an d sponsored research with reputed agencies both in the 
public and private sectors. Steps are also being taken to evolve a strategy for R&D in association with the State
Governments, especially of Kerala which has come forward pro-actively for carrying out R&D programmes for filling 
the technology gaps. 
BRAND IMAGE FOR THE INDIAN COIR 
Para 4.16 
Recommendation 
        There should also be an attempt to develop the brand image for the Indian Coir which should in stantly evoke an
sense of unique craftsmanship and assured quality. 
Page 5 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

Action Taken Note 
        The Coir Board has already initiated action for branding of Indian Coir under the brand name "Indian Coir" M/s. 
Ferguson & Co. has been engaged for a feasibility study. Based on their report further action will be taken.  
LAUNCHING OF NATIONAL COIR GEOTAXTILE TECNOLOGY MISSION 
Para 4.17 
Recommendation 
        The Committee desires that initially demonstration projects  for the use of coir geotex tiles may be taken up in 
different parts of the country through di fferent departments like Agriculture, Fo rest, PWD, Irrigation, etc. A National
Coir Geotextile Technology Mission for popularisation of coir geotextiles may be launch ed with support from Central
and the concerned State Governments. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Coir Board has already conducted demonstration on the application of coir geotextiles in various geographical
conditions in association with Kerala Agricultural Univer sity, Cochin University of Science & Technology, CWSRI,
Dahradun, Border Road s Organisation, etc. The observation of th e Committee for a National Coir Geotextiles
Technology Mission has been noted and pursued further.  
FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  FOR  TECHNOLOGY  UPGRADATION  IN  COIR  INDUSTRIES 
Para - 4.18 
Recommendation 
        Financial assistance for technology upgradation, revitalization and augmentation of training centres especially in 
areas where coir is yet to penetrate should be given. Such assistance should also be given for cluster development
programmes and marketing both for internal consumption and export.  
Action Taken Note 
        A Proposal has been included in the 10th plan to carry out the above recommendation of the Committee. Cluste r 
development has been adopted as a development strategy in the coir sector, as the experience gained through
implementing the UNDP project has amply demonstrated its effectiveness. 
SETTING  UP  OF  SEPARATE  CELL  FOR  COIR  INDUSTRY  BY  STATE  GOVERNMENTS 
Para 4.19 
Recommendation 
        Each of the State Governments may be advised to set up a separate cell for the coir industry in their respective
departments of industry, preferably under the SSI Sector. The District Industries Centres or District Rural Development
Agencies of the concerned district may be made the Nodal Agency for the develo pment of coir where there is coconut
cultivation. 
Action Taken Note 
        In the State of Kerala there is a sepa rate Directorate for Coir. In States like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka there are
separate cells for the coir industry. In other State Govern ments the Coir industry rela ted matters are dealt by the
Industries Department of the concerned States. The State Governments have been requested that the DIC or DRDA etc.
may be made the Nodal Agency for the development of coir as recommended by the Committee. 
COIR COOPERATIVES SOCIETIES PROJECT WITH THE HELP OF N.C.D.C.  
Para 4.20 
Recommendation 
        Specific project may be taken up for restructuring the coir  cooperative Societies in all States with the help o f
National Cooperative Development Corporation for which wholehearted support for the concerned State Governments
Page 6 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

has to be solicited. 
Action Taken Note 
        Integrated Coir Development Projects for modernisation and infrastructure development of the coir industry in the 
cooperative sector been under implementation in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and West Bengal in association with
the National Cooperative Development Co rporation. Other State Governments have also been urged to take steps fo r
availing NCDC Project for coir cooperatives. 
SETTING UP OF NATURAL HARD FIBRE DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
Para - 4.21 
Recommendation 
        To set up a Natural Hard Fibre Development Board with a pre-eminent position for the coir sector. The Committee 
recommends that a policy decision may be taken to this concept come true. 
Action Taken Note 
        The administrative Ministry has noted this recommendation  of the Committee. The feasibility of setting up such
an institutional arrangement has to be ascertained in detail. 
UNDP PROJECT IN INDIAN COIR SECTOR 
Para 4.22 
Recommendation 
        The Committee was informed that the Coir Board has been  implementing a project ent itled Technology Transfer, 
Modernisation and Capacity Building in Indian Coir Sector with funding from UNDP. Under the project, the Board has
identified six coir clusters in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala. The Project is at the half-way stage. 
The Committee expects that on completion of the project, based on experience , a replicable strategy for overall
development of the industry could be formulated. 
Action Taken Note 
        The project comes to an end by 31.12.02 Several develo pmental initiatives taken up under the project like the 
formation of SHGs, Exporters Consortium, Manufacturers Consortium, Raw Material Bank, Revitalisation and cost
reduction strategies etc. are all replicable models and henc e can be adopted for implementation in other areas as well.  
ARRANGEMENTS OF REGIONAL OFFICES OF COIR BOARD IN JHARKHAND AND NORTH
EASTERN STATES 
Para 4.23 
Recommendation 
        Arrangements should be made to equip the Regional Offices with sufficient manpower so as to enable it to cater to
needs of remote areas like the North-East States and Jharkhand etc. 
Action Taken Note 
        As a part of the restructuring exercise, consequent upon the recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms
Commission, necessary steps are contemplated to augment the Regional Offices to ca rry out the activities more
effectively and efficiently in the remote areas like North-East and Jharkhand as observed by the Committee. 
FINANCIAL PACKAGE FOR COIR INDUSTRY 
Para 5.1 
Recommendation 
        The Committee feels that there is a need  to provide more funds to the Coir Board to strengthen the coir sector. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries should wo rk out a financial package for the coi r
Page 7 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

sector to enable it to meet the challenges of economic  liberalisation and progressive withdrawal of quantitative
restrictions, etc. 
Action Taken Note 
        The outlay for coir sector in the Ninth Five Year Plan wa s increased from Rs. 30 crore in Eighth Plan to Rs. 60 
crore. A still higher outlay has been envisaged in the Tenth Plan also. In the Tenth Plan outlay has been fixed to Rs.
115 crore. 
POPULARISING COIR PRODUCT 
Para 5.2 
Recommendation 
        The Committee desires that appropriate action may be taken to give a fillip to the mu ch neglected coir industry
and realise its export potential. The Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries should take up publicity campaign of coi r
products and launch awareness programmes in these areas for making them popularise and household name.  
Action Taken Note 
        The export of coir products have been registering a su stained growth in the recent past. Several programmes like 
participation in fairs, exhibitions, catalogue shows, ma rket development missions, ex ternal market development
assistance for exporters, new brochures, updated web site , Coir Trade Information Centre, etc. are being implemented
to promote the export of coir products. Necessary outlays ha ve also been included in the Tenth plan for popularising
coir products both in the domestic and export markets. 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE  DOES  NOT  DESIRE  TO 
PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT'S  REPLIES 
NATIONAL LEVEL PROJECT FOR CREATION OF AWARNESS ABOUT COIR PRODUCTS  
Para 4.8 
Recommendation 
        The Committee recommends that a national level project may be evolved for creation  of awareness about coi r 
products, development of market, production of diversified goods, mass consumption and quality assurance. It is
understood that some steps have already been taken to establish a Coir Trade Inform ation Centre for collection,
analysis and dissemination of information. It should become one of the principal activities of the Coir Board in the
changed circumstances. This sector can develop through flow of information especially marketing and technology
which is possible through I.T assisted programmes.
 
Action Taken Note 
        The Ministry through Coir Board has already initiated action for development of products and diversified use o f
coir through collaborative research with reputed institutions like IIT, Bombay, IIT, New Delhi, ATO-DLO, Netharland, 
IPRITI, Bangalore and NID, Ahmedabad. Board also encourages private manufacturers for development of new
products, R&D activities, etc. 
        The Coir Trade Information Centre started func tioning at the Headquarters of Coir Board to provide all 
information pertaining to coir industry. The Centre is assisted by trained personnel in the field. The Centre will work 16
hours a day for the time being, and 24 hours service in due course.
 
EXPORT OF COIR PRODUCTS 
Para 4.11 
Recommendation 
        Thrust may be given to boost export of coir products and assistance of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation may 
be sought in the matter. The Committee also recommends that possibility of mutual cooperation in possible areas
Page 8 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

between India and other neighbouring coir producing countries may be exploited. 
Action Taken Note 
        The assistance of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation is being availed by the coir exporters. 
        In the recently conducted annual meeting of th e Asia Pacific Coconut Community, a proposal has been mooted fo r 
strategic alliance among coir producing countries in th e Asia-Pacific Region. The Conference r ecognised the 
importance of the proposal and resolved that APCC shall pursue efforts to build up a network of countries which are
currently producers of coir and other countries with potential to produce coir. In the emerging global scenario, such
international cooperation will be of great significance.   
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESP ECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT 
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
SPREAD OF ERIOPHID DISEASE AFFECTING PRODUCTION OF COCONUT  
Para 4 
Recommendation 
        The Committee all out efforts should be made to check the spread of the disease so that the size of the hus k 
remains normal and yields good quality fibre.  
Action Taken Note 
        The Eriophid mite disease has affected the production of co conut. The disease has resulted in smaller size of the 
nut leading to low yield and inferior quality of fibre. The Coconut Development Board has been implementing various
programmes to control the eriophid mite disease in the coco nut producing States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
etc. 
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee noted the reply. The Committee de sires that it should be apprised of results of various
programme implemented by the Coconut Development Board in various States, State-wise.  
SETTING  UP  OFFICES  OF  THE  COIR  BOARD  IN  ALL  BROWN  FIBRE  PRODUCING  STATES  
Para 4.4 
Recommendation 
        The Government should set up offices of th e Coir Board in all brown fibre producing States and in 
coordination with the State Gove rnments arrange awareness programmes and training programmes for the
benefit of private enterpreneurs and labours. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Coir Board has set up Regional Offices at Poll achi in Tamil Nadu,. Bang alore in Karnataka, and
Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh, to promote activities in the coir sector. These regional offices on their own and in
association with the State Governments and local NGOs, ar range, awareness programmes, skill development training,
entrepreneur development programmes, etc. in the non-traditional areas. These programmes are mainly aimed at
benefiting private entrepreneurs and rural workforce.
 
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee notes that Coir Board has its re gional offices in traditional Coconut producing States like 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The Committee feels that Coir Board should have its offices at
non-traditional areas to promote coir industry.
 
INVOLVEMENT  OF  PRIVATE  SECTOR  AND  STATE  GOVERNMENT  IN  
Para 4.13 
Recommendation 
Page 9 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

        The Committee stresses the need for greater emphasis on the involvement of the private sector as well as the
concerned State Government. The Board should also take advantage of programmes under other Ministries for
this sector. 
Action Taken Note 
        In the changed circumstances, the Coir Board has assume d the role of a facilitato r and promoter with greate r 
emphasis on participation of private sector and State Govern ments in the development activi ties of the coir industry.
The Board also endeavours to take benefit of the sche mes under other Ministries/agencies for better synergy in
improvement of development programmes. 
        Recently the Government of India have remove d coir processing units from the negative list of REGP 
implemented by the Khadi & Village Indu stries Commission. The Board has been seeking the assistance from financial
institutions like nationalized banks, SIDBI, NABARD etc.  for implementing schemes for the development of coi r
industry. 
        The Board in association with the develo pment programmes of State Governments, DRDA, State PSUs 
Cooperative Federations etc. undertak es several development and promotiona l programmes, especially in capacity
building, entrepreneurship development and market promotion. 
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee notes the reply that the Coir Bo ard facilitates the participatio n of private sector and State
Government in the development activities of the Coir In dustry and takes benefits fr om the schemes under other
Ministries. The Committee desires that a detailed note may be submitted by the Coir Board as to how they have
facilitated. Private Sector and State Government and taken the advantage of schemes of other Ministries during
the last three years. 
MAN  POWER  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME  FOR  SKILL  UPGRADATION  IN  NON-
TRADITIONAL   COCONUT PRODUCING  STATES  
Para 4.15 
Recommendation 
        Appropriate manpower deve lopment programme for skill upgradation in various fields, especially in non-
traditional areas, is to be devised. Efforts for upgradation  of skill of artisans and technical/managerial personnel
required for the industry are to be organised in coordi nation with NGOs, cooperative  societies and other State
Government institutions. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Ministry through Coir Board has been implement ing several training programmes including those fo r 
entrepreneurship development, in association with th e NGOs. Cooperative Societies and other State Government
institutions, the result of which has been quite encouraging.  
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee notes that Coir Board is im plementing certain training programme. The Committee desires 
that it should be apprised of the details of efforts made in upgrading the skill in non-traditional coconut 
producing States during the last three years, State-wise. 
Para 4.19 
Recommendation 
        Every State capital should have at least one outlet of the Coir Board and exhibition should be made periodically in 
all cities and small towns of the States for awareness as well as marketing purpose. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Expenditure Reforms Commission has recomme nded that the Coir Board s hould not engage in direct 
production and direct marketing. They  have suggested to progressively close down showrooms of the Coir Board
Page 10 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

except the showrooms in the Metropolitan towns which may function as display and demo nstration centres to create
awareness among the public about coir prod ucts. The Board participated in important fairs and exhibitions in cities and
towns and also organise buyer-seller meets to promote coir products and its marketing.  
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee notes that the Expenditure Comm ission has suggested closing down Show Rooms of the
Coir Board except the Show Rooms in me tropolitan towns. The Committee feels that this is a negative line
adopted by the Government. The Committee recommends that Show Rooms in small towns should continue to
create awareness among the public about coir products.
 
AWARENESS PROGRAMME ON COIR INDUSTRY IN ANDHRA PRADESH  
Para 4.25 
Recommendation 
        The Committee recommends that more awarene ss programmes should be la unched in Andhra Pradesh so
that coir is not wasted there. 
Action Taken Note 
        A number of training programmes, Entrepreneurship Deve lopment Programmes, financial assistance for setting up
coir manufacturing units, participation in  fairs and exhibitions, buyer-seller meets,  etc. are organised regularly to create 
awareness about the economic importance of coir industry. The production of coir fibr e has been on the increase in
Andhra Pradesh, which indicates a higher utilisation of coconut husk.  
Further Recommendation 
        The Committee notes that a number of prog ramme held to create awareness in Andhra Pradesh. The
Committee desires that it should be apprised about (i) Training programme (ii) En trepreneurship Development
programme (iii) Financial assistance of setting up coir manufacturers units. (iv) Fair s and exhibitions (v) Buyer-
seller meets organized in Andhra Pradesh in last three years.  
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESP ECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED. 
DIFFICULTIES FACED BY THE COIR TRAINING CENTRES IN ANDHRA PRADESH  
Para 4.24 
Recommendation 
        The Committee also observes that existing training centres in Andhra Pradesh are unable to sustain themselves as 
the State Government is not able to cate r to their financial needs. Their functioning runs into rough weather for want o f
adequate financial support. The Committee,  therefore, recommends that the Government of India should provide them
with sufficient funds for their smooth running. 
Action Taken Note 
        The Regional Coir Training and Development Centre, Rajamundry and the Demonstration cum Production Centre, 
Narsapuram in A.P. were set up by the Coir Board on behalf  of the State Governments with the clear understanding that
these Centres will be taken over by the State Governments at the end of the stipulated period. Even after that period the
State Governments did not come forward to take over them  in spite of repeated requests. Hence the Centres were
constrained to be closed down to facili tate greater participation of the Governments in capacity building programmes in
the coir sector, the expenditure towards this which is very nominal, may be met by the State Government itself. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
        The Committee noted the reply. The Committee desires that  it should be apprised of results of various 
programmes implemented by the Coconut Development Board in various States, State-wise. 
(Para 4)
Page 11 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

        The Committee notes that Coir Board has its regional  offices in traditional coconut producing States like Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The Committee feels that Coir Board should have its offices at non-traditional 
areas to promote coir industry.                                (Para 4.4) 
        The Committee notes the reply that the Coir Board facilitates the participation of private sector and State
Government in the development activities of the Coir Industry and takes benefits from the schemes under othe r
Ministries. The Committee desires that a detailed note may be submitted by the Coir Board as to how they have
facilitated Private Sector and State Government and taken th e advantage of schemes of othe r Ministries during the last
three years.        (Para 4.13)
 
        The Committee notes that Coir Board is implemen ting certain training programme. The Committee desires that it 
should be apprised of the details of efforts made in upgr ading the skill in non-traditi onal coconut producing States 
during the last three years, State-wise.               (Para 4.15) 
        The Committee notes that the Expenditure Commi ssion has suggested closing do wn Show Rooms of the Coi r 
Board except the Show Rooms in metropolit an towns. The Committee feels that this is a negative line adopted by the
Government. The Committee recommends that Show Rooms in  small towns should continue to create awareness
among the public about coir products.             (Para 4.19)  
        The Committee notes that a number of programmes had been held to create awar eness in Andhra Pradesh. The
Committee desires that it should be ap prised about the details of (i) Traini ng programmes, (ii) Entrepreneurship
Development programmes, (iii) Financial assistance of setting up  coir manufacturers units , (iv) Fairs and exhibitions 
and (v) Buyer-seller meets organized in Andhra Pradesh in last three 
years.                                                                               (Para - 4.25)  
MINUTES 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH  MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday th e 17th December, 2002 in Commi ttee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
     1.   Dr. P.C. Alexander     -----     Chairman 
           RAJYA  SABHA 
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal 
     3.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
     4.   Dr. Faguni Ram 
     5.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
     6.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
     7.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil 
     8.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
     9.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
           LOK  SABHA 
    10.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee 
    11.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
    12.   Shri Thomas Hansda 
    13.   Shri A. C. Jose 
    14.   Shri Sunil Khan 
    15.   Shri Manjay Lal 
    16.   Shri A. Narendra 
    17.   Shri Ananta Nayak 
    18.   Shri P. Rajendran 
    19.   Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
    20.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain 
    21.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari 
Page 12 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm

           SECRETARIAT 
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary 
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary 
           Shri D.P Ahuja, Under Secretary 
2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Memb ers of the Committee and appris ed them of agenda for the 
meeting of the day. 
3.     Thereafter, The Committee took up following draft reports for consideration :- 
(i)    95th Draft Report on inter PSUs cooperation in Engineering and Construction Sectors the Department o f
Public Enterprises; 
(ii)    100th Draft Report on performance review of  National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NMDC)
(Ministry of Steel); 
(iii)   103rd Draft Report on the Action Taken on reco mmendations contained in Committee's 87th Report on the
Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat 
Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of Steel);
 
(iv)   104th Draft Report on the Action Taken on reco mmendations contained in Committee's 85th Report on the 
Implementation Status of Financial Assistance-cum-restructuring package and Revival of Bharat 
Refractories Ltd. (Ministry of Steel); 
(v)   104th Draft Report on the Ac tion Taken on recommend ations contained in Committee's 64th Report on
Modernisation, Restructuring and Expansion Pr ogrammes and Post Disinvestment Performance o f
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) (Ministry of Coal and Mines);  
(vi)   106th Draft Report Globalisation and Capital Go ods Industry the Department of Public Enterprises, 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  
(vii)  107th Draft Report on Liquidated Damages and Related Issues (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises); 
(viii) 108th Draft Report on the Action Taken on recomme ndations contained in Committee's 91st Report on Coi r
Board---A Performance Review pertaining to the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries;  
(ix)   109th Draft Report on the Action Taken on re commendations contained in Co mmittee's 84th Report on 
Implementation of Prime Minister's Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala,
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries; and  
(x)   110th Draft Report on Action Taken on Reco mmendations contained in Committee's 86th Report on 
Performance Review of Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) (Ministry of Steel).  
3.1   *                                                                                     *                                                                                                             * 
3.2   *                                                                                     *                                                                                                             * 
3.3   *                                                                                     *                                                                                                             * 
3.4   After a brief discussion all the reports were adopted unanimously without any modification. 
3.5   The Chairman nominated two Members from Lok Sabh a and three Members from Rajya Sabha to present the 
reports to both Houses of Parliament. 
4.     *                                                                                     *                                                                                                             * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 P.M. 
Page 13 of 13108th Report of Standing Committee of Industry
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/indus/108threport.htm