 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND SECOND REPORT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 299th  Report of the Committee on Demands for   
Grants (2020-21) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industry 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) 
 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
 
  
 
   REPORT NO. 
302 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON INDUSTRY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND SECOND REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in  the 299th     Report of the    Committee on      Demands for   
Grants (2020-21)  pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry 
of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) 
 
(Presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February,2021) 
 
 
  
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………….. (i) 
 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………..  (ii) 
 
3. REPORT ………………………………………………………………………………….. 1-19 
  
 
 CHAPTER – I Recommendations/observations, which have been 
accepted by the Ministry  ……………………............. 
 
          2-3 
 
 CHAPTER–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to p ursue further in view of the 
Government's replies………………………………......... 
 
         4-6 
 CHAPTER–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the 
Committee has not accepted the replies of the Ministry  
and desires the  Ministry to review their replie s 
………………………................................................... 
 
         7-14 
 
 CHAPTER – IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which the                         
Committee desire further comments of the Ministry 
.............……................................................................ 
          15-19 
   
 
4.   Minutes……………………………………………………………………………..         20-22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
(Constituted  w.e.f.  13th September, 2020) 
1. Dr. K. Keshava Rao  -                                                   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
  2.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya    
 3. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
 4. Shri Shwait Malik 
 5. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 6. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 7. Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli 
 8. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 9. Shri Sanjay Seth 
 10. Dr. Amee Yajnik 
     LOK SABHA 
 11.   Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
 12.   Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
 13.   Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
 14.   Shrimati Annpurna Devi  
 15.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse  
 16.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
 17.   Ms. S. Jothimani 
 18.   Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanjibhai Kundariya 
 19.   Shri Ravindra Kushawaha 
 20.   Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
 21.   Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
 22.   Shri Rampreet Mandal 
 23.   Shri Vincent H. Pala 
 24.   Shri Chirag Paswan 
 25.   Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
 26.   Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy  
 27.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
 28.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 29.   Shri Sunil Soren 
 30.   Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
 31.   Shri Su Thirunavukkarasar 
                               
              SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3.  Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4.  Shri J.K. Mallick, Additional Director 
5.  Smt. Sreeja. V., Deputy Secretary 
6.  Shri. Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
7.  Smt. Deepti Rana, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

  INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Three Hundred 
and Second Report on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Heavy 
Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises) on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety 
Ninth Report on the Demands For  Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to the Department of 
Heavy Industry. 
 
2.  I, thank the Department of Heavy Industry (Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises) for furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations 
contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Ninety Ninth Report.  
 
3.  The Committee in its meeting held on the 16th October, 2020  considered and 
adopted the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
New Delhi 
October  16, 2020 
Asvina 24, 1942 (Saka) 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Chairman 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ( ii) 

 1 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) on 
the recommendations co ntained in the Committee‟s Two H undred and Ninety- Ninth 
Report on the Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to Department of Heavy 
Industry. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Heavy Industries 
and Public Enterprises (Department of Heavy Industry) in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 299th Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
Chapter-I    The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the                     
Ministry. 
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations 
as mentioned in the Chapter – I of the Report. 
 
Chapter-II-  The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire 
to  pursue further in view of the Government's replies. 
 
In respect of these recommendations, the Committee is convinced with the 
logic and explanation advanced by the Ministry and therefore does not 
want to pursue them further for the present. 
 
Chapter-III-    The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has  
  not accepted  replies of  the Ministry and  desires  the Ministry  to review    
  their replies. 
 
The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry in respect 
of recommendations contained in Chapter – III and desires that the 
Ministry in the light of further recommendations/observations of the 
Committee furnish comments/explanations thereof. 
 
Chapter-IV-  The  recommendations/observations  in respect  of   which   the   Committee 
desire  further comments of the Ministry. 
 
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter -IV, the Ministry has 
either furnished the interim replies, therefore, the Committee desires that 
the Ministry may furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of 
recommendations categorized in Chapter -IV in detail and to the point, as 
per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
 
3. The details of the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry and further 
recommendations/observations of the Committee thereon wherever found necessary are 
given in the succeeding pages.  
 

 2 
CHAPTER – I 
 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 1.              From the above table as per information furnished by the DHI, it can be seen 
that only a sum of Rs 1489.98 cr as BE is allocated for 2020-21 which is less than 50% of 
the demanded amount. DHI’s flagship scheme like FAME -India has been given very less 
allocation than what was projected by the Department. The sectors under DHI viz. 
Capital goods sector, heavy Engineering & Electrical, Auto sector are very critical to 
economic growth and any shortfall in fund may adversely affect the successful 
implementation and efficient performance of various schemes/Projects as they have a 
huge bearing on the economy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DHI should 
convince the M/o Finance for enhanced allocation at RE stage, so that the 
schemes/Projects/Initiatives could be implemented to its fullest capacity, so that the 
purpose & objective of the new initiatives are not defeated.   
 (para 9) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.    The outlay for the ambitious scheme FAME -II is Rs. 10,000 Crore for 3 years 
commencing from 1 stApril 2019. However the BE allocation for the year 2020 -21 is a 
meagre Rs 692.94 crores as agains t Rs. 2500 cr proposed by the Department. The 
Committee feels that with such a small allocation, the implementation of the project may 
be badly affected even in the initial stages itself. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the department should impres s upon the Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
sufficient funds at RE stage.  
(para 39)   
Action Taken Replies 
Under the scheme, Rs 692.4 cr is allocated against Rs 2500 cr sought by the Deptt 
in FY 2020 -21. The Committee‟s recommendation to impress upon  MoF to allocate 
sufficient funds at RE stage is noted for compliance.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. It can be seen from the above table that in the FY 2018 -19 the entire allocation of 
0.50 crores was surrendered with NIL utilization. Likewise the Dep artment utilized only 
0.20 crores out of the allocated fund of Rs 0.50 crores in FY 2019 -20, compelling the 
MoF to allot only a meagre amount of Rs 0.20 crores for the FY 2020 -21. The Committee 

 3 
notes that a sum of Rs 0.20 crores  is a miniscule amount to m eet the important aspect of 
promotional activities for creating awareness of the benefits of manufacturing and 
technology related aspects for the Capital Goods sector. The Department’s explanation 
that during the year 2018 -19 no suitable proposals were rec eived from the Industry 
associations/ PSUs for providing financial support is not well received by the Committee. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should pro -actively interact with the 
Industry/ PSUs for arranging effective promotional activiti es in large numbers to create 
vast awareness of the benefits of Capital Goods sector. The Committee also recommends 
that the DHI should seek more funds in RE 2020 -21 for carrying out promotional 
activities. 
(para 65) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The recommendations of the Committee to proactively interact with the Industry 
and PSUs for arranging effective promotional activities, to create awareness regarding the 
benefits of the Capital Goods sector shall be complied with. 
  
Further, as advised, the Department sha ll request for the increased budgetary 
allocations for RE 2020-21. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. Further, in reply to a query, it was brought to the notice of the Committee that out 
of an allocated amount of Rs 19 crores, the actual release under this h ead is only Rs 14 
crores and the balance of Rs 5 crores will be released before the close of the Financial 
year. As per the provisions of GFR, not more than 20% expenditure is to be extended in 
the last quarter of a financial year and such rush of spending  in the last quarter is likely 
to attract audit objections. Hence the Committee recommends that Ministry may avoid 
such rush of expenditure in the last quarter and to keep the spending pattern uniform 
throughout the year. 
(para 71) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The observations of the Committee are noted for future compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
CHAPTER–II 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE FURTHER IN VIEW OF 
THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee not es that there is huge variations in allocation of funds both at 
BE as well as RE stage. An a mount Rs. 2600 which was allocated at BE for the year 
2017-18 was cut down steeply to Rs. 1107.26 at RE stage. Likewise Rs. 1125.73 allotted 
as BE for the year 2018-19 was also reduced to 1036.24. Though in both those two years, 
DHI utilized the allocated fund in a relatively optimal manner, the huge variations in BE 
& RE do not exhibit prudent financial practice. For the present financial year 2019 -20, 
DHI could utilize only 80% of the RE upto 31.01.2020, with little time left for utilizing the 
remaining 20%. The Committee recommends that the Department of Heavy Industry 
which oversees important CPSEs, Engineering Industries and Auto Sector should ensure 
that the entire RE is fully utilized in the remaining period of the financial year, so that the 
important initiatives/schemes/projects do not suffer for lack of sufficient fund. Also in 
future the Department should rationalize the expenditure spreading all through the  year 
to avoid uneven spending. 
(para 8) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) promotes the development and growth of 
Capital Goods, Heavy Electrical Equipment and Auto sectors in the country. DHI also 
administers 29 CPSEs and 5 Autonom ous Organisations. Funds under DHI are released 
to Central Sector Schemes/Projects related to Auto & Capital Goods Sector. Funds are 
also released to Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under DHI in the various 
forms viz. grants, loans and investment for their revival, restructuring, closure etc. 
 
 In 2017 -18 Budget allocation for DHI was Rs. 2600.00 cr. which was meant 
mainly for NATRIP, FAME -India, Capital Goods, Hindustan Cables Ltd (HCL) and 
Implementation of VSS/VRS and Payment of Statutory Dues & Closure of sick Public 
Sector Enterprises. Budget allocation of Rs. 2600.00 cr. was reduced to Rs. 1107.26 cr at 
RE stage since fund earmarked for HCL could not be released due to non -materialization 
of financial settlement with unsecured creditors. Also , there were less proposals for 
Implementation of VSS/VRS and payment of statutory dues & closure of sick Public 
Sector Enterprises. However, almost entire amount of RE were utilised in FY 2017-18. 
  
Budget provision for the year 2018 -19 was Rs. 1125.73 cr . which was reduced to 
Rs. 1036.34 cr. at RE stage against which expenditure was Rs. 1034.13 cr. Almost the 
entire amount of RE was utilised in FY 2018-19. 
 

 5 
 In the financial year 2019 -20 budget provision was Rs. 1367.00 cr. which was 
reduced to Rs. 1308.6 1 cr. at RE stage against which expenditure was Rs. 1306.28 cr. 
Almost the entire amount (99.83%) of RE was  utilised by the end of FY 2019-20. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. From the table above, it can be seen that DHI has fully utilized the funds 
allocated in the FY 2016-17, FY 2017-18 & FY 2018-19. However, it is observed that the 
utilization of the funds upto 31.01.2020 has fallen short and is only 68% of the allotted 
fund of Rs. 500 crores. It is unlikely that the remaining 32% of fund will be utili zed in the 
remaining two months. The Committee therefore recommends that DHI should adopt a 
rationalised expenditure uniformly all through the year to avoid under -utilization of fund 
and subsequent surrender. 
(para 36) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Budget provisio n for FAME -India was Rs. 500.00 cr. in the FY 2019 -20. The 
same amount was retained as RE. The entire provision of BE/RE was utilised by the end 
of FY 2019-20. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. It may be seen from the above table that the actual Expenditure for the FY 2018 -
19 has been relatively optimal, slightly over - utilized. The expenditure trend of FY 2019 -
20 also appears to be in the right tempo of utilization. However, the Committee notes that 
BE for 2020-21 has been steeply upscaled to Rs 173.11 crore s which is a departure from 
the usual allocation trend of previous years. In the presentation made by the Department 
before the Committee, the Department had proposed a sum of Rs 265.41 crores for 
allocation. The Committee hopes that the Department will be able to convince MoF about 
the rationale behind demanding more funds and additional funds of Rs 265.41 crores as 
proposed by the Department will be made available to it in RE 2020 -21 for supporting 
ambitious projects. 
 (para 49) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
An amount of Rs 265.41 crores was proposed as BE 2020 -21 for the following 
reasons:  
 
i) The time period for the Scheme for “Enhancement of Competitiveness in the Indian 
Capital Goods Sector” has been extended up to March, 2021. Thus, the balance scheme 
funds were sought by the Department for FY 2020-21 to complete the on-going projects.  
 
ii) In addition, funds were sought as a token provision for the  proposed Phase II of the 
Capital Goods Scheme for funding of technology development projects. 

 6 
   
 The funds al located of Rs. 173.11 crore as BE 2020 -21 are for the ongoing 
Capital Goods Scheme. For Phase II of the Scheme, additional funds would be sought by 
the Department at RE 2020-21 stage after getting the required approvals for the Phase II 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. Besides, it has been stated by the department that on re -assessment, a few 
activities of the  Advanced Ultra Super Critical  (AUSC) Project were deleted by the 
consortium partners. The Committee hopes that such deletion of activities would in n o 
way have a direct or indirect bearing on the quality of the end products of the AUSC 
Project. 
 (para 61) 
Action Taken Replies 
The development projects were identified by the consortium partners and AUSC 
Mission Directorate. It is being ensured that delet ion of a few activities after undertaking 
reassessments, do not affect the quality and envisaged technical milestones of the AUSC 
R&D Project. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee observes that a sum of Rs. 95 crores and Rs.90 crores have been 
allocated at BE 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 respectively. However, the entire BE amount in 
both the years have been taken away at RE Stage. The Committee is not convinced with 
the explanation given by DHI for fund exemption. The Committee is cognizant of the fact 
that the government is giving impetus for developing North Eastern Regions and that 
many of the Aspirational Districts have been selected in NER. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should seek funds in the RE stage for development of 
North Eastern Areas. 
(para74) 
  
Action Taken Replies 
 
Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited is a CPSE under DHI which is located in 
Assam and facing liquidation under the directions of National Company Law Tribunal 
(NCLT), New Delhi. The Liquidator appointed by the NCLT i s proceeding with the 
liquidation as per the provisions of the Indian Bankruptcy Code 2016. 
 
As for Committee‟s recommendation on  seeking funds at RE stage for 
development of North Eastern Areas, there are no schemes/ projects for NER under this 
Deptt for  doing so. However, under Central Sector scheme, FAME India, an amount of 
Rs 1.69 cr in 2018 -19 and Rs 5.72 cr in 2019 -20 were released to Assam State Transport 
corporation as incentive for procurement of e-buses.  

 7 
CHAPTER–III 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY AND 
DESIRES THE MINISTRY TO REVIEW THEIR REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
   
1. From the above facts, the Committee observes that the fund of Rs 259.23 Crores 
allocated for the current year 2019 - 20 at RE which was kept at the same level at BE 
stage, has already been exhausted on 31.01.2020 and NATRiP is left with no funds for the 
expenses to be made in the remaining two months. The Committee is of the view that the 
DHI had failed to foresee the expenses that would be incurred and also to procure 
sufficient funds in both BE and RE although it was already known to them that the facility 
under NATRiP is supposed to be completed by March, 2020. Hence the Committee 
recommends that the complexities related to the contractual issues with regard to the 
Advanced Passive Safety Lab at Chennai may be got resolved expeditiously so as to 
enable the Project to be completed within the stipulated time frame. The Committee notes 
that already the NATRiP Project is running in an extended mode and any further delays 
would only add to cost over - runs.  
 (para 25) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The period of NATRIP project has been extended for one more year up to 
31.03.2021. The entire fund of Rs 259 .23 cr allocated to Natrip has been spent in FY 
2019-20. With regard to contractual issues related to Advanced Passive Safety Lab 
(APSL), Chennai, the work has been progressing at sites. However, progress is held up 
since 24th March, 2020 due to COVID-19 to till date. Recommendations of the committee 
are noted to compliance. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
 
 The Committee is perturbed to note from the Department's reply that the 
NATRIP, a flagship project of DHI which had already run into overtime and  
extended deadlines for completion, has again been extended for one more year upto 
31.03.2021.  These repeated extensions tend to impose  tremendous cost escalation  
and a burden on the exchequer .  However, t he Committee agrees with the 
Department on the unf oreseen disruptions in the project due to inevitable 
nationwide lockdown compelled by the unprecedented Covid Pandemic.   Since the 
lockdown system  is now being unlocked in a phased manner and the rebuilding 
activities have gained momentum.  As the Project aims to create State -of-the-Art 
research and testing infrastructure to enhance vehicular safety, reduce emission & 
bolster performance for expanding India's global presence, promote larger value 
addition and significant employment generation, the Committee  desires that post 

 8 
pandemic, a robust monitoring mechanism should be put in place to oversee the 
progress of the projects viz., High Speed Test Track at NATRAX/Indore and 
Advanced Passive Safety Lab  at GARC/Chennai and ensure timely 
completion/commissioning by optimally utilizing the allocated funds through 
prudent financial management.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. The Committee also observes that in its earlier report on DFG (286th), the 
Committee had desired that the CAG report on the performance aud it of NATRiP be 
furnished with the findings as and when the report is received from them. The 
Department in their ATN Report had assured to provide the same when Final Audit 
Report is received from CAG. However, the CAG report on NATRiP is still awaited fr om 
the Department. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation and 
desires that the outcome of the Report of CAG on NATRiP be placed before it.  
 (para 26) 
Action Taken Replies 
Relevant CAG report on the performance audit of NATRiP has been placed in the 
Annual Report 2018-19 of NATRiP. A copy of the same is attached as Annexure I.  
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
 
The Committee observes from the CAG Report annexed to the D epartment 
of Heavy Industry's Reply on the performance aud it of NATRiP for the year ended 
31st March, 2019, that many discrepancies have been pointed out by the CAG on the 
record management of  funds under wrong Account Heads.  The Committee 
therefore, desires that the remedial action taken in the matter may be b rought to its 
notice. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee is constrained to note that notwithstanding the pending liability of 
Rs. 25 crores, the budget was reduc ed to Rs. 8.80 crore at the 2019 -20 RE stage. But 
surprisingly, the Department could  only utilize Rs 2.55 crore  upto 31.01.2020 which 
display an unplanned approach of the Department in managing the affairs of DCAAI. 
The worrisome factor is the pending liability of Rs. 25 crores. Further, the Department 
has been allocated only Rs. 15 crore s as BE for the Financial year 2020-21. Now the 
apprehension is whether this amount will be used to settle the pending liability or for 
supporting the R&D and Study Projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
DHI needs to be more proactive and serious about the fund management of DCAAI and 
take necessary steps to settle the pending liability of Rs. 25 crores expeditiously. Also the 
DHI should seek for additional funds in RE 2020 -21 for running the R&D activities 
under DCAAI. 
(para 42) 

 9 
 
Action Taken Replies 
All efforts would be made to clear the pendency in payments and as 
recommended by the Committee additional funds would be sought, if required. 
 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations   
 
 The Committee finds the Department of Heavy Industry 's reply to be vague 
as there is no mention of any action plan to clear the pendency.  The Committee fails 
to understand as to how DHI would be able to clear the pending liability of Rs.25 
crores and simultaneously meet the expenditure for supporting R&D  initiatives and 
Study Projects with an inadequate allocation of Rs.15 crores.  The Committee notes 
that the shortfall in the BE allocation has been due to the massive under-utilization 
of the allocated funds over the previous years.    The Committee, therefore, is of the 
view that adequate funds should be projected by the  Department at the RE to 
provide uninterrupted financial support to R&D and Study Projects and also to 
clear the pending liability. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Committee observes that the  number of CPSEs under the administrative 
control of DHI i.e., 31 CPSEs in 2016 -17 has dwindled to 22 as on date, out of which 
only 10 are profit making and 12 are making loss. 7 CPSE are under closure. The 
Committee is concerned about the large rate of at trition of CPSEs under DHI. The 
Committee recommends that DHI should undertake a thorough appraisal of each loss 
making CPSEs and explore all possibilities to revive or restructure the CPSEs with a 
view to bring about a turnaround in its performance with G overnment support in the first 
instance. 
(para 77) 
Action Taken Replies 
There are 29 Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under the administrative 
control of the Department of Heavy Industry (DHI), out of which 10 CPSEs are profit 
making and 12 CPSEs are loss making during 2018 -19. Remaining 7 CPSEs are under 
closure. Besides these, there are 14 CPSEs under liquidation under the purview of the 
Official Liquidator. 
 
The loss making enterprises suffer from a number of factors including poor order 
book, s hortage of working capital, surplus manpower, obsolete plant and machinery, 
difficulty in adjusting to changing market conditions, products profile/ technology and 
fierce competition etc. Several of these loss making CPSEs have problems of large work 
force and huge overheads, far above the industry norms. 
 

 10 
As regard to possibilities to revive or restructure the CPSEs, DHI has been 
undertaking regular appraisal of each loss making CPSE to assess the prospects of 
revival.  As a part of this exercise, the loss  making CPSEs having the potential of 
turnaround are considered for revival/ restructuring. Those found chronically sick are 
disinvested or closed down after payment of compensation to employees. Steps taken by 
DHI so far in this regard are as follows: 
 
 
(i) Bharat Pumps & Comp Ltd (BPCL) : BPCL was earlier a BIFR referred sick 
company and incurring loss since FY 2011 -12. For requiring financial support, CCEA 
gave 'in -principle' approval for Strategic Disinvestment in 2016. Legal Advisor and 
Transaction Advisor have been appointed by DIPAM and disinvestment process is under 
way, for which a d raft Cabinet Note has been circulated on 22.05.2020 to 
Ministries/Departments for comments. 
 
(ii) Scooters India Limited (SIL):  SIL was declared sick company during 1992 and 
referred to BIFR . SIL came out from sickness having positive net worth from FY 2012 -
13 onwards. Cabinet approved revival plan during 2013 and CCEA approved 100 % 
disinvestment of SIL during 2016, for financial support of SIL. A cabinet note is being 
prepared for the disinvestment process. 
 
(iii) HMT Machine Tools Ltd ( HMTMTL): HMT MTL (A 100% subsidiary company 
of HMT Ltd.) is a technology -driven ccompany, comprising of six manufacturing units 
and a centralized marketing division. HMT MTL is catering to both domestic and export 
markets in metal cutting & metal forming machines including printing machines and Die-
casting &Moulding machines.  Four units of HMT MTL,by  having distinct supplying 
machines and equipment for Space, Atomic Energy &Defence Sectors,  and Railways,  
havestarted generating operational profit.  Further, proposals of merger with holding 
company and restructure are under way. 
 
(iv) Hindustan Paper Corp Ltd: Company is under liquidation by the Order of National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), D elhi under Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 
2016. 
 
(v) Nagaland Pulp & Paper Corporation : Approved closure of NPPC has been put on 
hold on the advice of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justice as 
holding company, HPC, is under liquidation. 
 
(vi) Hindustan Newsprints Ltd.:  Manufacturing operations in the HNL had stopped in 
January, 2019 due to a shortage of working capital. Disinvestment process has been kept 
on hold on the advice of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justice as 
holding company, HPC, is under liquidation. HNL is also facing Corporate Insolvency 
Resolution Process (CIRP) notice under the IBC, 2016 in the NCLT, Kochi and 
appointed an Interim Resolution Professional (IRP) for HNL. 
 
 

 11 
(vii) NEPA: It was a BIFR referred company in 1998.  The Company is currently 
undergoing a Revival and Mill Development Plan (RMDP) approved by the Cabinet in 
2018 which is likely to be completed by September, 2020.  As per the decision of CCEA, 
the strategic disinvestment proc ess of Nepa Ltd shall be carried out after completion of 
RMDP. 
 
(viii) Sambhar Salts Ltd :  It is being considered  for transfer to Govt. of Rajasthan 
(GoR). GoR has constituted a Joint Negotiation Mechanism Committee 
(JNMC).Valuation of the SSL and modalities of transfer of assets are underway. The next 
meeting of the JNMC is likely to be held after the lockdown. 
 
(ix) BHEL-EML: It is 51% subsidiary company of BHEL.  In 2016, NITI Aayog 
recommended to hand over the stake to the State Government of Kerala . Cabinet Note 
has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat for transfer of BHEL share to Government of Kerala 
in BHEL- EML. 
 
(x) Hooghly Printing Co. Ltd. (HPCL): HPCL is 100% Subsidiary of AYCL. CoS has 
recommended closure of its operations and merger of assets and liabilities into Holding 
Company AYCL. Its operations have been closed. The process is underway for its merger 
with AYCL. 
 
(xi) Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. (EPI):  EPI undertakes turnkey projects and 
consultancy services in India and abroad and remain ed profit making company till FY 
2017-18. It incurred loss during FY 2018 -19.  CCEA has approved its strategic 
disinvestment in 2019. However, disinvestment kept in abeyance till September 2020. 
 
(xii) Heavy Engineering Corporation:  DHI is implementing the  recommendations of 
the Report for modernization of the plant by Dr. V. K. Saraswat, Member, NITIAayog. 
For transferring the HEC from DHI to DAE, Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) decided 
that status quo should be maintained for administrative control of HEC with DHI and 
HEC should not be privatized. AEC has suggested to restructure the Board of HEC with 
participation of all stakeholders. The above status has been communicated by DHI to 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) for bringing the 
matter before CGD for seeking further directions. 
 
Necessary action(s) for implementation of these decision are underway in the 
Department. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations  
After having gone through the Reply of DHI narrating the steps taken by 
them for revival/ restructuring/disinvestment of the loss making CPSEs, the 
Committee expresses deep anguish over the so called measures lingering over a long 
period of time ever since these CPSES have been declared sick/incipient  sick.  The 
undue delays at various stages with different entities have only failed the strategy of 
overhauling/reviving the Units for a possible turnaround.  The Committee, 

 12 
therefore, recommends that DHI should play a pro -active role in persuading and 
liaising with the stakeholders  involved with respect to the loss making C PSEs for 
early resolution for their  revival/disinvestment.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee notes that there is lackadaisical approach on the part of DHI in 
implementing the recommendations of the Report for modernization of the plant by Dr. 
V.K. Saraswat, Member, NITI  Aayog way back in January 2017 which is still pending 
with the DHI. The Committee is left with no option but to express its displeasure on the 
callous and nonchalant approach of the D epartment in taking remedial measures for 
reviving HEC. The Committee desires that the department in consultation with the Govt. 
of India should implement the recommendation of Dr.Saraswat Committee, without any 
further delay. 
(para 82) 
 
  
Action Taken Replies 
As regards the reports of the Dr. Saraswat Committee recommending revival of 
the Company, it is stated that the recommendations of the Committee have been noted by 
the Department. As a part of the first phase of the implementation of recommendations o f 
Dr. Saraswat Committee, Cabinet in its meeting dated 31.03.2017, permitted HEC for 
return of 675.43 acres of land to the State Government of Jharkhand (GoJ) for raising Rs. 
742.98 cr to liquidate the employees related statutory dues and other liabilities  on the 
Company to help the company in its efforts of revival. 
 
Further, on the direction of Core Group of Secretaries (CGD), this Department 
had made interaction with the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), DRDO and NITI 
Aayog so as to optimally leverage o n the assets and operations of the Company and it 
was recommended to CGD to transfer HEC from DHI to DAE on “as is where is‟‟ basis. 
 
Subsequently, Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) had accorded “In Principle” 
approval for transfer of administrative control o f HEC from DHI to DAE, with the 
recommendation to constitute a Group/ Committee led by DAE, which will include all 
the stake/holders like, ISRO, DRDO, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of 
Mines, Ministry of Railways and Department of Heavy Indu stry, in order to evaluate 
modernization-revival of HEC and make recommendation for further consideration of the 
AEC. 
 
Accordingly, a high level Committee has been constituted with the approval by 
Cabinet Secretariat and the said Committee had submitted it s report, which was put up 
for discussion in the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC)‟s 234 th meeting and it was 
decided that the Commission: 
 

 13 
(a) Agreed with the recommendation of the Committee constituted by Secretary, 
DAE in consultation with Cabinet Secretary, that status quo should be maintained 
for administrative control of M/s HEC with Department of Heavy Industry and 
that M/s HEC should not  be privatized. 
 
(b) Suggested to restructure the Board of M/s HEC with participation of all 
stakeholders. 
 
(c) Suggested that a  policy framework be developed for all public funded projects 
and programmes, under which identified facilities like M/s HEC, which are 
dealing with strategic work, are treated differently in respect of placement of 
orders with a defined preferential treatment. 
 The Final decision in this regard is yet to be taken. 
 
Further Recommendations/Observations 
 
 The Committee notes with dismay the unsuccessful attempt of DHI to 
transfer HEC to DAE leading to avoidable delay  in the revival of the Company .  As 
the matter has been languishing in the administrative department and other related 
authorities, the performance of HEC has been deteriorating in the last few years 
making loss after loss.  However, t he Committee appreciates the decision of the 
Cabinet not to pri vatise HEC. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for 
prioritising the revival of HEC by DHI and fast -track its intervention with all the 
related stakeholders for expeditious implementation of the recommendation s of Dr. 
Saraswat Committee Report to facilitate HEC to regain its lost glory. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction on the lethargic attitude of DHI 
towards these CPSEs for their final closure. The Committee is of the opinion that after 
final disposal of  these Unit, DHI would be able to concentrate and dedicate their time 
and money on the other CPSE, particularly the sick and incipient for their restructuring 
for a turnaround. 
(para 87) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
DHI is pursuing the DPE‟s guidelines dated 14.0 6.2018 on time bound closure of 
CPSEs. The requisite formalities related to closure process such as payment of dues of 
employees including VRS package, settlement of dues with secured and un -secured 
creditors, other liabilities, disposal of movable assets etc. have been completed in the line 
with provisions of DPE guidelines, which includes two major issues firstly related to 
inordinate delays in land disposal and secondly related to fulfilling certain monetary 
requirement laid down in the Companies Act, 20 13 or Rules thereunder for closure of a 
Company. This includes, extinguishing completely the liabilities and assets, filing of an 

 14 
indemnity bond by every Director in respect of any unforeseen future liabilities even after 
dissolution of the company, settli ng pending litigations etc. before filing the application 
to close a Company under the Companies Act, 2013.  To address these issues, recently a 
CoS meeting was held on 22 nd May 2020 under the chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary 
and recommended that DPE may suitably amend their guidelines on closure of a CPSE 
and MCA may issue necessary orders /clarifications to  expedite closure of sick CPSEs.  
 
Necessary action(s) for implementation of these decisions are underway in the 
Department. 
  
Further Recommendation 
 
 The Committee notes that a lot of encumbrances are involved in the closure 
formalities of sick CPSEs like settlement of liabilities, disposal of assets (moveable & 
immovable), payment of dues to employees, approval of CCEA/Cabinet, NITI 
Aayog etc.  To a ddress these bottlenecks, in the CoS meeting held on 22 nd May, 
2020, it was recommended that the DPE may amend their guidelines on closure of a 
CPSE and Ministry of Corporate Affairs ( MCA) may issue necessary 
orders/clarifications to expedite closure of si ck CPSEs.  The Committee, therefore, 
sincerely expects that DHI would not leave any stone unturned to seize this 
opportune time to intervene with DPE and MCA to bring forth feasible and 
pragmatic guidelines to expedite closure formalities of those sick CPS Es which have 
not benefitted  from the revival plans of the Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 15 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DESIRE FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The C ommittee notes that as Automobile Industry constitutes 27% of Industrial 
GDP and 49% of manufacturing GDP, any strain in this sector will have a multiple 
percolating impact on other areas  also like employment etc. The C ommittee also finds 
merit in the suggestion made by the Auto Industry Associations. The Committee therefore 
recommends that to revive the Auto Sector, the Department should initiate immediate 
appropriate action with Ministries concerned to either suspend or postpone the enhanced 
registration charges and upf ront insurance payment for 5 years, till the Auto Industry is 
back on track. The new BS VI variant with upgraded Technology is going to roll out with 
a higher cost. Hence to mitigate such higher cost and create demand for purchases, the 
committee recommend s that GST rate may be reduced to a lower slab at least till the 
revival of the Auto Sector. The committee also recommends that DHI may pursue with the 
Ministry concerned for introducing incentive based scrappage policy for creating 
purchase demand for new vehicles, after scrapping the old vehicle. 
(para 18) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
Recommendation of the Committee have been forwarded to the relevant 
Ministries ie Committee‟s recommendation on Scrappage Policy which is incentive 
based, has been taken up with MO RTH and issue of reduction of GST has been referred 
to Deptt of Revenue. 
    
Recommendation/Observation 
  
2. Further, during examination of the DFG 2020 -21, some of the Automobile 
Associations had put forth their views/suggestions for revival of the Auto I ndustry from 
the present slump that it is undergoing, by measures such as reduction in import duty for 
lithium ion cell battery which is used for operating the e-vehicles etc. The committee after 
hearing the Associations, recommends that Ministry may take up the following issues 
with the concerned:  
 
(i)         Import duty on lithium ion cells in Batteries, on which e -vehicles are 
being operated, be kept at zero per cent till the Auto Industry revives itself.  
(ii)         levy of uniform road tax across all states.  
 (para 19)  
 
 

 16 
Action Taken Replies 
DHI is pro-active in assisting  OEMs by taking up their concerns with other 
Ministries/Departments. Ministry of Finance has revised the custom duty on the EV 
components to promote local manufacturing of these components.  
Recommendations of the Committee on Zero Import Duty on Li -ion cells in 
batteries, on which e -vehicles are operated and levy on uniform road tax have been 
forwarded to D/o Revenue and MORTH respectively. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
   
3. During course of examination of DFG 2020 -21, it was brought to notice of the 
Committee that DHI has entr usted the task of making three E xpressway fully e -vehicle 
friendly by way of establishing of charging infrastructure at regular intervals to its 
PSUslike BHEL and REIL. These highways are Delhi -Chandigarh, Delhi – Jaipur and 
Mumbai – Pune Expressways. The C ommittee is pleased to note that amongst these, the 
Delhi Chandigarh highways has been declared as the first expressway of the country, 
which is e -vehicle friendly. The committee would like to be apprised of the progress on 
the other proposed highways and the likely date of their completion.  
 (para 37) 
Action Taken Replies 
Progress on the other proposed highways i.e. Delhi – Jaipur and Mumbai – Pune, 
as on 15.5.2020, is as below:  
1. Twenty two charging stations have been installed on the Delhi – Jaipur 
Highway/Expressway and work is in progress for another 10 charging stations.  
2. Eleven charging stations have been installed on the Mumbai – Pune 
Highway/Expressway and work is in progress for another 6 charging stations.    
 
  The installation work for these charging Stations is to be completed within a few 
months after lifting of lock down, due to Covid -19 outbreak. Due to advisories against 
any travel due to Covid  -19, especially in the state of Maharashtra and NCR, it would be 
difficult to indicate date of completion. 
  
It is also submitted that completion of this R&D project may be impacted due to 
COVID-19 pandemic and country -wide lockdown. However, all efforts are being made 
for execution and completion of the project as per schedule. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. From the above submissions of DHI, the Committee observes that the actual total 
cost of the AUSC project has come down to Rs.905 crores instead of th e initially 
estimated cost of Rs.1554 crore. The funding requirement from DHI has been reduced 
from Rs. 900 crore to Rs. 474 crores. Out of which the Govt. has already allocated the 
entire amount of Rs. 474 crore (Rs. 120 crore in 2017 -18,Rs. 220 crore in 2018-19 and 

 17 
Rs. 134 crore in 2019 -20). However the Committee observes that DHI has utilized only 
Rs. 110 crores upto 31.01.2020, a balance of Rs. 24 crores is pending unspent which 
needs to utilized in the remaining period of FY 2019 -20. The Committee also  observes 
from the submissions of DHI that the target date set for completion of the R&D project is 
by the end of September 2020. The Committee recommends that the Department should 
take all out efforts to spend the entire balance of Rs. 24 crores in the F Y 2019-20. The 
Committee also desires to be informed about meeting of expenses upto September 2020 
i.e., the set target date of completion when no provisioning of fund on this account has 
been made in the BE 2020-21. 
(para 60) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
 
The ba lance grant of Rs. 24 cr from Department of Heavy Industry (DHI) 
earmarked for FY 2019 -20 was released to the AUSC Mission Directorate on 28 -02-
2020, and this amount has been transferred/allocated to the three consortium partners. 
The grant will be utilize d by the consortium partners during FY 2020 -21 for carrying out 
R&D phase project activities.  Further, no additional grant from DHI is required for the 
AUSC R&D project during 2020-21. 
 
It is also submitted that completion of this R&D project may be impact ed due to 
COVID-19 pandemic and country -wide lockdown. However, all efforts are being made 
for execution and completion of the project as per schedule. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee notes that the allocated BE 2020 -21 is only Rs 6 crores as  Grants 
in Aid for salaries support to CMTI as against the Projected Budget of Rs 22.00 crores. 
As the fund allotted is just sufficient to meet the salaries of the faculty, the R&D 
programmes are likely to be badly affected. The Committee recommends that t he DHI 
should seek sufficient funds in the RE 2020 -21 for the purpose of R&D programme, for 
developing high tech core manufacturing technologies. 
(para 70) 
 
Action Taken Replies 
The Department released Rs 19.00 crores as Grant in Aid for salaries to CMTI f or 
the Financial Year 2019-20. An amount of Rs.22 crores was the projected expenditure for 
the Grant-in-Aid for salaries for CMTI for the FY 2020-21. The Department will seek the 
remaining funds under this Head in RE 2020-21.  
 
Further, as advised, additional funds will be sought for R & D and development of 
high tech core manufacturing technologies for CMTI under Phase-II of the Capital Goods 
Scheme at the RE 2020-21 stage. 
 

 18 
In addition, DHI is supporting CMTI in their efforts to develop high end 
technologies and infrastructural facilities such as Development of Shuttle less High 
Speed Rapier Loom, Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0 Centre, a Precision 
Metrology Lab, Nano Manufacturing Technology Centre, Sensor Technology 
Development Facility, etc. The De partment has released Rs. 85.26 crores in last three 
years for the development of the above technologies and facilities through the Scheme for 
Enhancement of Competitiveness in Indian Capital Goods Sector.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. From the above fa cts it is seen that the entire amount of Rs. 469.41 crore for 
undergoing the Revival and Mill Development Plan has been sanctioned/released. 
Though the RMDP was supposed to be completed by December, 2019, the deadline has 
been missed. The DHI in their subm ission has assured that it is likely to take some more 
time for completion. The Committee therefore, expects the RMDP of NEPA to be 
completed soon by fast track monitoring by the Department and report compliance to the 
Committee. 
  
(para 85) 
Action Taken Replies 
The Department of Heavy Industry has constituted a Monitoring Committee under 
the chairmanship of AS&FA, DHI to regularly review the progress of the implementation 
of the RMDP of Nepa Limited. The Department has also constituted a Technical 
Committee with senior experts and engineers from Central Pulp & Paper Research 
Institute (CPPRI), BHEL and Bridge and Roof Co. Ltd to provide technical assistance to 
Nepa Ltd., if required. This team is part of the Department‟s regular review and 
monitoring process for the RMDP. Till date, fourteen meetings of the Review Committee 
have been held.  
 
The announcement of the nationwide lock down due to the 'Covid -19 Pandemic' 
has resulted in all construction work relating to the RMDP stopping for almost 40 days. 
The c oncerned District Administration has recently given permission to NEPA Ltd. to 
resume the RMDP work with stringent conditions and very limited manpower. 
             
The Department shall make best efforts to fast track monitoring as directed by the 
Committee.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee observes that some irregularity has been done by BHEL by 
misusing the funds towards extending undue benefits to its employees on account of 
payment of Late Night Snacks Allowance in gross violation to th e extant rules/guidelines 
of DPE. The Committee would like to know the present status of the Audit observation 
and action taken by BHEL and DHI for its settlement. The Committee also desires that 
DHI should issue instructions to all CPSEs under its domain to strictly adhere to the 

 19 
guidelines of DPE and maintain financial propriety in accordance with the laid -down 
policy. 
(para 89) 
Action Taken Replies 
Departure from provisions governing payment of Late Night Snacks Allowance 
(LNSA) was only in respect of Hy derabad Unit of BHEL, and not across the Company. 
The LNSA issue has since been rectified by Hyderabad Unit of BHEL vide its Circular 
issued in April 2018 in line with provision laid down in the Personnel Manual of the 
Company. Accordingly, the concern rai sed in the Audit observation has been suitably 
addressed. It is also confirmed that the provisions laid down in Personnel Manual with 
respect to LNSA are implemented by BHEL in all its Units and for all category of 
employees. Presently, no issue or actiona ble point on this is pending from BHEL‟s side. 
In the past, two Action Taken Notes have been furnished by this Department to the o/o 
C&AG for dropping of this audit para. Now, a fresh Action Taken Note is again being 
sent to C&AG with the request to drop this para. 

 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
I 
 
First Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 2:30 p.m. on Friday, the 16 th October, 2020 in 
Committee Room- „A‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
3.     Shri Shwait Malik 
4.    Shri K. C. Ramamurthy 
5.   Dr Amee Yajnik 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6. Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
7.   Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
8.   Dr. S. T. Hasan 
9.     Ms. S. Jothimani 
10.  Shri Ravinder Kushwaha 
11.  Shri Vincent H. Pala 
12. Shri T. R. V. S. Ramesh 
13.   Shrimati Gomati Sai 
14.   Shri Ravindra Shyamnarayan Shukla alias Ravi Kishan 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
2.     Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. M. Sasilekha Nair, Director 
4. Smt. Sreeja V., Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Ajin J. R., Under Secretary 
 
Department of Heavy Industry: 
 
1.   Shri. Arun Goel, Secretary 
2.   Smt. Sukriti Likhi, Joint Secretary 
3.   Shri. Amit Varadan, Joint Secretary 

 22 
4.  Shri Amit Mehta, Joint Secretary 
BHEL: 
Shri Nalin Shinghal, CMD 
HMT: 
Shri S. Girish Kumar, CMD 
 
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed all the 
Members to the fir st meeting of the Committee after its reconstitution . As 
per the agenda, the Committee firstly took up  the 300th, 301 st ,302nd  and 
303rd draft Reports for consideration and adoption. Draft 300th, 301st & 302nd 
Action Taken Reports of the Committee were pr epared based on the replies 
furnished by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the 297 th, 298 th and 299 th Reports of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants, 2020 -21 pertaini ng to the Ministry of MSME, 
Department of Public Enterprise s and Department of Heavy Industry 
respectively. Draft 303 rd Report was on the subject “Downturn in 
Automobile Sector - Its Impact & Measures for Revival”. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted all the above four draft Reports  
unanimously without any change. As both the Hous es of the Parliament are 
not in S ession and the recommenda tions made in the 303 rd Reports require 
immediate attention of the Go vernment, the Committee decided to present 
the Report to the Hon‟ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha at an early date. 
  
2. *     *     *  
3. *     *     * 
   
4. *     *     *  
 
5. *     *     *  
6. *     *     *  
 
7. *     *     * 
   
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
9. The Committee adjourned at 4.22 p.m. 
______________________________________________________________________________________  
***Pertains to other matter. 