187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED  EIGHTY SEVENTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE COMMITTEE’S 175TH REPORT ON KEY CONCERN
AREAS OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES IN SELECT STATES.
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON  22ND  MAY, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  22ND  MAY, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY  ,  2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE                                                    
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                         
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS  AND   RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                              
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
 RAJYA SABHA
Shri Surendra Lath       
Shri Suresh Bhardwaj  
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
Dr. Vijay Mallya          
Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan        
*Shri O.T. Lepcha
Vacant
Vacant
 LOK SABHA
Shri Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Kailash Baitha
Shri Rajnarayan                       
Shri Swadesh Chakraborty                  
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Subhash  Deshmukh         
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan          
Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Smt. Susmita Bauri
Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato         
Shri Prakash Paranjpe             
Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel           
Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana          
Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana     
Smt. Rubab Sayeda                 
(i)
_____________________________________________________________
nominated w.e.f   8
th May, 2006
 
Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                  
Shri Ganesh Singh                    
Shri Suraj Singh
Shri Girdhari Yadav                             
Shri Chandramani Tripathi        
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri  A.K. Singh, Deputy  Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under   Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
I N T R O D U C T I ON
 
I,  the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Industry,  having   been   authorized 
by the  Committee, hereby present this   187
th  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the 175th Report on Key concern areas of Small Scale Industries in select states.
 
2. The Committee examined and considered the Action Taken Notes supplied by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
on the recommendations contained 175th Report on Key concern areas of Small Scale Industries in select states
(Ministry of Small Scale Industries) and this report is based on such examination .
 
3. The Committee in its meeting held on 16TH May , 2006 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI;
16
TH May , 2006
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department -related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries on
the Recommendations contained in the  175th      Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Industry) on “Key Concern Area of Small Scale Industries in Select States’’ pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries.  The Report was presented /laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on  the 12
th May, 2005.
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Small Scale Industries     in respect of the  
recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized as follows:
 
Chapter - I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry :- Paras :1.1.5, 1.1.7,1.7.2,
1.8.5, 2.4.1, 2.5.1, 2.5.3, 2.7.1, 2.8.9, 2.9.5, 2.11.1, 2.12.1, 2.12.2, 2.13.2 and 2.13.3

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
 
             The Committee is pleased to observe that  the   Ministry  has accepted its  recommendation as  mentioned in
Chapter –I of the  Report. 
 
Chapter - II- The recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government's replies: - Paras :- 1.2.3 and 1.8.6
 
 In respect of these recommendations the Committee is  convinced  with the logic and explanation  advocated by the
Ministry  and therefore   does not want to  pursue  further. 
 
Chapter - III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Ministry: - Paras: 1.1.4, 1.1.6, 1.2.2, 1.3.2, 1.3.4, 1.3.5, 1.4.5, 1.4.6, 1.4.11, 1.4.15, 1.5.7, 1.9.1, 1.9.2, 1.10.1, 1.10.2,
1.10.3, 2.2.6, 2.2.7, 2.5.2, 2.9.4 and  2.10.4
 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation  of recommendations contained in  Chapter-III  and
desires that the Ministry should furnish  logical  explanation  in respect of these recommendations.  
 
Chapter - IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which  final replies of the  Ministry have not been
received :-1.3.3, 1.4.6, 1.4.7, 1.5.8, 1.8.4 and 2.5.4 
In respect  of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has  either   furnished the interim replies or couched
its language in  vague terms like  noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires  that the Ministry
should furnish Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendations categorized   in Chapter-IV  in detail and to the
point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
           
3.         The Details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
1.0       Recommendation
 
1.1       Lack of ancillarisation of  industries in the Small and Medium sectors
 
1.1.1    No major efforts have been made to put the state on the industrial development track, and therefore there is the
lack of ancillarisation of  industries in the Small and Medium sectors.  Besides the general problems like lack of
infrastructural development and marketing assistance and shortage of timely and adequate credit flow etc, the state has
also been the victim of natural calamities like super cyclone in 1999 which have actually devastated the Small Scale
Industrial set up and thus arrested the industrial growth and promotion and proliferation of small and medium
enterprises in the state.
(Para 1.1.5)
 
Action Taken
 
1.1.2    The Government has recently announced a  ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs)’.  The measures in the Policy Package to increase the quantum of credit to SMEs (including Small
Scale Industries – SSIs) include:
Public sector banks to fix their own targets for funding SMEs in order to achieve a minimum 20 per cent year-on-year
growth in credit to the SME sector.
Public sector banks to follow a transparent rating system with cost of credit linked to the credit rating of the enterprise.
Commercial banks to make concerted efforts to provide credit cover on an average to at least 5 new tiny, small and
medium enterprises at each of their semi-urban / urban branches per year.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to issue detailed guidelines relating to debt restructuring mechanism so as to ensure
restructuring of all eligible small and medium enterprises.
Introduction of a one-time settlement scheme to apply to small scale Non-Performing Asset (NPA) accounts in the
books of the banks as on March 31, 2004.

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Taking the existing RBI guidelines as indicative minimum, banks to formulate a comprehensive and more liberal policy
relating to advances to the SME sector.
Special dispensation under the Credit Guarantee Scheme for all (a) loans upto Rs.2 lakh, (b) eligible women
entrepreneurs and (c) eligible borrowers located in the North Eastern region (including Sikkim) and Jammu and
Kashmir.
Banks to adopt cluster based approach for SME financing.
The RBI to constitute empowered committees with the Regional Director of RBI as the Chairman to review the progress
in SME financing and rehabilitation of sick small and medium enterprises.
Boards of banks to review the progress in achieving the self-set targets as also rehabilitation and restructuring of SME
accounts on a quarterly basis.
 
1.1.3    The RBI has issued circulars to the banks dated 19
th August, 2005 and 25th August, 2005 advising them to
implement the measures announced in the Policy Package. Further, as per the announcement made by the Governor,
RBI in the Annual Policy Statement for 2005-06, the RBI has formulated a scheme for strategic alliance between
branches of banks and SIDBI located in the clusters, viz., Scheme for Small Enterprises Financial Centres (SEFCs).
This scheme is important in the context of expanding the outreach of banks and improving credit flow to the Small
Scale Industries (SSI) sector. The SIDBI has operationalised the Small & Medium Enterprises (SME) Fund w.e.f. April
1, 2004.  The major initiatives taken by SIDBI towards SME Fund implementation are as under:
 
To make available, funds to the SME sector at competitive rates and thereby encourage availment under the Fund, the
interest rate for direct lending by SIDBI under the SME Fund has been fixed at a competitive rate 2% below PLR,
which currently works out to 9.5% p.a.
Apart from direct lending by SIDBI, the SME Fund is being deployed through other intermediaries so as to enhance the
credit flow.  For this purpose, funds are being made available to all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding RRBs &
Cooperative Banks) at a rate of 6.25% p.a. to 7.25% p.a. and to SFCs/ SIDCs/ TFIDCs at 7.5% p.a. to 8% p.a.
During the financial year ended March 31, 2005, sanctions and disbursement under SME Fund amounted to around Rs.
2,730 crore and Rs. 1,830 crore respectively.
 
1.1.4    As far as Industrial Infrastructural Development is concerned, three IID Centres have been sanctioned in the
State of Orissa under the scheme of IID.  One IID Centre was sanctioned in the year 1996 in Distt. Rayagada and Distt.
Jagatsinghpur.  The implementation of IID Centre in Distt. Rayagada, which falls in the backward KBK (Koraput,
Bolangir & Kalahandi) region of the state has been slow due to poor response from entrepreneurs.  In order to publicise
the IID Centre at Rayagada, the IDCO has planned to organize an “Investors Meet” in the month of July,2005. 
Regarding IID Centre at Paradeep., Distt.Jagatsinghpur, the implementing agency, IDCO is not in a position to
implement the project because of the land dispute and Court Case with Paradeep Port Trust.  IDCO has informed that
case is likely to be decided by the Hon’ble High Court soon.
 
Recommendation
1.2       Key Areas for effective action
           
1.2.1    The Committee further recommends that following key areas must be selected for effective action:-
 
Strengthening the functional aspects of State Level Inter-Institutional Committee(SLIIC) and promotional agencies;
 
Financial restructuring of Orissa State Financial co-operation by seriously considering the proposal of adjustment of
interest payment to the tune of Rs.160.33 crore against principle liabilities besides wavering of the interest;
 
Extension of income tax and central excise exemption for setting up of SMEs in economically backward districts like
Bolangir, Koraput and Kalahandi on NER, Uttranchal and Himachal Pradesh line;
 
Special liberal package to super cyclone effected SSI units like rehabilitation package and one time settlement(OTS).
(Para 1.1.7)
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Action Taken
 
1.2.2    The RBI has advised their Regional Offices to play a proactive role in timely holding of State Level Inter-
institutional Committee (SLIIC) meetings in coordinating with different Government agencies.
 
1.2.3    As a pro-active measure to strengthen the SFCs, SIDBI has offered a restructuring package to the SFCs and
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with them.  The package, inter-alia, covers reduced rate of interest on the
existing outstanding portfolio and future disbursements on prompt payment of dues.  The package also offers
moratorium on repayment of principal dues by one year.  OSFC after due approval of the State Government had
selected UTI Bank Ltd., as Consultant to make a diagnostic study and suggest a restructuring plan and programme to
make the Corporation a viable organization on a sustainable basis.  After getting a positive indication about possibility
of infusion of fresh equity by the State Government in OSFC, SIDBI may consider the matter for restructuring package
envisaging above measures/ facilities, subject to fulfillment of conditions as may be prescribed by the Bank.
 
1.2.4Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue has informed that section 80-IB (5) of the Income-tax Act provides
for substantial income-tax concessions for industrial undertakings set up in backward districts during the period
1.4.1994 to 31.3.2004.  Undertakings set up in Category-A backward districts are entitled to a 100% deduction of profits
for a period of 5 years followed by 25% (30% in the case of companies) for the next 5 years.  In the case of units set up
in Category-B districts, the deduction available is 100% for 3 years and 25% (30% in the case of companies) for the
next 5 years.  These concessions are available to small and medium enterprises as well, which are located in these
districts. Such concessions are also available in the backward districts of Orissa so classified viz., Kalahandi, Bolangir,
etc. Excise exemption is already available on clearance of rupees one crore to Small Scale Industries having total annual
turnover not exceeding Rs. 4 crore. Area based exemptions create economic distortions affecting economic viability of
units located in non-exempted areas and result in shifting of industry from non-exempted areas to exempted areas.  Such
exemptions also lead to shrinkage of Tax base and adversely affect buoyancy in revenue collection, apart from breaking
the CENVAT chain.  Such region specific exemptions are difficult to administer and are prone to misuse and
consequent loss of revenue. Durability of such investments beyond the exemption period is also doubtful. Further both
Shome and Kelkar Committees have recommended discontinuance of area-based incentives to the backward districts
and states since they result in distortions and have an adverse effect on the industrial development of contiguous states. 
In view of the above, the Ministry of Finance has opined that it would not be desirable to extend area-based exemptions.
 
1.2.5    The SIDBI had extended relaxations and launched ‘Relief Refinance Scheme for Cyclone Affected Units’ in the
year 1999. Accordingly, Prime Lending Institutions were made eligible for refinance on liberal terms in respect of their
fresh loans extended to cyclone affected SSI units in the notified areas.  Further, a higher moratorium of two years was
provided under the Scheme to the affected units. As per the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government, the RBI circulated to all the public sector banks on 3
rd September,
2005 the guidelines on One-Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme for SME accounts.  The OTS Scheme will cover the NPAs
upto Rs. 10 crore which have become doubtful or loss as on March 31, 2004 or those classified as sub-standard on that
date, which have become doubtful or loss subsequently.
 
Recommendation
 
1.3       Single Window Industrial clearance System
 
1.3.1    The Committee is pleased to note that Andhra Pradesh is the First State to have the “ Single Window Industrial
clearance System” and thereby recommends that other states should follow the suit for the actual furtherance of SMEs. 
However, the Committee wishes that Andhra Pradesh should continue to be a harbinger of Information Technology
Revolution in the country and play the role model for other states.  The Committee desires that the Central Government
as well as the State Government should undertake measures for optimum utilization of available resources in the state
by encouraging SMEs in the sun rise Small Scale Industries and thus explore avenues for employment generation by
promoting labour intensive industries.(Para 1.7.2)
Action Taken
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
1.3.2    Regarding the “ Single Window Industrial Clearance System”, it is informed that the matter has been taken up
with the Industries Department, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh.
 
1.3.3    The promotional activities for encouraging sunrise/knowledge-based industries are undertaken through the Small
Industries Service Institutes (SISIs).  During 2003-04, 33 Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDPs) related to
information technology were conducted by the SISIs.  During 2004-05, 10 EDPs have been conducted by the SISIs, so
far.  The three National Training Institutes namely, IIE, Guwahati, NISIET, Hyderabad and NIESBUD, Noida also
conducts EDPs on sunrise/knowledge based industries.  During 2003-04 these Institute conducted 605 EDPs, including
those related to sunrise/knowledge based industries.
 
 1.3.4   Various measures have been taken to look into the problems of the small scale Drugs and Pharmaceuticals
industries, which include, raising of investment limit from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore for certain items reserved for the
SSI sector, financial assistance through the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme for  technology upgradation to meet
the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), etc.
 
1.3.5    Considering the importance of the Bitechnology sector amongst the sunrise industries, the Ministry of SSI has
taken up the task of encouraging biotechnology in the SSI sector by conducting a number of sensitization programmes
in various parts of the country in collaboration with the Biotech Consortium India Ltd (BCIL) of the Department of
Biotechnology and various State Government agencies to acquaint small entrepreneurs about the  industrial and business
opportunities in the new and growing area.
 
1.3.6    To assist SSI entrepreneurs in getting basic understanding of the technologies, products and processes, a set of
project profiles have been prepared in coordination with the BICL of the Department of Biotechnology, covering the
following areas: Plan Tissue Culture, Biofertilizers, Biopesticides, Fresh Water Prawn Culture/Hatchery,
Vermicomposting, Micropropagation Technology, Medicinal Plant Extractions, PCR Diagnostics and Organic farming.
 
Recommendation
 
1.4       Working  of Handicrafts and Handlooms units
 
1.4.1    The Committee is also of the view that adequate attention must be given to improve the working conditions of
Handicrafts and Handlooms units in the state and through diversification of products, the profitability of the handloom
and handicraft units be enhanced.  Suitable strategy should be undertaken for domestic marketing and export of
Lucknow’s Kurta and Pyjama and Chicken print clothes to international market. (Para 1.8.5)
 
Action Taken
 
1.4.2    The observations of the committee for paying adequate attention to improve the working conditions of the
handicraft units in the state and  diversification of products for enhancing profitability have been noted.  To provide
improved working environment to handicraft artisans, workshed scheme is being implemented to provide well
ventilated and ample working space to them leading to better productivity and enhanced income.
1.4.3    Financial assistance is also being given to eligible organisations (viz State Handicraft Development Corporation,
NGOs and Cooperative Societies etc.) under Design Technological Upgradation Scheme to organize Design
workshop/projects for developing and diversify the product range with a motive of profitability.
1.4.4    For promotion of domestic marketing a large number of Craft Bazaars, Expos and Exhibitions etc. are being
organized under Marketing & Support Services Scheme, in potential market across the country including participation
in National, State and local fairs.  34 Urban haats have been sanctioned to provide direct marketing facilities to the
handicrafts artisans  throughout the year on rotational basis to promote the marketing of crafts.
1.4.5    For boosting exports, office of the DC(Handicraft)is providing assistance for participation in international fairs
and exhibitions abroad; organizing buyers sellers meets; overseas publicity; conducting market studies; development of
products as per market demand; dissemination of market intelligence amongst exporters; organizing
seminars/workshops on export procedure & packaging; opening of showroom/warehouse in Dallas, USA; exploring
new markets in CIS, South Africa, Latin America & ASEAN Countries; setting up of India Exposition Mart at Greater
Noida and Special Economic Zones (SEZs) at Moradabad, Gautam Budh Vihar and Jodhpur and organization of Indian

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Handicrafts & Gift Fair at New Delhi.
 
1.4.6    The Government of India has been implementing the  Centrally Sponsored/Central Sector Schemes/programmes
for promotion and development of handloom sector throughout the country, including the Deen Dayal Hathkargha
Protsahan Yojana(DDHPY) ;Marketing Promotion Programme ; Scheme for reimbursement of one time rebate @ 10%
given by the handloom agencies on the sale of handloom cloth ; Handloom Export Scheme ; Integrated Handloom
Training Project (IHTP) ; Mill Gate Price Scheme ; Workshed-cum-Housing Scheme ; Weavers’ WelfareScheme
comprising Thrift Fund Scheme, New Insurance Scheme ,Health Package Scheme ; Bunkar Bima Yojana ; Scheme for
Central assistance to State Governments for setting up of Enforcement Machinery.
 
1.4.7    Specific provision exists under the Deen Dayal Hathkargha Protsahan Yojana (DDHPY), Handloom Export
Scheme and Integrated Handloom Training Project(IHTP) for providing  financial assistance to the handloom units for
diversification of products.  Assistance is being provided to the handloom weavers for domestic marketing under the
Scheme for reimbursement of one time rebate @ 10% given by handloom agencies on the sale of handloom cloth,
Marketing Incentive Component of DDHPY and Marketing Promotion Programme.  Assistance has also been provided
to the Uttar Pradesh State Handloom Development Corporation for strengthening infrastructure under the DDHPY.  The
Handloom Export Scheme had provision for financial assistance to handloom agencies for building up, developing and
marketing of exportable handloom products.  The scheme covers activities towards development of export-worthy
handloom products as design innovation, product diversification, modification of looms, skill up-gradation,
development of packaging etc.
 
1.4.8    Under the various schemes being implemented by the Office of the Development Commissioner for Handlooms,
financial assistance has been provided to the handloom sector in Uttar Pradesh during the last three years as under:
                                                (Rs. in lakh)
Name of the State Year
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Uttar Pradesh 985.24 1263.70 2023.33
 
Recommendation
 
1.5       Investment in plant and machinery under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
 
1.5.1    The Committee observes that loan limit of Rs. 25 lakh for investment in plant and machinery under the Credit
Guarantee Scheme is not sufficient so the loan limitneeds to be enhanced at least to Rs.1 crore.(Para 2.4.1)
Action Taken
 
1.5.2    The loan limit under the Credit Guarantee Scheme has now been increased to Rs. 1 crore. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.6       Collateral/third party guarantee
 
1.6.1    The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the provision of the loan up to 25 lakh without
collateral/third party guarantee and the guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India thereto, Banks insists on the collateral
security and the third party guarantee and despite the Committee’s repeated recommendation to change the mind set of
the Branch Manager, nothing fruitful has come out.  The SSI  Associations/federation in Bihar, West Bengal,Uttar
Pradesh,Orissa, Jharkhand complained about the non-adherence of RBI guidelines by the nationalized banks in this
regard. (Para 2.5.1)
 
Action Taken
 
1.6.2    The banks have been advised by the RBI to consider increasing the exemption limit for obtention of collateral
security for all SSI borrowal accounts based on good track record and financial position of the units from Rs.15 lakh to
Rs.25 lakh, with the approval of their Board of Directors.

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
 
1.6.3    The CGTSI is making all efforts to change the mindset of the branch level Bank Managers to consider the loan
applications on merits rather than on the strength of collaterals and/or third party guarantee. Further, changes in the
scheme are introduced from time to time, to make it more user friendly. Workshops for branch level managers of banks
are being held regularly to apprise them of the procedural details of the Credit Guarantee Scheme and address any
apprehensions they may have regarding the scheme. Till 31
st August, 2005, CGTSI has participated in 384
seminars/workshops/meetings/exhibitions, etc. throughout the country.  The efforts of CGTSI and member banks are
bearing results, which can be viewed from the fact that more and more member banks are extending credit facilities
without collateral security/third party guarantee and covering under the scheme. During FY 2004-05, 11,559 proposals
were approved for guarantee cover for credit facilities of Rs.326.77 crore as against 6,965 proposals for credit facilities
of Rs.115.43 crore during FY 2003-04. As on 31
st August, 2005, cumulatively 31,576 proposals involving credit
amount of Rs. 672.10 crore have been approved under the Credit Guarantee Scheme. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.7       Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme in Bihar
 
1.7.1    The Committee observes that the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme suffered in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Orissa, Jharkhand due to high upfront charges of banks like service charge, processing fee and that too differing from
bank to bank under this scheme also one time Guarantee Fee of 2.5% of the sanctioned amount and1% Service Fee on
the outstanding loan is collected as on 31
st March each year.  These fees are however, fixed and do not vary from bank
to bank.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that these fee should further be rationalized.
(Para 2.5.3)
 
Action Taken
 
1.7.2    The recent modifications in the Credit Guarantee Scheme include reduction in annual service fee from 1% to
0.75% and linking levy of service fee to the credit facility sanctioned and covered under the scheme.  The present
guarantee/service fee structure works out to 1.25% over a tenure of five years. Some of the banks have already started
bearing a part/whole of the one-time guarantee fee. Further, the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government envisages special dispensation under the Credit Guarantee Scheme
for all (a) loans upto Rs. 2 lakh, (b) eligible women entrepreneurs and (c) eligible borrowers located in the North
Eastern region (including Sikkim) and Jammu and Kashmir.
 
Recommendation
 
1.8       Credit Rating
 
1.8.1    The Committee strongly recommends for a Credit Rating Mechanism covering both the credit and performance
factors.  The Committee accordingly recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of initiating and popularizing the
Credit Rating System for SSI units in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra  and Gujarat
for easy procuring of capital by the entrepreneurs.
(Para 2.7.1)
 
Action Taken
 
1.8.2    The Ministry of SSI has already introduced a scheme of Performance and Credit Rating for small enterprises in
the entire country, including the above mentioned States. The Credit Rating Scheme is being implemented through
National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC), which has organized open house meetings involving various industry
associations of SSI units in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat
in order to popularize the scheme.  A total of 7 SSI units from Maharashtra, 5 SSI units from U.P., 2 SSI units each from
Gujarat and West Bengal have got the accreditation so far. In addition, 44 SSI units from U.P., 24 SSI units from
Maharashtra, 8 SSI units from Gujarat, 7 SSI units from West Bengal, 2 SSI units from Orissa and 1 SSI unit from Bihar

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
are undergoing the credit rating accreditation process.  The SIDBI has also launched the credit rating agency dedicated
to SMEs in association with select banks and an existing reputed credit rating agency, in the month of September, 2005.
The SIDBI has also launched the credit rating agency dedicated to SMEs in association with select banks and an
existing reputed credit rating agency, in the month of September, 2005.
 
Recommendation
 
1.9       Activities and services of NSIC
 
1.9.1    The Committee notes the activities undertaken by NSIC in Bihar, West Bengal, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Jharkhand and Rajasthan and recommends that the following Course of Action may be undertaken for making NSIC in
fulfilling its role more effectively.
 
Opening of branches/sub-offices in each commissionery and Technical Services Centre in each district head quarter for
promotion of SMEs in various segment of  industries;
 
Flexibility of the NSIC Board to induct professionals in order to build the internal competency levels;
 
NSIC should be declared a nodal agency for purchases by Government Departments/Agencies.  This will enable NSIC
to play an effective role in marketing the products of the SSI sector;
 
NSIC should be treated at par with SSIDCs in matters relating to allocation of Steel and other raw materials.  At present,
allocation of steel is made to NSIC only in those states where SSIDCs do not exist and
 
Intensive motivational campaigns, seminars and conferences and exhibitions for the development SSI by extending
marketing assistance in the areas of Raw Material Assistance and Agency Sales in all the states at district-levels.(Para
2.8.9)
 
Action Taken
 
1.9.2    NSIC facilitates development of small scale industries through its Branch office at Patna in the state of Bihar,
Branch office at Kolkata and Technical Services Centre at Howrah in the state of West Bengal, Branch office at
Ahmedabad  in the State of Gujarat, Branch Offices at Mumbai, Pune and Nagpur in the state of Maharashtra, Branch
Office at  Cuttack in the State of Orissa, Branch office at Jamshedpur in the state of Jharkhand and Branch Office at
Jaipur in the state of Rajasthan. Opening of new branches/sub offices and Technical services centers in these states can
be considered on demand basis, scope of industrial development in the concerned districts and commercial viability of
operations of such branches/technical centers in these districts.
 
1.9.3    At present,  the board of NSIC consists of three full time professional directors including Chairman-cum-
Managing Director, one Director( Plg. & Mktg) and one Director(Finance), two part-time official Directors i.e. Joint
Secretary from Ministry of SSI and Director(IF) from Ministry of Commerce and Industry and one nominee Director
from financial institution i.e SIDBI, NSIC has got sanctioned strength of 12 Directors.  Remaining 6 Directors are to be
non-official part time Directors, i.e. independent Directors with varied experienceand expertise.  This structure of the
Board is expected to promote internal competency levels in the organisaiton.
 
1.9.4    NSIC registers SSI units under Single Point Registration Scheme to enable them to participate in stores purchase
programmes of various Central  and State Governments agencies.NSIC is continuously interacting with various
Government departments to make them aware and follow the guidelines issued by Government of India through
Ministry of SSI/Ministry of ARI/Office of DC(SSI) regarding the benefits to be given under the Government Purchase
Policy for SSI units.
 
1.9.5    On 1
st June 2005 a meeting was held to discuss various measures for effective implementation of the above said
policy by DGS&D wherein DG, DGS&D, Development Commissioner(SSI) and CMD, NSIC participated.  It was

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
decided that all the purchasing departments will be approached with a request to adhere to the terms and conditions of
the Government Purchase Policy while purchasing from SSI units.
 
1.9.6    At present the steel is being allocated by Ministry of Steel, Government of India to various SSIDCs and NSIC. 
The present allocation of NSIC is limited to the states where SSIDCs are not operating the scheme in order to avoid dual
agencies in a single State.
 
1.9.7    The matter would be taken up with Ministry of Steel,Government of  India to treat NSIC on par with SSIDCs for
material allocation in all the States.NSIC is organizing intensive campaigns, buyer seller meets, seminars, conference
and exhibitions on an ongoing basis all over the country within the budgetary support extended by the Ministry of Small
Scale Industries.
 
Recommendation
 
1.10     Small Scale Industries in Karnataka
 
1.10.1  The Committee takes stock of the scenario of Small Scale Industries in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat,
where SSI sector is facing specific problems in each state as advocated by SSI associating federations in the respective
States.  The Committee is of the  view that the Ministry of SSI and its allied organisation should interact with the SSI
associations/ federations of respective States for timely redressal of grievances of the problems being faced by these
States in promoting SSI Sector. The Committee is of the view that the weightage should be given on consolidation of
SSI sector in these states and providing integrated infrastructure for marketing assistance and expert promoting besides
providing adequate credit.
(Para 2.9.5)
Action Taken
 
1.10.2  A number of measures exists for providing marketing assistance to small scale units.  The Govt. of India and
RBI/SIDBI have initiated various measures with a view to improving  the flow of credit to the SSI  sector.  These
measures have been already enumerated under Para 1.1.5 . 
 
Recommendation
 
1.11     Challenges of globalization and liberalization
 
1.11.1  The Committee desires that the Government should take measures for preparing SSI Sector to meet the
challenges of globalization and liberalization under the WTO regime.  However, the basic concern of the Committee is
the protection and promotion of domestic SSI sector under the prevailing global market economy.  Therefore, the
continuous and concrete efforts should be made by the Government to protect the domestic Small Scale Industries from
the on-slaught of adverse impact of globalization and liberalization through appropriate tariff adjustment, anti dumping
measures and other safeguards.  Simultaneously the process of strengthening SSI Sector and acquiring the requisite
competitive  resilience should be enhanced on the ground level.  The Committee is in agreement with the views of SSI
associations/ federations that the Ministry of SSI should make efforts for Streamlining and strengthening the Anti-
dumping mechanism.
 
Conversion of Quantitative restriction(QRs) into rationalized  tariff regime for providing protection to the domestic
SSIs;
 
Implementation of VAT and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance with WTO provision; and
 
Expeditious disposal cases are anti-dumping actions thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under open general
license(OGL) list.
(Para 2.11.1)
Action Taken
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
1.11.2  The Government is fully aware of the WTO environment and has taken appropriate measures for preparing the
small-scale sector to meet the challenges of liberalization and globalisation. Taking a view of the whole situation, the
Government has put in place several measures to help small enterprises to become globally competitive.  These include
schemes/programmes for technology upgradation, development of cluster of  industries, making bank credit of up to
Rs.5 lakh available without collateral, 75 per cent credit guarantee for loans upto Rs.25 lakh, creating awareness among
these industries regarding export related issues and sensitizing them to the emerging challenges of trade liberalisation,
reimbursement of the cost of obtaining ISO 9000/14001 certification upto    Rs.75,000, reimbursement of registration
fee up to Rs.15,000 for adopting bar coding of products, etc.  The government has also put in place appropriate trade
defence mechanisms, such as import licensing, safeguards against surge in imports and anti-dumping measures to
provide protection to domestic industries, including small and cottage industries. 
 
Conversion of Quantitative restriction(QRs) into rationalized tariff regime for providing protection to the
domestic SSIs:
 
1.11.3  Under the WTO regime all Quantitative Restrictions(QRs)  have been abolished except 430 QRs maintained on
account of public morality, safety & health etc.  The current average  tariff is 15% for non-agriculture products  These
tariffs are considered as higher tariffs amongst the tariffs  applied by the various Member States in the WTO regime. 
 
1.11.4  Regarding rationalized tariff regime for providing protection to the domestic SSIs, it is stated that during annual
exercise for formulation of budget proposals concerning customs/excise for submission to the Ministry of Finance, EA
Division of this office consults all concerned Technical Divisions as well as SSI Associations, etc. On the basis of
proposals so  received, suitable budget proposals are formulated and sent to Ministry of Finance for their consideration
so as to protect the interests of domestic industries.  The budget proposals do include suggestions for increase/decrease
in custom duties including rationalization of the rates so as to protect the interests of domestic industries. 
 
1.11.5  Ministry of Commerce & Industry consults this office while formulating Bi-lateral/Regional Trade Agreements. 
Here also, this office makes   appropriate recommendations to the Department of Commerce after consulting the
concerned Technical Divisions. While making recommendations, factors like reservation of an item for exclusive
manufacture in the SSI sector,  its production base in terms of  number of units manufacturing the item, our competitive
strengths, potential for employment generation & exports, etc.are  taken into consideration.
 
1.11.6  In general, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry is the nodal Ministry for  monitoring trade flows including that
falling under the SSI sector.  That Ministry keeps a watch on the applied tariffs on various products.  Necessary
adjustment in the tariff rates is done as per the requirements of the situation in the domestic/world market, as and when
needed. 
 
Implementation of VAT and safeguard duties to protect domestic producers in consonance with WTO provision:
 
1.11.7  “Value Added Tax (VAT) intends to replace the States’ sales tax. VAT is a simple transparent and modern tax
system which has been adopted by more than 130 countries around the world.  It is a multi-stage tax with input tax
credit  which eliminates cascading of tax (tax on tax).  Consequently, there is no price escalation due to tax on tax. 
Moreover, because of the availability of input tax credit on tax paid on earlier stages of production, the cost of
production is expected to be lower under the VAT system vis-à-vis the earlier Sales Tax system.  Therefore,
implementation of the value Added Tax(VAT) system  is not likely to adversely  affect the interest of small and cottage
industries.
           
1.11.8  Regarding  imports, the Government has put in place appropriate trade-defence mechanisms, such as import
licensing, safeguards against surge in imports and anti-dumping measures, to provide protection to the domestic
industries, including small and cottage industries. The Director General of Safeguards has taken action in respect of  18
products for investigations.  And safeguard duty in respect of 10  cases have been  imposed. 
 
Expeditious disposal of dumping case are anti-dumping actions   thereto, in view of almost all SSI products under Open
General License (OGL) list:
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
1.11.9  The Anti-Dumping mechanism comes under the purview of the Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied
Duties under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is monitoring the
progress of anti-dumping cases.  Anti dumping actions have been   initiated by the Director General of Anti-dumping
and Allied Duties  and anti-dumping duties were imposed on certain products of SSI concern like Dry-Cell Batteries
with effect from 2.8.2001 and on sports shoes on 25.9.2001.  The Anti-dumping Authority in the Ministry of Commerce
& Industry is responsible for initiating anti-dumping actions when complaints are made by SSI sector.  The time taken
by the Indian authority to dispose off anti-dumping cases compare favourably with other major users of anti-dumping
measures in the world.  Till 25.7.2005, Directorate General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties has initiated anti-dumping
investigations in 185 cases.  Out of these 185 cases, DGAD has recommended to  impose anti-dumping final duty in 162
cases, preliminary duty in 2 cases and 12 cases are still under investigation. 9  Cases have been closed after initiation. 
 
Recommendation
 
1.12     Legal framework
 
1.12.1  The Committee desires that legal framework affecting the Small Scale Industries must be satisfactory in order to
give fillip to the promotion and development of Small Scale Industries Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand.  The following  issues may be taken up on priority basis and the Ministry of SSI should pursue with the
concerned Ministries:-
 
A single Unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and layoffs and social benefits for employees.
 
Enactment of  Single Comprehensive Small Enterprises Development Act for SSEs similar to the Industrial
Development and Regulation (IDR) Act.
 
Comprehensive Social Security Scheme for widening the social safety nets.
 
Amendment in the provision of the Delayed Payment Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act 1993 as
amended in 1998 and the relevant provisions of the Companies Act  i.e. mandatory provision requiring the large
enterprises to show in the entries of their Balance sheets the amount due for payment  to the SSI units to enable SSI
units/suppliers to get payments as agreed upon.
 
(vi)   the SSI sector needs the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, therefore,that the Ministry of SSI should
continue to pursue for legislation of the Limited Liability Partnership Act in the interest of Small Scale Sector.
 
(Para 2.12.1)
 
Action Taken
 
1.12.2  Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 provides a single unified Act governing the rules pertaining to retrenchment and
lay-offs.  The Act also protects the vested rights of provisions relating to lay-off and retrenchments of workmen. 
Chapter VA of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 provides provisions relating to lay-off and retrenchment  of workman.
Lay off compensation is required to be paid by the employer to the workman laid off  in the industrial establishment
employing less than 50 workmen.  This Chapter also contains provisions that an industrial establishment employing on
an average more than 50 workmen is required to give 60 days notice before affecting closure.  The provisions of
retrenchment compensation equivalent to 15 days wages for every completed year of service by the workman and
principal of last come first go in case of retrenchment.
 
1.12.3  Under Chapter V B of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947, prior permission is required by the industrial
establishments i.e. factory, mines and plantations wherein 100 or more workmen are employed before effecting lay-off,
retrenchment or closure.
 
1.12.4  Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 has already been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 12
th

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
May 2005 which, inter alia, takes care of the issues relating to the recommendations of the Committee.
 
1.12.5  Ministry of Labour & Employment is working on a scheme for providing social security to the workers in the
unorganized sector.   Apart from this, Employees Provident Fund Organisation and Employees State Insurance
Corporation provides social security to the workers in the organized sectors and efforts are being made to expand the
social safety net.
(iv)       The position has already been explained under para (ii) above.
 
1.12.6  The Ministry of SSI has been constantly pursuing the matter with M/o Company Affairs for inclusion of Small
Industries (just as it was to cover selected professional services) in their proposed Limited Liability Partnership Bill.  A
meeting in this regard was held by the Secretary (Company Affairs) during which draft of a LLP Bill was handed over. 
The draft LLP Bill, inter alia, is applicable to all body Corporate including Small Enterprises which are formed by being
incorporated under this Act and which has legal personality separate from that of its partners.
           
Recommendation
 
1.13     Policies for Medium Enterprises
 
1.13.1  The Committee views that small scale industries is the engine of growth, therefore, SSI units must be given the
space to grow into medium enterprises. In the context of globalisation there is a growing feeling in certain quarters that
India should also adopt the SME Concept World over, policies are devised to meet the requirement of small and
medium enterprises (SME).  The Committee desires that the steps should be initiated for formulating policies for
Medium Enterprises and adequate institutional arrangement and mechanism should be set up for working of medium
enterprises in the national economy.
 
(Para 2.12.2)
Action Taken
 
1.13.2  Small and Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 has already been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 12
th
May,2005 for the development of the SMEs in the country.
 
Recommendation
 
1.14     Sunrise industries in the SSI sector
 
1.14.1  The Committee desires that adequate steps should be taken to identify the sunrise industries Bihar, West Bengal,
Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand in the SSI sector e.g. Information Technology(IT), Biotechnoloy (BT) Pharmaceuticals
and Nan technologies along with IT Enabled Services (ITES) and concrete steps may be undertaken to reinforce
appropriate policy regime to promote sunrise SSI industries which have the potential to be the winners of tomorrow. 
The issue such as IPR protection and management of rapid up-scaling of operations could be taken up on priority basis.
 
(Para 2.13.2)
Action Taken
 
1.14.2  The following measures have been taken to promote sunrise SSI industries: The promotional activities for
encouraging sunrise/knowledge-based industries are undertaken through the Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs). 
During 2003-04, 33 Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDPs) related to information technology were
conducted by the SISIs.  During 2004-05, 10 EDPs have been conducted by the SISIs, so far.  The three National
Training Institutes namely, IIE, Guwahati, NISIET, Hyderabad and NIESBUD, Noida also conducts EDPs on
sunrise/knowledge based industries.  During 2003-04 these Institute conducted 605 EDPs, including those related to
sunrise/knowledge based industries.
 
1.14.3  Various measures have been taken to look into the problems of the small scale Drugs and Pharmaceuticals

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
industries, which include, raising of investment limit from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore for certain items reserved for the
SSI sector, financial assistance through the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy scheme for  technology upgradation to meet
the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), etc.
 
1.14.4  Considering the importance of the Bitechnology sector amongst the sunrise industries, the Ministry of SSI has
taken up the task of encouraging biotechnology in the SSI sector by conducting a number of sensitization programmes
in various parts of the country in collaboration with the Biotech Consortium India Ltd (BCIL) of the Department of
Biotechnology and various State Government agencies to acquaint small entrepreneurs about the  industrial and business
opportunities in the new and growing area.
 
1.14.5  To assist SSI entrepreneurs in getting basic understanding of the technologies, products and processes, a set of
project profiles have been prepared in coordination with the BICL of the Department of Biotechnology, covering the
following areas: Plan Tissue Culture, Biofertilizers, Biopesticides, Fresh Water Prawn Culture/Hatchery,
Vermicomposting, Micropropagation Technology, Medicinal Plant Extractions, PCR Diagnostics and Organic farming.
 
Biotechnology is a new subject in the SSI sector for the development of Biotechnology related industry in SSI sector,
and  accordingly, a  Biotechnology Cell was created in the office of DC(SSI) on 16.08.2002. The main aim of this cell is
to promote awareness amongst the SSI entrepreneurs on the  benefits of Biotechnology and to disseminate techno-
economic information on various biotech products feasible in the  SSI sector. To strengthen further our field offices on
promotion of Biotechnology in the SSI sector, a group of 23 officers from SISIs all over the country were trained  
during 19
th to 24th July, 2004   by Biotech Consortium India Limited (BCIL) at Chennai.   During the year 2004-05,  15 
one-day sensitization programmes on Biotechnoloy were  held  by different SISIs including  Agra, Gorakhpur and
Kolkata. During current financial year also, one day sensitisation programmes on Biotechnology are proposed to be held
at Ranchi, Cuttack and eight other locations in the country.  In close coordination with BCIL and Department of
Biotechnology, Govt. of India, efforts are being made for identification of new biotech products commercially viable in
the SSI sector and also for  formulation of new policy initiatives.  For the guidance of the  prospective biotech 
entrepreneurs, a few    project profiles  have been compiled and brought out. It may be mentioned that a few interested
and innovative entrepreneurs have already started biotechnology based units in the SSI sector in the field of plant tissue
culture,  bio-fertilizers,  bio-pesticides,  fresh water prawn culture / hatchery, vermi composting and medicinal plant
extractions, etc.   
 
 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) With the onset of the trade related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
agreement under WTO and the consequent changes made by various countries in their IPR laws including by India the
issues of IPR have gained special importance in the Small Scale Industry sector. It was noticed that changes of far
reaching consequences were being effected in the business landscape without the SSI sector being aware of it. It was
also felt that  IPRs require understanding and attention by the industry. By protecting their intellectual property, small
scale units can increase their competitiveness. IP protection will help in Preventing competitors from copying or closely
imitating a companies product or services ;avoiding wasteful investment in research and development ; and marketing ;
Creating a corporate identity through a trademark and branding strategy; Increasing the market value of the company
and enhancing access  to new market.
 
Intellectual Property Rights consist of Patents, Trade Marks, Industrial Designs, Copy Rights, Trade Secrets and
Geographical Indications etc.
 
1.14.6To generate awareness amongst SSIs  on IPR related issues,  various one-day sensitisation programmes are being
organized since 2001-02.  During the year 2004-05,  26 Awareness Programmes  were held at various parts of the
country including Meerut,  Ferozabad,  Cuttack,  Patna,  Varnasi,  Kanpur and Kolkata.  During the current financial
year,  IPR programmes are proposed to be held at Ranchi,  Bhubaneswar,  Kanpur and  nine other locations in the
country.    Some of these programmes were product specific, i.e. Biotechnology, Toys, Electronics,  Sports Goods,
Glass industry, etc.  For registration of Bikaneri  Bhujia and Kullu Shawls under Geographical Indications,  workshops
were held at Bikaner and Kullu on 24.09.04 and 08.10.2004 respectively.  Kulu shawls registration has been notified in
the gazette published by concerned authorities.
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
1.14.7  The Ministry of Small Scale Industry, Office of DC(SSI) has proposed to launch a Financial Assistance Scheme
for registered small scale / tiny units for adoption of patents in India and abroad.  The scheme envisages to tap the vast
innovative potential of the small scale entrepreneurs enabling them to become technology based entrepreneurs.  The
objective of the scheme is to generate confidence amongst different small scale / tiny unit holders for their individual
inventions enabling them to convert an original idea/invention / know-how into working prototype/processes.
 
Recommendation
 
1.15     Streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs
           
1.15.1  The Committee hopes that for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs in Bihar, West Bengal,
Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand,  Maharashtra and  Gujarat, the Government the should focus on the following issues:-
 
Providing full credit, technology upgradtion, modernization and marketing support to the SSI sector;
 
Infrastructure Upgradation in general particularly in the major SSI industrial clusters;
 
Freedom from the plethora of rules and regulations existing in the SSI sector, which is known as Inspector Raj;
 
Full support to the service industry to fulfill its true growth and employment generation potential; and
 
Training of existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on a massive scale.  Modern management  practices and
skill upgradation through advanced training facilities for capacity building in the SSI Sector.
(Para 2.13.3)
Action Taken
 
1.15.2  The Government and RBI/SIDBI have taken various measures with a view to improving the flow of credit to the
SSI sector. The main objective of the IIUS Scheme is to enhance competitiveness of the domestic industry by providing
quality infrastructure through public-private partnership in select industrial clusters/areas.  The Central grant in respect
of approved clusters is upto Rs. 50 crore or 75% of the project cost, which ever is less.  Remaining 25% is required to be
arranged by the Special Purpose Vehicle of the project which is formed extensively by the local industrial associations. 
Out of this 25%, State Government/its agencies or institutional loans can contribute up to 10% of the project cost.   15%
of the project cost should essentially contributed by the local industry.  The reason behind this is to involve the local
industry in implementation of the project to ensure that the project components are need based and does not duplicate
the facilities already available.  The above funding pattern has also got the approval of CCEA. 
 
1.15.3  The SMED Bill 2005 introduced in the Parliament on 12
th May,2005 inter alia takes care of streamlining 
inspections small enterprises.  Service sector is included in Small Enterprises and has been defined in SMED Bill 2005
so as to provide full support to it in fulfilling its true growth and employment generation potential. SIDO through its
field Institutions conducts the training programmes   pertaining to     Industrial Motivational Campaigns (IMCs) ;
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) ; Management Development Programmes (MDPs);Skill
Development Programmes (SDPs) for training the potential and existing entrepreneurs and workers of SSI as well as to
support growth and employment generation.
 
 Industrial Motivation Campaigns: SIDO conducts Industrial Motivation Campaigns (duration of 1 day or 2  days) to
identify and motivate traditional / non-traditional entrepreneurs   having potential for setting up small-scale industries so
as and to lead them    towards self-employment.    The number of beneficiaries trained in the states for which committee
has emphasized for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs is given below:
 
Name of the State No. of beneficiaries during
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Bihar 1075 1845 3500
West Bengal 442 1327 1800

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Uttar Pradesh 1887 13151 15000
Orissa 996 1921 2500
Jharkhand 357 623 1000
Maharashtra 1461 1400 3000
Gujarat 803 2191 2500
 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP): Developing entrepreneurs to start small scale units through
Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP).  The basic objectives of these programmes are to impart the state of
art learning in the emerging management techniques / practices to help the small scale entrepreneurs to harvesting better
benefits and to acquire substantial share in the domestic and  overseas markets.  The duration of the programme is
generally varies from 4 to 6 weeks. The  training schedules also assist entrepreneurs in preparing detailed feasibility
report for their appropriate appraisal, evaluation, modification. Programmes so far organized inter-alia included Herbal
Cosmetics, High Fashion Garments, Hosiery, Food & Fruit Processing Industries, Information Technology, Hardware
Maintenance, Soap and Detergents, Leather Products/Novelties, Servicing of Household Electrical Appliances and
Electronic Gadgets, Gem Cutting & Polishing, Engineering Plastics etc.  The number of beneficiaries trained / to be
trained in the states for which committee has emphasized for streamlining and strengthening the contribution of SMEs is
given below:
 
Name of the State No. of beneficiaries during
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Bihar 277 620 650
West Bengal 356 546 600
Uttar Pradesh 674 1682 2100
Orissa 175 657 650
Jharkhand 172 265 300
Maharashtra 856 865 900
Gujarat 110 440 450
 
Management Development Programmes (MDPs): MDP on various areas of industrial management initiatives are
devised for owner cum Manager and Supervisory level personnel of small scale  industries. The subjects covered under
MDPs pertains to various  management aspects like industrial management, marketing  management, export
management and documentation, materials  management, financial management, packaging management, computer
science and information technology, quality management etc.       The duration of the programme is generally one to two
weeks. 
 
The number of beneficiaries trained/to be trained in the states for which committee has emphasized for streamlining and
strengthening the contribution of SMEs is given below:
Name of the State No. of beneficiaries during
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Bihar 159 406 500
West Bengal 475 679 700
Uttar Pradesh 333 568 700
Orissa 181 282 500
Jharkhand 93 141 300
Maharashtra 428 413 500
0Gujarat 46 265 250
 
Skill Development Programme (SDP):   The basic objective is  to provide training to skilled workers engaged in small
scale units and to equip them better and improved technological skill of production.  The technicians and workers
sponsored by the SSI units are imparted with such training to develop their skills in different trades.  The duration of the
course is generally six months.   To meet the changes scenario, SISIs have started providing training in information
technology, catering, fashion design, beauty parlor, air ticketing, etc.  With the introduction of PD Account system,
whch given flexibility in operation to Directors of SISIs, many innovative programmes are being organized in the fields
like training in CNC machines, CAD, CAM etc. 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
CHAPTER – II
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
 
Recommendation
 
2.0       Operational period of Technology Development Fund  Scheme
 
2.1       The Committee desires that the proposal of extending the operational period of Technology Development Fund 
Scheme from 3 to 5 years may be suitably examined.(Para 1.2.3)
Action Taken
 
2.1.1    Technology Development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF) Scheme was reviewed by SIDBI in November 2004
and it was decided to discontinue the TDMF Scheme due to launching of SME Fund by SIDBI under which assistance
is granted at more favorable rate of interest i.e. 2% below PLR (presently at 9.5%).  The fund commenced its operation
with effect from April,2004.
 
Recommendation
 
2.2       Industrial Infrastructure up-gradation scheme
 
2.2.1    The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should examine the proposal whether under Industrial
Infrastructure up-gradation scheme the provision of 25% of the total cost of the project to be borne by the stakeholders
of respective cluster may be relaxed and instead the State Government/State Government institution may be allowed to
contribute the share of the stakeholders.  The consent of the State Government in this regard may be sought and
accordingly the Committee may be apprised of.
(Para 1.8.6)
 
Action Taken
 
2.2.2    The main objective of the Industrial Infrastructure up-gradation scheme (IIUS) Scheme is to enhance
competitiveness of the domestic industry by providing quality infrastructure through public-private partnership in select
industrial clusters/areas.  The Central grant in respect of approved clusters is upto Rs. 50 crore or 75% of the project
cost, which ever is less.  Remaining 25% is required to be arranged by the Special Purpose Vehicle of the project which
is formed extensively by the local industrial associations.  Out of this 25%, State Government/its agencies or
institutional loans can contribute up to 10% of the project cost.   15% of the project cost should essentially be
contributed by the local industry.  The reason behind this is to involve the local industry in implementation of the
project to ensure that the project components are need based and do not duplicate the facilities already available.  The
above funding pattern has also got the approval of CCEA and it is not possible to alter the funding pattern.
Chapter - III
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE HAS NOT
ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT OR THE COMMITTEE WANTS TO MAKE FURTHER
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
ORISSA
Recommendation
 
3.0       A paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty
 
3.1       The Committee observes that Orissa demonstrates a paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty as the state,
despite having mineral and marine resources, has been bereft of sustainable industrial growth and economic
development.  The Committee finds that the cherished Charter of the Planning Commission which was “ to combine a
rapid rise in the Standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing
production and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the community”, has not seen the light of

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
the day in the state.  The state has been devoid of planned development giving rise to the economically backward district
like Bolangir, Koraput and above all the Kalahandi.
(Para 1.1.4)
Action Taken
 
3.1.1    The Parliamentary Standing Committee has observed that no major efforts have been made to put the State of
Orissa on the industrial development track and there has been lack of infrastructural development.  The state has been
devoid of development giving rise to the economically backward districts like Koraput, Bolangir & Kalahandi.
 
3.1.2    As far as Industrial Infrastructural Development is concerned, three Integrated Infrastructure Development (IID)
Centres have been sanctioned by SIDO under the Ministry of SSI in the State of Orissa under the scheme of IID.  One
IID Centre was sanctioned in the year 1996 in Distt. Rayagada and Distt. Jagatsinghpur.  The implementation of IID
Centre in Distt. Rayagada, which falls in the backward KBK (Koraput, Bolangir & Kalahandi) region of the State has
been slow due to poor response from entrepreneurs.  In order to publicise the IID Centre at Rayagada, the IDCO has
planned to organize an “Investors Meet” in the month of July,2005.  Regarding IID Centre at Paradeep.,
Distt.Jagatsinghpur, the implementing agency, IDCO is not in a position to implement the project because of the land
dispute and Court Case with Paradeep Port Trust.  IDCO has informed that case is likely to be decided by the Hon’ble
High Court soon.Apart from this, the Small Industries Service Institute, Cuttack has been directed to get in touch with
the Industries Department or the corporation concerned  of the State and advise them to set up IID Centres at
appropriate locations.
Further  Recommendation
 
3.1.3    The Committee, keeping in view the  prevailing economic standard  in Orissa and more specifically  the
backward  district  like  Koraput, Bolangir, and Kalahandi, reiterates  its view point that  Orissa is yet to be put  on
Industrial development track by  harnessing  the available raw material in each district  under integrated economic
planning  systems , if the vision as spelt out in the cherished  charter of planning commission  “to   combine a rapid rise
in the Standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing production
and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the community”,  is to be realized .
 
3.1.4    As  regard the   existence  of three Industrial  Infrastructure Development (IID) sanctioned  by the SIDO  is
concerned , the Committee is of the view that where structural existence is not  going  to have any  meaning unless the
same has bearing  on the functional aspects and that too  empirically  result -oriented .  Therefore the Committee 
recommends that  the Ministry of SSI must  encourage the upcoming  SMEs  by the younger entrepreneurs through to
Seminar Investment Meet  and Conference to establish  small and medium enterprises in the state.  
 
Recommendation
 
3.2       Timely and adequate credit flow
 
3.2.1    The committee, therefore, is of the view that the financial institutions should come forward for providing timely
and adequate credit flow to the entrepreneurs for accelerated industrial growth and promotion of SMEs in the state.  The
Committee recommends that concerted efforts must be undertaken for popularization of venture capital, factoring
services and other financial linked schemes like CGYTSI, CLCSS,NEF and SME Fund of SIDBI.
(Para 1.1.6)
Action Taken
 
3.2.2    he Government and RBI/ SIDBI have initiated various measures with a view to improving the flow of credit to
the SSI sector. The SIDBI has been popularizing all the Government schemes in the State of Orissa particularly, Credit
Guarantee Scheme, CLCSS, NEF, TUFS and SME fund through meetings, seminars and press/ media.  Six active
industry associations viz., Utkal Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Confederation of Indian Industry, Orissa
Assembly of Small & Medium Enterprise, Orissa Small Scale Industries Association, Orissa Industries Federation,
Orissa Young Entrepreneurs Association are regularly informed about the details of the schemes and progress through
meetings and seminars.  About 40 project consultants and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India,
Bhubaneshwar Chapter have been apprised of the schemes.  Besides, the potential entrepreneurs are made aware of the

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
schemes through EDPs supported by SIDBI and conducted by various organizations including SISI.  All DICs have
been apprised of the schemes directly and indirectly through the Director of Industries, Orissa.
 
3.2.3    Venture Capital Scheme was launched by SIDBI in October, 1992 and a separate VC fund with an initial corpus
of Rs. 10 crore was set up for the purpose. Further allocations to the corpus have been made on an annual basis from the
profits of the SIDBI. The fund was initially utilized for direct VC assistance to SSI units. Over the years, the focus
changed and in order to enlarge the reach for extending VC assistance to small scale units, SIDBI assumed the role of
“Fund of funds” by contributing to the corpus of National/Regional VC Funds for extending assistance to SSI units. So
far, SIDBI has committed an aggregate contribution of Rs. 450.82 crore to 14 All India Funds, 9 Regional Funds, 1
International Fund and Asset Management Companies/ Trustee Companies (AMC/TCs) of 5 VCFs.
 
3.2.4    The venture capital strategy of SIDBI has been to create a 3-tier venture capital structure viz., at the Regional,
National and International levels so as to effectively integrate and enhance the opportunities for the SMEs. Besides, in
order to keep a close watch on the functioning of the Asset Management Companies (AMCs), SIDBI started retaining
rights to take up equity stake in the AMCs and Trustee Companies (TCs). Further, SIDBI also extends venture capital
assistance to SSI units directly and by way of subscription to the corpus of other Venture Capital Funds. SIDBI has also
extended assistance for setting up of two incubation centres at IIT, Kanpur and BITS, Mesra, Ranchi.
 
3.2.5    In September, 1999, SIDBI created SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd. (SVCL) and SIDBI Trustee Company Ltd.
(STCL), as wholly owned subsidiaries of SIDBI primarily to be the Investment Manager and Trustee of the National
Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry (NFSIT) respectively. SVCL currently manages the Rs.100 crore NSFIT,
which has contributions from SIDBI (Rs.50 crore), Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,
Government of India (Rs.30 crore) and IDBI (Rs.20 crore). The entire fund corpus has been drawn by SVCL from the
contributors. SVCL works actively with its investee companies in implementing systems, MIS and corporate
governance.  It also provides visibility to the assisted units in both domestic and international fora.  
 
3.2.5    In October, 2004, SIDBI launched a Rs. 500 crore venture capital fund for SMEs viz., SME Growth Fund (SGF)
with an initial contribution of Rs. 100 crore by SIDBI.  The fund will be investing by way of equity and equity-linked
instruments in the growth sectors including life sciences, retailing, light engineering, food processing, information
technology, infrastructure related to services such as health care, logistics and distributions, etc. It is an 8-year close-
ended Venture Capital Fund.  As on 31
st March, 2005, over and above Rs. 100 crore from SIDBI, SGF has received
commitments for an aggregate amount of Rs. 400 crore from various banks, with which the fund has received
commitment for entire target corpus.  The Fund has started its operations and approved three investments aggregating
Rs. 26 crore in alternative fuels, pharmaceuticals and services company.  An amount of Rs. 10.50 crore has also been
disbursed in two of these companies. 
 
3.2.7    The Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) has been taking steps to popularize the Credit
Guarantee Scheme by adopting a multi-level strategy. The SSI Associations as well as Branch Managers of Member
Lending Institutions (MLIs) have been the focus of dissemination of information regarding the provisions of the scheme
as well as the latest amendments made therein. The workshops were arranged by the member banks to create awareness
about the Scheme. In order to further popularize the scheme, a Workshop for the officials of SISIs and Commissionerate
/Directorate of Industries identified as Nodal Officers was conducted for familiarizing them with the features of Credit
Guarantee Scheme and its operational modalities. These officers are disseminating the information regarding the scheme
to prospective entrepreneurs in the area under their jurisdiction. The modifications recently introduced in the Credit
Guarantee Scheme are expected to make the scheme more popular and the CGTSI has been making efforts to
disseminate information about the modifications in various fora. Further, the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to
Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the Government envisages special dispensation under the Credit
Guarantee Scheme for all (a) loans upto Rs. 2 lakh, (b) eligible women entrepreneurs and (c) eligible borrowers located
in the North Eastern region (including Sikkim) and Jammu and Kashmir.
           
Further  Recommendation
 
3.2.8    The action taken notes as furnished  by  the Ministry of SSI  shows the mirror –image of the  concerted efforts

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
being undertaken by the  financial institutions for providing timely and adequate credit to the  entrepreneurs for  
accelerated  industrial growth and promotion of SMEs in the State of Orissa, however, the Committee feels  that all
existing institutional arrangements  and financial  facilities  as seems to being extended  to SMEs in general has yet   to
have visible  bearing on State’s  economy, as  the State  remains  deprived of planned development.  Such situation 
prevails  probably because we have elaborate institutional arrangement and large number of  schemes  on paper  but on
the ground realities the  situation/circumstances  remain entirely different.  Need  is to take  action  on  the  ground level
so that its true bearing  is felt on the state’s  economy and  peoples’ standard of living.
 
GUJARAT
Recommendation
 
3.3       Co-ordinating activities with the State Government
 
3.3.1    While the Committee is pleased to note the impressive development of small scale industries in Gujarat, as
almost ten thousand new SSI units are registered each year, however, the Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI
should act promptly in co-ordinating activities with the State Government, Banking division and steel sector for
combating the problems of inadequate credit flow, lack of infrastructure development and inadequate supply of steel in
the engineering segment.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should invite from the State
Government proposal under Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme.  Adequate impetus may also be
given for covering more cases under cluster development approach in the state.   The Committee further recommends
that the Ministry of SSI should co-ordinate with the steel units in public and private sector for ensuring timely
availability of steel raw material to SSI units in the state.
(Para 1.2.2)
Action Taken
 
3.3.2    As regards the issue of inadequate credit flow, the recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with the
Commissionerate of Industries, Government of Gujarat and it has been informed the Lead Bank in the districts is
organizing quarterly review meeting to increase credit flow to SSI sector. 
3.3.3    Ministry of SSI is regularly taking up the matter with Ministry of Steel for the smooth supply of steel raw
materials to SSI sector.  Regular meetings are also being convened by the Ministry of Steel with participation of
Members from the Ministry of SSI for reviewing the status of supply position of Steel materials to SSI units.  NSIC, an
autonomous body under this Ministry, is looking after the distribution of Steel in the State of Gujarat.      
           
3.3.4    Ministry of SSI has launched a Scheme name Small Industries Cluster Development Programme(SICDP) for
holistic development of SSI clusters in the country.  So far, three clusters, namely, Diesel Pump & Engineering Cluster,
Rajkot, Trial Runs on Hydrogenation Process for Manufacturing of Specialty Oils & Solvents in Rajkot and Rice Flakes
Industry Cluster, Gondal, Ahmedabad have been taken up for development under SICDP in Gujarat. In addition to this,
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India (EDII), Ahmedabad have been assisted by Ministry of SSI for
imparting training to Cluster Development Executives(CDEs), monitoring cluster development work, assisting in
formulation of programmes and policies for cluster development and guidance.  It will help in accelerating cluster
development works in Gujarat.
 
3.3.5    Under the IID Scheme, one Centre sanctioned in March,94 in district Junagarh is yet to be completed.  The
second Centre was sanctioned in March, 98 in district Banaskantha and the Implementing Agency (IA) is reportedly not
interested to take up its development.  Further, two more centers to be located at Anjar and Nagor were sanctioned in
July,2003.   The IA is yet to take up the development work.  The Small Industries Service Institute, Ahmedabad has
been directed to get in touch with the Industries Department or the concerned corporation of the state and advise them to
set up  IID Centres at appropriate locations.
 
Further  Recommendation
 
3.3.6    The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of SSI  should continue to encourage cluster development 
approach for SSIs  and ensure  that the Small Industries   Service Institute,  Ahmedabad  co-ordinate with  Industries
Department of the State  for setting up of  Integrated Infrastructural  Development (IID) at  appropriate  location. 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
 
Karnataka
Recommendation
 
3.4       Problem being faced by SSI Sectors in Karnataka
 
3.4.1    The Committee observes that Karnataka is becoming the hub for proliferation of sun rise Small and Medium
Enterprises units in the field of Bio-technology, Electronic, Software, the Committee, therefore, recommends that the
State should be given top priority for encouraging investment in specific sectors in those select sectors viz. Pharma,
Automobile and Auto components, Textile Garments, IT, ITES, Sugar, Food Processing, Engineering and Metallurgy
(Iron and Steel and Cement) with greater R&D impetus for accelerating modernization and up-gradation of mining
processing technology.
(Para 1.3.2)
Action Taken
 
3.4.2    The Small Scale   Pharmaceutical Industry has a substantial contribution both in basic drugs as also in the
formulations.  Besides, various basic drugs like Paracetamol, 6APA, 7ADCA, Niacin, Ampicillin, Amoxycillin,
Ibuprofin, Trimethoprim, Sulphamethoxaszole etc.  Small Scale Units are also engaged in the formulation of tablets,
capsules, injectables, Syrups, Oinments, I.V. Fluids etc.  Small Scale units contribute about 40% of the total production
and 44% of the total exports.  The main concentration of these units are in Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
West Bengal, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Delhi.
 
3.4.3    At present, there are 16 bulk drug/intermediates  reserved for the manufacture in small scale sector, but none of
the formulations are reserved in the small scale sector.  For the promotion of drug and pharmaceutical industry,
following measures have been taken:-
 
3.4.4    With the consultation of stake holders of drug and pharmaceutical industry, the investment limit of  reserved
items have been raised from Rs. 1 crore to  Rs.5 crore which ninter-alia include Para Amino Phenol – Indl. Grade ;
Pyrazolones ;Benzyl Benzoate ; Niacinamide; paracetamol ; Methyl Parabens and Sodium Salt starting from Para
Hydroxy Benzoic Acid ; Ethyl Parabens and Sodium Salt starting from Para Hydroxy Benzoic Acid ; Propyl Parabens
and Sodium Salt starting from Para Hydroxy Benzoic Acid Calcium Gluconate and Aluminium Hydroxide Gel
 
3.4.5    Financial assistance is available to SSI Bio-tech and  drug and pharmaceutical units through CLCSS for
Technology upgradation to meet the requirements of GMP which provides 15% subsidy.  Increase in investment limit
upto 5 crores for all the SSI drug formulation units is under consideration. Recently, Ministry of Finance vide their
notification dated 7
th January, 2005 have brought pharmaceutical products under the MRP based excise duty with 40%
abatement.   Due to this notification, small scale drug & pharmaceutical industry associations are representing that
mostly small scale drug and pharmaceutical units are shifting their activity to Uttranchal, J&K and Himachal Pradesh
which were declared excise free states.
 
3.4.6    Office of DC(SSI) is constantly in touch with Deptt. of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Chemicals &
Petro-chemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and fertilisers on these issues and has suggested following measures:
The small scale pharmaceutical manufacturers may be allowed of excise duty exemption upto a turnover of Rs. 3 crore
(existing Rs. 1 crore) with the eligibility limit increased to 6 crore from the existing Rs. 4 crore.
or
 
The excise duty on pharmaceutical products may be brought down to 8% from the existing 16%.
 
3.4.7    Due to introduction of product patent w.e.f. 1.1.2005, Deptt. of Chemicals & Petro-chemicals in consultation
with the Office of DC(SSI)  is proposing for set-up of Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Fund to help pharma
industry to update their manufacturing activity at par with the global players. 
 
3.4.8    A few drugs and drug intermediates are being extracted from medicinal plants.  Further promotion and

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
dissemination of the information about these plants, five Cluster Development Centres have been established in the
potential states.  These clusters also have the common plant for processing and testing equipments/instruments to
facilitate the plant growers.
 
3.4.9    79 Awareness/Motivation/Training Programmes and one national seminar on the issue related to aromatic and
medicinal plant, etc. were conducted through these Cluster Development Centres in various states including 18 in
Orissa, 9 in Bihar, 4 in Uttranchal and 48 in Rajasthan.
 
3.4.10  To encourage R&D in SSI sector including drug and pharmaceutical sector, a provision has been made for 150%
weighted tax deduction subject to the recognition of their R&D by Ministry of Science and Technology.  The
equipment/instruments relevant to R&D are allowed to import duty free for the units having R&D recognition.
 
3.4.11  25 sensitization programmes on bio-technology were conducted and 10 project profiles were prepared for the
new entrepreneurs to start their small scale industry in bio-tech field.
 
Further  Recommendation
 
3.4.12  While appreciating the efforts undertaken by the various  organs of the Ministry of  SSI in  order to promote and
proliferate  pharmaceutical industry in SME sector in Karnataka, the  Committee  wishes to make under  mentioned
further observations and recommendations :-
 
Accelerating efforts to enhance investment limit upto Rs. 10 crore for all the SSI  during  drug formulation  units in
SMEs  sector.
 
Setting up  of pharmaceutical  technology upgradation  fund  with adequate caution amount at the  earliest for injecting
competitiveness  among the manufacturing  units.
 
Checking out  sustainable strategy to undo the adverse impact of the notification dated  7
th January, 2005 of the
Ministry of Finance pertaining to pharmaceutical products under the MRP based  excise duty;
 
Review  the problems and prospects of pharmaceutical sector along with  SWOT  analysis in India in general keeping 
in view the  global trends and prospects along with strategy to combat  the problems
 
3.4.13  The Committee would like to know the status of  Automobile and Auto components, textiles Garments , IT,
ITES, Sugar, Food Processing and Engineering  and Metallurgy (Iron and Steel and Cement) sector  in Karnataka  as
recommended by the Committee and  on the  line of action taken notes as furnished by the Ministry of SSI in  regard to
Pharmaceutical sector.
 
Recommendation
 
3.5       Promotion of Industrial Development through Cluster approach
 
3.5.1    The Committee is of the view that the concerted efforts should be made for appraisal of Agri Exports zones at
Chitradurga, Kolar, Bangalore, Tumkur and Bijapur.  The Union Ministry of SSI should also undertake promotion of
Industrial Development through Cluster approach in select districts.  Action Plan should also be chalked out and
effectively implemented for industrialization of backward areas for balanced industrial development in the state.
(Para 1.3.4)
Action Taken
 
3.5.2    Under Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP), seventy-six clusters have been taken up for
development including a project for promoting exports from 38 clusters in the country.  The issue pertaining to
technology Upgradation, process modification and product diversification for small-scale sector are also addressed
under the holistic approach of development of the cluster.  So far, clusters taken up for development in Karnataka are

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Readymade Garments, Bangalore & Foundry Industry, Belgaum.
 
Further  Recommendation
 
3.5.3    The Committee  would like to know as to  what  actions have been taken by Union Ministry of SSI or 
encouraging industrial    development through   cluster  approach in  backward  districts of  Karnataka like  Chitradurg,
Kolar, Tumkur and Bijapur.
 
Recommendation
 
3.6       The Committee feels that Union Government in tandem with the State Government should give due emphasis on
implementation of industrial infrastructure projects, Upgradation of surface transport infrastructure, augmentation of
railway network and connectivity to ports and up-gradation  and expansion of Mangalore and Karwar ports.
(Para 1.3.5)
Action Taken
 
3.6.1    Under the scheme of IID, five IID projects has already been sanctioned in the state of Karnataka in district
namely Belgaum, Bijapur, Kolar, Bagalkot and Tumkur.  Out of these, three IID Centres in district Belgaum, Bijapur
and Kolar have already completed.  One IID project in district Bagalkot is in progress.  However, for the IID project in
Tumkur district, the implementing agency has decided not to implement the project.  In the meantime, the Small
Industries Service Institute, Bangalore has been directed to get in touch with the Industries Department or the concerned
corporation of the state and advise them to set up IID Centres at appropriate locations.  The M/O SSI shall consider any
further proposal under the scheme.
 
Further  Recommendation
 
3.6.2    The Committee is of view that the Ministry  of SSI should  not  sit across and  wait for the proposals pouring
under  IID scheme . Rather the Ministry should  invite   and induce the  proposal under  the scheme and apprise the
Committee of the measures taken in this regard.
 
Recommendation
 
3.7 Central subsidy for the development of basic infrastructure for food processing industry
 
3.7.1    The Committee is of the view that basic infrastructure like Cold storage Chain, Research Development
Manpower Development, Improvement in quality of products, Packaging, Improvement in logistic, Ware House,
Quality and Testing Lab are required for achieving proposed Food Processing Industry.  Reasonable central subsidy for
the development of basic infrastructure for food processing industry in the state may be provided.  The Committee
impress upon the Ministry of SSI to take up the matter with Ministry of Food Processing Industry for promotion of the
industry.
(Para 1.4.5)
 
Action Taken
 
3.7.2    Several plan schemes have been implemented by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries providing financial
assistance for establishment and modernization of food processing units, creation of infrastructure, support for R&D,
human resource development besides other promotional measures to encourage development of food processing
industries.  As part of the strategy to develop food processing infrastructure, the Ministry has been pro actively 
pursuing the task of setting up of food parks in different parts of the country. Under the food parks scheme, financial
assistance @ 25% of the project cost in general areas and 33.33% in difficult areas is provided for specified
infrastructural facilities, subject to a maximum of Rs. 4.00 crore.  In the food parks, common facilities like cold storage,
food testing and analysis lab, effluent treatment plant, common processing facilities, packaging centre, power supply,
water supply, seminar/conference/training facilities etc. are provided.  So far, 50 food parks have been approved under
the scheme.  Assistance is also being extended for modernization of abattoirs and for establishment of facilities like cold

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
storage, packaging, irradiation and value added centres.Storage facility (depots) for raw materials and finished goods in
one of the eligible items for financing under the IID Scheme and GOI grant is released as per the requirement of the
particular IID Centres.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.7.3    The Committee  would like to seek  the clarification whether the figure of 50 food parks  as approved pertains to
State of Karnataka   or all India. Since  the Committee’s recommendations at present pertains to  State of Karnataka,
therefore, the facts and figures  should accordingly be furnished relating to the State. The Committee would like to
know the status of  the plan /schemes of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in Karnataka and how the Ministry of
SSI is co-ordinating with that Ministry.
 
 Bihar 
 
Recommendation
           
3.8       The Committee is pleased to note that Bihar has the potential for Agro based industries, fruits and vegetables,
therefore, the Central Government should open Food Park in the potentilly identified districts of Bihar and a  Nodal
Agency for promoting SMEs in these areas should be set up for regulating food processing units and undertaking
research and development activities.  Opening of a branch each of Central Food Research Institute, Agriculture Science
Centres with advanced technology and APIDA would prove paramount in the promotion and furtherance of SMEs in the
state.(Para 1.4.6)
 
Action Taken
 
3.8.1    The Central Govt. does not set up food parks on its own.  However, financial assistance upto Rs. 4.00 crore is
provided to implementing agencies for establishment of food parks.  So far MFPI has sanctioned financial assistance to
one food park in  Vaishali Distt. of Bihar.  More food parks may be considered if any such viable proposal is submitted
or recommended by the  Govt. of Bihar.  The MFPI has already designated Commissioner, Industrial Development as a
nodal agency for promotion of  FPI sector in Bihar.
 
3.8.2    Regarding opening of a Food Park in the potentially identified district in Bihar, the State Govt. of Bihar will be
advised by the Small Industries Service Institute, Patna & Muzaffarpur to set up Integrated Infrastructural
Development(IID) Centres at appropriate locations.  In this regard, Small Industries Service Institutes have already been
directed.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.8.3    The Committee would like to know the outcome of the direction being given to Small Industries Service
Institutes to set up Integrated Infrastructural Development(IID) Centres in Bihar. The Committee recommends that 
financial assistance may be provided for establishment of food parks at appropriate locations. 
 
Recommendation
 
3.9       Special package
 
3.9.1    The Committee is of the view that in the changing scenario of increased industrial activity, there is need to
impart more training to the entrepreneurs  of the state in the field of Management, Cost effectiveness, Financial
Management, advertisement and publicity, patent laws, new technologies in marketing, Inventory Management etc.  To
have the global standard of entrepreneurship there is a need to provide additional basic Infrastructural facilities so that
the entrepreneurs of the state can be trained with such a high quality management training inputs which at later stage
can be so strong that the identity and existence of entrepreneurs can be not effected by the influence of World Trade
Organisation. (Para 1.4.11)
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Action Taken
3.9.2    Organizing Management Development Training programmes constitute an integral part of the activities of Small
Industries Service Institutes(SISIs) besides counseling and consultancy services. Management Training course on
various areas of industrial management initiatives are also devised for owner-cum-manager and supervisory level
personnel of small scale industries.  These training programmes are continuously re-structured  in their  contents
keeping in view the demands of the area and the local requirements of the industries.  The nature of target groups and its
profile determines the modification in course content in order to make them suitable for contemporary managerial trends
and practices which may be used by small scale industry executives for attaining desired strength of managerial action.
           
3.9.3    The target of management courses for 2005-06 has been fixed at 400 courses through which 10,000 participants
are  likely to be benefited. In the current year 2005-06 the target of Rs. 1.00 lakh to be utilized for Management
Development Programme through  different SISIs.  The basic objective of Management Development Programme is to
impart the state-of-art learning in the emerging management techniques/practices to help the small scale entrepreneurs
for harvesting better benefits and substantial share in the domestic/overseas markets.  These programmes are designed
and conducted by SISIs keeping in view the local conditions and needs of the target groups.  The subjects covered under
these training programmes pertain to various aspects of Management covering Industrial Management, Human
Resource Management,  Marketing Management, Export Management & Documentation, Materials Management,
Financial Management, Information Technical & Exports etc.  Training programmes are also organized on each one of
these topics independently depending on the requirement.
           
3.9.4    SISIs are being equipped with modern infrastructure facilities like computer systems so that the entrepreneurs
for small scale industries can be trained with high quality management inputs in the field of computer science and
information technology.  Special programmes will also be organized by SISIs on networking concepts and functioning
will also be taught.  The main emphasis will be given on practicals/demonstrations to the trainees so that the
entrepreneurs will not be affected by the influence of WTO. An amount of Rs. 13,000/- (Maximum) is  sanctioned for
each course for a duration of 30 hours and minimum intake of 20 participants.  The minimum course fee of Rs. 400/- per
participant is being charged for all places except for Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, North Eastern States,
J&K and Sikkim, where it is Rs. 100/- per participant.  Only 50% of the prescribed course fee is being charged from
SC/ST candidates.
 
3.9.5    With a view to create awareness among the SSI, Small Scale Industries Associations, etc. on WTO Agreements
and its implication for them, Ministry of SSI & ARI has so far organized 28 one day Sensitization Workshops at various
places in the country during 2000 and one such workshop was organized during 2003-04. This Ministry organized 14
one day sensitization programmes on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) at various places in the country during 2001-
2002, 8 such programmes during 2002-2003, and 9 programmes during 2003-04, and 25 programmes were organized
during the  year 2004-05.   Two such programmes have been organized till date during current year to create awareness
among the SSI units and their Associations.  Ministry of SSI also organized four one-day product specific workshops for
assessing the impact of WTO on Bicycle and Parts Industry, Medicinal Bio technology, Glass & Ceramics Industry and
Flavor & Fragrance Industry during 2002-2003.  One such workshop on Hand tools industry was also  organized during
2003-2004. 
 
3.9.6    17 seminars were organized to disseminate information to the SSI     Associations on anti-dumping
investigation   during 2001-02 and 2002-03.  These seminars  were organized in association with representatives of
Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied Duties (DGAD) at various ports in India. One sensitisation programme
on geographical indications was conducted during  2003-04.  5  Such more sensitisation programmes on geographical
indications were organized   during 2004-05. 
Further Recommendation
 
3.9.7    The Committee observes that the Ministry of SSI has not furnished the facts and figures pertaining to state of
Bihar as per  requirement of   recommendations of  the Committee.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation and
desires that the  Ministry should furnish the action taken note  in line with the recommendation of the  Committee
pertaining to Bihar.
 
Recommendation

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
 
3.10     Status of Power supply of Industries
           
3.10.1  The Committee feels that the State Government should implement the provisions of State Industrial Policy
enunciated recently for promotion of Small Scale Industries in the State.(Para 1.4.15)
Action Taken
 
3.10.2  The Govt. of Bihar is implementing the Industrial Policy-2003 based upon the raw materials and resources
available in Bihar and renewed efforts have been made to establish Small/Medium & Large Industries as well as to
rehabilitate the sick outlaying Industries of the state. The local and outside entrepreneurial talent is being taken to give a
fillip to industrial development in order to create employment opportunities and to increase individual income coupled
with state revenues.
 
3.10.3  The State Govt. is implementing the following provisions as announced in the Industrial Policy: -
 
Sending positive signal and building confidence among investors through creation of an appropriate investment climate.
Human resource development with a view to generating & encouraging entrepreneurship.
Development of Infrastructure.
Setting up of export oriented units as well growth centers.
Establishment & Strengthening of Infrastructure to promote Modern Information Technology and Bio-Technology as
well as Food Processing Project.
Providing marketing facilities of Small, Tiny and Cottage Industries including Handloom & Handicraft.
Intensive campaign for upgradation of technology and bringing about improvement in qualities through Research &
Development.
Mobilisation of private investment for industrial development.
Timely detection of sickness in Industrial units and provision of necessary remedy through District level Monitoring
Agency.
Revamping of Single Window System to make it move effective.  Udyog Mitra has been established.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.10.4  The Committee would like to know as to how many SMEs  and large units have been established in Bihar as a
result of renewed efforts  under the industrial policy  2003.  The Committee would  further like to know the empirical
facts regarding the impact of the implementation of various provisions of the  said industrial policy  in the State.
 
3.10.5  The Committee desires to know the initiatives being taken by the New Government in regard to supply of power
being  extended to SMEs. 
 
West Bengal
Recommendation
 
3.11     Thrust Areas for Development in SSI Sector
 
3.11.1  The Committee recommends that the Union Ministry of SSI in co-ordination with the State Government of West
Bengal should under take concrete measures for further proliferation of leather industry by relocating the leather tiny
units at suitable places and providing adequate institutional and logistic support for enhancing production and export of
leather products.(Para 1.5.7)
 
Action Taken
 
3.11.2  Central Footwear Training Institutes at Agra and Chennai are conducting various long term and short term
training programmes for footwear making. The candidates from the state of West Bengal are getting trained from these
Institutes regularly. The personnel trained from these Institutes help footwear industries in adopting new technologies to
reduce their production cost and improve their quality and thereby increase the export earning of the industry. Both of

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
these training centers are well equipped with latest machines for footwear manufacturing. New technologies for
footwear making is being incorporated in these institutes on regular basis. Ministry of Small Scale Industries, is
providing financial assistance in the  form of Grant-in-aid to these Institutes for procurement of latest machines. Both
the Institutes are providing consultancy and job work services to Small Scale Industries to enable them to produce
quality products.
 
3.11.3  Tailor made training programmes for footwear making may be arranged by CFTIs in West Bengal in association
with State Government. SISI, Kolkata, which is headed by a Director who is a specialist of leather technology is
conducting Training Programmes in the leather trade and also providing technical consultancy to leather industries for
enhancing production and export earning of the industry.         It may also be mentioned here that Government of India
has approved a scheme of Integrated Development of the Leather Sector which will be operated by Deptt. of Industrial
Policy & Promotion (DIPP).           
Further Recommendation
 
3.11.4  The Committee desires to know the action taken by the Ministry of SSI in coordination with state Government in
regard to relocation of tiny leather units at suitable  places.  The Committee is of the view that the Government should
set up the footwear Training  Institute in West Bengal for providing logistic and institutional support to the leather
industry in the state.
 
Maharashtra
Recommendation
 
3.12     Ancillarization among various segment of industries
 
3.12.1  The Committee wishes to point out that Maharashtra being on the threshold of industrial development, an all out
efforts should be made for ancillarization among various segment of industries in order to give fillip to the emergence
and consolidation of SMEs in these segment.  The Committee also desires that forward and backward linkages should
be set up for integrated development of industries in the state. The Committee recommends that the proposal for
establishment of industrial towns and its management by first generation entrepreneurs must be encouraged and propped
up.(Para 1.9.1)
Action Taken
 
3.12.2  Office of DC(SSI) is providing financial assistance for setting up sub-contracting exchange by NGOs/Industry
Association in almost all States.  So far 59  sub-contracting exchanges have been set up till 30
th September, 2005 by
Industry Associations/NGOs in different parts of the country apart from 35 sub-contracting exchange set up at SISIs
located in almost every  corner of the country. In addition to the this,  30 to 35 Vendor  development Programmes are
being conducted every year in different parts of the country which is aimed at improving business relationship with
buyers (large scale industries) and sellers (small scale Industries). Such progrmmes are also contributing to enrich the
data bank of the sub-contracting changes.
 
3.12.3  Sub-contracting exchange – Six Sub-contracting exchanges have been set up by Industries Associations/NGOs
with the financial assistance of this office in order to promote development of small scale units in the State of
Maharshtra and other purchasing orgnizations viz Vidarbha Inds.. Association,Nagpur ; Nasik Industrial Co-operative
Estate, Nashik; Maratha Chamber of Commerce, Indutry &  Agriculture,Pune ; MIDC Ind. Assoc., Chanderpur ; MIDC
Ind.Asso., Nagpur and Marathwada Asso. Of small Ind. & Agriculture, Aurangabad.
 
3.12.4  In addition to the above Sub-contracting exchange set up by Industry Associations/NGOs in the State of
Maharashtra one Sub-contracting exchange is also operating at SISI, Mumbai to meet the requirements of small scale
sector and large scale sector.  Vendor Development Programmes are also being organized in the State of Maharashtra at
different locations for establishing business linkages between the buyers and sellers.  Four numbers of Vendor
Development Programmes have been conducted during the last three years for the development of SSI units and has
fetched Rs.30 crore of business and around 225 small and large scale industries have been benefited from these
programmes. Office of DC(SSI) is continuously striving to achieve the goal of ancillarisation in the State of

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Maharashtra.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.12.5  The Committee, while  appreciating  the continued efforts of Office of Development Commissioner (SSI) to
achieve   the goal of ancilliarisation   of industry in the State, would like to know the working  equilibrium  of
ancillarisation of industries in the State of Maharastra alongwith the SWOT analysis  of  the status and problems being
faced by ancillary units and the strategy required  for combating the problems.  The Committee would like to be
apprised of the success rate and quantum of Vendors Development Programme  in the State.  The Committee would 
also like  to be apprised of more specifically the number of  industrial town established and managed by First generation
entrepreneurs.
 
Recommendation
 
3.13     Rehabilitation of sick units
 
3.13.1  The Committee desires to know the comment of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries on the proposal of the
industrial federations on the issue of acceptance by the Central Government the certificate issued by District Industries
Centres in regard to rehabilitation of sick units. (Para 1.9.2)
Action Taken
 
3.13.2  The Union Government does not provide financial assistance to the States/Union Territories for rehabilitation of
sick SSIs. Financial assistance for the rehabilitation of sick SSIs is provided by the primary lending institutions (PLIs),
including the commercial banks. As per the RBI guidelines on rehabilitation of sick SSI units, based on the norms
specified therein, it will be for the banks/financial institutions to decide whether a sick SSI unit is potentially viable or
not.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.13.3  The Committee would like to be  enlightened on the role of Central Government in regard  to rehabilitation  of
sick SSI units. The main concerns of the Committee is the rehabilitation of sick SSI units.
General Recommendations
 
U. P.
Recommendation
 
3.14     Status of SSI sector in the select state
 
3.14.1  The Committee desires that the Ministry of SSI should undergo the merits of the expectation of SSI Associations
and the State Governments and accordingly chalk out course of action to address the same in order to improve and
proliferate the status of SSI sector in the select states.  The Committee is of the considered view that the main issues
concerning the Indian SSI sector pertains to rehabilitation of the existing units by providing assistance at concessional
rates, advanced infrastructure of international standards, setting up of Information Technology centers for SSI sector,
soft funding for Upgradation and modernization, relaxation from power cuts and taxation and strict anti-dumping
regulations. It will help to increase the potentials of these units and enable to retain employment and contribution of the
domestic production of the country in future.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of SSI should
undertake following course of action:-
 
Making in -depth study and research work regarding the actual status of SSI sector to SWOT analysis;
 
Selection of key areas for massive action;
 
Formulation of district wise development strategy in each state for promotion and proliferation of SSI units:
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Co-ordination with the State Governments, SSI Associations, Banks and other Union Ministries/ Departments
impressing upon the need for promotion of SSI sector;
 
Strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of SSI promotional schemes and programmes in
each state. (Para 1.10.1)
 
Action Taken
3.14.2  A synoptic SWOT analysis of the Small Scale Industries (SSI) sector is as follows:
 
,Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats
1. Far greater
employment potential
as compared with the
large sector
1. Supply of credit
inadequate and not in time.
1. Opportunity to gain new export
market due to phasing out of QRs
and falling trade barriers.
1. Delayed payments
from big units.
2. Locational flexibility 2. Low technology base. 2. If promoted/ assisted in
clusters, can compete with large
enterprises and also reap benefits
of economies of scale,
technological upgradation and
improved supply chain
management.
2. Competition with large
scale industries.
3. Less infrastructural
requirements.
3. Poor access to R&D
facilities.
3. Sunrise areas like bio-
technology, IT enabled services,
software, etc., can be tapped by
SSI entrepreneurs.
3. Low technology
resulting in low
productivity.
4. If supported,
innovative ideas are
applied in respect of
products and processes.
4. Not able to avail of
benefits of economies of
scale.
4. Utilisation of increasingly
popular concept of public-private
partnerships to bridge critical
gaps.
4. Vulnerability to fast
changes in technologies
from Multinationals.
5. Because of lean
ownership and
management,
enterprise is better
controlled.
5. Prone to harassment by
inspectors because of lack
of time and mostly one-
man management of both
indoor and outdoor jobs.
  
6. Ancillarisation and
growth therefrom.
6. Poor in marketing and
brand building.
  
 7. Association fragmented
and largely not managed
professionally.
  
 
3.14.3  The recommendations of the Committee were taken up with the Directorate of Industries of all the concerned
States. The Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar Pradesh has informed that the key areas for development
have been identified and incorporated in U.P. industrial policy, 2004.  The focus is laid on the development and
strengthening of clusters, infrastructure support and development of AEZ and SEZ in the State.  Besides Industrial
Policy, IT Policy, Bio-technology Policy, Power Policy for the State have been issued in U.P. to ensure sustained
development.  The Directorate of Industries, Government of Bihar has informed that State Industrial Policy-2003 has
been announced in the month of June, 2003. In this Policy, measures for development of basic infrastructure, allotment
of land and lease, sectoral development of energy, tourism and entertainment industry, handicrafts, handloom, silk,
Khadi and rural industries, sugar industry, food processing industries, information technology mission and export, etc.
have been included. Thrust industries and basic facilities and incentives admissible under the above industrial policy
have also been included. The implementation of the Industrial Policy is on progress.
 
3.14.4  The Directorate of Industries, Government of U.P. has informed that targets under various schemes for industrial
development sponsored by Central and State Government are normally fixed district-wise.  Regular monitoring of

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
district-wise targets are also ensured.  Under PMRY, targets are allotted bank branch-wise spread all over the districts. 
District Credit Plan is also prepared in consultation with all concerned.  Single Table System is also operative for grant
of all clearances and sanctions in time and at one place. The Directorate of Industries, Government Bihar has informed
that Industrial Potentiality Survey reports are being prepared by SISI, Patna every year. During the year 2004-2005
Industrial Potentiality Survey report of Bhojpur, Buxar and Rohtas were prepared. For promotion of SSI sector, SSI
Associations, Banks and different departments have been made members of different committees constituted for
development/rehabilitation of SSI sector in the State.
 
3.14.5  The Ministry of SSI regularly interacts and coordinates with other Central Ministries/ Departments concerned,
the State Governments, SSI Associations, etc. for the promotion and development of the SSI sector. The various
schemes being implemented by the Ministry are also closely monitored.  The Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs)
in the States are also actively involved in the promotion and development of SSIs in the respective States and maintain
close liaison with the State Directorate of Industries.  In view of the importance attached to cluster development for the
growth of SSI sector, at the instance of the Ministry, the RBI has advised all the Sate Level Bankers’ Committee
(SLBC) Convenor Banks to invite the Director of SISI as member of the SLBC to attend its meetings in the States and
also discuss the cluster issue.  The RBI has informed that as per the decision of the fifth meeting of the Standing
Advisory Committee, Indian Banks’ Association has advised its local chapters to hold periodical meetings with SSI
Associations to sort out the issues relating to credit flow to SSI sector. 
 
3.14.6  In line with the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises’ announced by the
Government, at the Regional Offices, the RBI is proposing to constitute Empowered Committees with the Regional
Director of the RBI as the Chairman to review the progress in SME financing and rehabilitation of sick SSI and medium
enterprises and to co-ordinate with other banks/ financial institutions and the State Government in removing
bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of credit to the sector.  The said Regional level Committees may decide the
need to have similar Committees at cluster/ district levels.    Further, the Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar
Pradesh has informed that co-ordination with various agencies and associations are ensured at district and regional level.
District Level Udyog Bandhu meetings are organized every month. Similarly, Zonal and State Level Udyog Bandhu
meetings are also organized from time to time. Department of Industries also organizes regular meetings with DICs,
Zonal Offices and State Level Institutions to monitor and evaluate the programmes.
 
3.14.7  The aim of the Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme is to provide developed sites with
infrastructural facilities like power distribution network, water, telecommunication, drainage and pollution control
facilities, roads, banks, raw materials, storage and marketing outlets, common service facilities and technological back
up services etc.  The Scheme covers rural as well as urban areas with a provision of 50% reservation for rural areas and
50% industrial plots are to be reserved for tiny sector.  The scheme also provides for Upgradation/strengthening of the
infrastructural facilities in the existing  old industrial estates.
 
3.14.8  Regarding strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of IID scheme in each State, the
Directors of Small Industries Service Institute have been directed to get in touch with the Industries Deptt. of the
concerned corporations of the State and advise them to set up IID Centres at appropriate locations.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.14.9  The Committee wishes to point out that emergence of SMEs  at the global level  is  the empirical fact in all  the
leading economies of the world and  each Government  in world  is giving special impetus to the growth and
development of SMEs.  Indian  Government, too,  is making efforts through budgetary announcement  for boosting the
SMEs  for its domestic consolidation and sharpening its competitiveness for global survival .   Therefore, the Committee
desires that  the States Governments  should also cope up with the global pace and  the policy  and priority of the
Central Government to make SMEs as the engine of growth.  That is possible only when the Ministry of SSI coordinate
with the state governments  in the effective manner.  
 
3.14.10            The Committee is of the view that each state should make SWOT analysis of the prevailing SMEs in the
State and chalking out strategy for their consolidation  and  proliferation  in the state by availing the opportunity ahead
and combating the threats on its ways.   The Committee would like to know in detail as to what action have been taken

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
in regard to the development and strengthening of clusters, infrastructure support and development of AEZ and SEZ in
the State.   The Committee would further like to know the details of  the provisions of  industrial Policy, IT Policy, Bio-
technology Policy, Power Policy for the State of U.P.   for ensuring  the  sustained development and their overall 
impact on the economic development of the state.  Similarly, the Committee would like to know the details in the case
of Bihar in regard to progress made in implementation of  Industrial Policy   and its impact on the emergence of SMEs
in the state.  
 
3.14.11In regard to the Committee’s recommendation for formulation of district wise development strategy in each State
for promotion and proliferation of SSI units, The Committee does not merely mean the district-wise target under various
schemes for industrial development sponsored by State and Central Government  or the district-credit plan but chalking
out plan for massive action to boost the SMEs as per the distribution of raw material and opportunity for marketing
facilities and infrastructure.  For this, the Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) in the state has really to play pro-
active role in making awareness among the entrepreneurs of the first generation to undertake the SME activities.
           
3.14.12            While the Committee understands the merits of Policy Package for stepping up credit to small and
medium enterprises  but at the same time the Committee feels that  the policy has to be  implemented in letter  and
spirit. 
 
Recommendation
 
3.15     Promoting of  SSI sector in economically backward regions
 
3.15.1  The Committee further recommends that the allocation may be made in a manner as to promote SSI sector in
economically backward regions like Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Orissa where adequate institutional
arrangement may be set up for training and manpower development and encouraging scheme, technology environmental
research and Development.  Sufficient  fund should be allocated for integrated Infrastructural Development and all out
efforts should be made to implement effectively the credit generator Fund Schemes, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy for
Technology up-gradation and the Micro-Finance programmes.
(Para 1.10.2)
Action Taken
 
3.15.2  The Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme is implemented by the SIDBI.  SIDBI has advised all Primary Lending
Institutions(PLIs) to conduct workshops, seminars, conferences, etc., for popularizing the scheme.  To supplement the
efforts of SDIBI, Office of DC(SSI) has also organized 15 awareness programmes on Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
Scheme so far, through its Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs).  The industry associations, banks, SIDBI and State
Industry Departments also participated in these seminars. The operation of the CLCSS is being reviewed at the State
Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings in most States. Copies of the scheme have been forwarded to the Staff
Training Centres of various banks.  Training sessions on CLCSS are also being held at Bankers Training Colleges.
 
3.15.3  Interactive sessions with bankers and entrepreneurs are being held in various potential centers/clusters.  Three
such meetings have been organized in Chenai, Hyderabad and Pune during August and September,2004. The details of
the scheme are being circulated at the meetings and seminars organized by Industry associations, State Governments,
etc.  The guidelines on CLCSS have also been posted on the SIDO website.Letters have been written to all District
Industry Centres/various Industry Associations furnishing details of the scheme and requesting them to circulate their
details among the industries located in their respective areas..
           
3.15.4  The three national- level training institutes viz., Indian Institute for Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati, National
Institute for Small Industry Extension Training (NISIET), Hyderabad and National Institute for Entrepreneurship  and
Small Business Development(NIESBUD), Noida and the Small Industries Service Institutes(SISIs) and branch SISIs
organize a number of training programmes across the country to train potential/existing entrepreneurs in the tiny sector
for improving their techno/managerial knowledge and skills.  Besides, training programmes are also organized in
specific technical trades in the Regional Testing Centres(RTCs), Product & Process Development Centres(PPDCs) and
Tool Rooms for imparting appropriate training.  The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) conducts
programmes for imparting of training in entrepreneurs skills and marketing techniques for entrepreneurs in micro

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
enterprises.
           
3.15.5  The Ministry of SSI is implementing the Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme, under which
financial assistance is made available to individuals in tiny/small sector to participate in international exhibitions,
overseas study/tours, production of overseas publicity material, sector-specific market studies, initiating/contesting anti-
dumping cases and reimbursement of cost for adoption of bar-coding.  SIDBI also extends support to tiny/small units for
undertaking various activities like marketing research, advertising, branding, participation in trade fairs, etc.   Further,
assistance is extended to specialized organisations which provide marketing assistance, infrastructure and support
services to industrial concerns in the small scale sector.
 
3.15.6  The Ministry of SSI implements various schemes like Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLCSS), Small
Industries Cluster Development Programme(SICDP), etc. for assisting the tiny/small units in technology upgradation. 
Further, SIDBI has set up a Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises(TBSE) in collaboration with the United Nations. 
Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (UN-APCTT) to help SSIs tap opportunities at the global level for
acquisition of technology and establish business collaborations. The Government and the Reserve Bank of India have
taken several measures/initiatives for extending adequate credit facilities to the tiny units.  These, inter alia, include 60%
of the SSI lending earmarked for tiny units, providing collateral-free loans up to Rs. 25 lakh to SSI units having good
track record, enhancement of the credit limit under Laghu Udhyami Credit Card (LUCC) from Rs. 2 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh
based on satisfactory track record, etc.  The Ministry of SSI is also implementing schemes like the Credit Guarantee
Scheme and Micro-Finance Programme for augmenting the flow of credit to the tiny and micro enterprises.  The
Government has also operationalised a Small and Medium Enterprises(SME) Fund w.e.f April 1,2004.  Under the Fund,
80 per cent of the corpus is earmarked for SSI units having investment in plant and machinery upto Rs. 1 crore and
loans are provided at interest rate of 2 per cent below the PLR of SIDBI.
 
3.15.7  SIDBI has in place a National Equity Fund (NEF) with the objective of providing equity type support to
entrepreneurs for setting up new projects in tiny/small scale sector, for undertaking expansion, modernization,
technology Upgradation and diversification by existing tiny, SSI and service enterprises.  SIDBI is also implementing
Micro Credit Scheme for promoting, financing and development of micro-enterprises in the country. The Ministry of
SSI is implementing the Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Scheme with the objective to make available
developed plots for setting up tiny and small units with basic infrastructure facilities viz. power, water, roads,
telecommunications, common service facilities etc.  Under the Scheme, a grant of 40% of the project cost for each IID
Centre, subject to a maximum of Rs. 2 crore is provided.  The quantum of grant in case of states in the North-East
region, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttaranchal is 80% of the project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs. 4
crore.
           
3.15.8  The major schemes being operated by SIDBI for financing the activities relating to creation of infrastructural
facilities for SSIs are (i) Scheme of Refinance Assistance for Infrastructure Development and (ii)Scheme of Direct
Assistance for Development of Industrial Infrastructure for SSI sector.  Under this schemes, assistance is provided for
setting up Industrial areas/Estates, technology parks, common utility centers, setting up of warehousing facilities for SSI
products/units etc.   
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.15.9  The Committee is of the considered view that the Government should take up the issue of promotion and
proliferation of  SMEs  on the priority basis in economically  backward regions like Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and
Orissa  in order to tackle twin problems of unemployment and stark poverty prevailing in these States.   The empirical
impact of  the various training programmes,  Market Development  Assistance schemes, credit facilities and the
integrated infrastructural development scheme  would be felt in real terms only when people of  the States  dwells in
peace and prosperity.
 
Recommendation
 
3.16     Marketing assistance and export promotion
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
3.16.1  The Committee desires that Action Plan, state-wise should be chalked out for promoting small scale industries
by the SIDO and impetus should be given for marketing assistance and export promotion in and through these regions. 
It may be noted that SSI Sector would be able to achieve the Twelve per cent annual growth rate only when the
problems being faced by SSI sector in these economically backward regions is removed and when these regions want
contributing in enhancing the growth and development.  Then and only then, SSI sector may convert itself into ‘ Engine
of growth’ for national economy.
(Para 1.10.3)
Action Taken
 
3.16.2  For streamlining and strengthening the SSI sector in the region like Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal  Orissa,
marketing support is being provided under the Government Stores Purchase Programme to SSI units registered with
NSIC under its Single Point Registration Scheme for which 358 items are also reserved for exclusive purchase from SSI
sector.  For participation in International Trade Fairs, there is a provision for financial subsidy under SSI-MDA scheme.
 
 
3.16.3  The Marketing assistance is  provided to small scale units . Under Government Stores Purchase Programme,
various facilities are being provided to SSI units registered with NSIC under its Single Point Registration Scheme such
as(i)Issue of Tender Sets free of cost, (ii) Exemption from payment of Earnest Money(iii) Waiver of Security Deposit
upto Monetary Limit for which unit is registered and (iv) Price preference upto 15% over the quotation of large scale
units.
 
3.16.4  In addition to this, 358 items have also been reserved  for purchase from SSI Sector. The opportunities are
provided to SSI units for participation in Trade Fairs/Exhibitions at the level of National as well as abroad.  Buyer-
Seller Meets are also conducted on a common platform among buyers from organizing sector and seller from SSI sector
to explore the possibility for procurement of material from SSI units.
 
3.16.5  The marketing supports are also provided to SSI sector through training programme on Export Marketing and
Packaging for Exports. The Marketing Development Assistance Scheme (SSI-MDA) offers funding for I     (a) 
Individual assistance for participation in overseas fairs/exhibitions. Individual overseas study tours, or tours of
individuals as member of a trade delegation going abroad. Production of publicity material for overseas publicity.    
Sector specific market studies by Industry Associations/Export Promotion Councils/Federation of Indian Export
Organisation. Initiating/contesting anti-dumping cases by SSI Associations and reimbursement of 75% of the
registration fee paid to EAN Indian by SSI units.
     
Further Recommendation
 
3.16.6  The Committee finds that the action taken notes as furnished by the  Ministry of SSI merely enumerates policy
and programmes in operation but the ATN does not mention anything about chalking out action plan in the
economically backward regions for boosting SMEs  in the states.  The Ministry may categorically comment on the
committee’suggestion.
Recommendation
 
3.17     Working of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
3.17.1  The Committee observes that Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is a very good scheme aimed at
technological up-gradation in SSI sector.  The progress so far in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat, as apprised by the SSI associations/Federations, has been tardy and in fact the
scheme is yet to take off.  The Committee desires that in future the scheme in these states should show better results.  
The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of SSI to provide better package incentives to SSI units for technology up-
gradation and work out and effective strategy in the economically backward states.
(Para 2.2.6)
 
Action Taken
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
3.17.2  The scheme could not take off in some states like Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Jharkhand since
the general level of industrial activity in the product groups/sub- sectors approved under the scheme is low for these
States.  However, with the inclusion of new product/sub- sectors and  improved technologies, sensitisation activities
undertaken to popularise the scheme among various stakeholders in these States and general improvement in the
business environment and the recent liberalization of its terms & conditions and enhancement of the rate of subsidy
under the scheme, the pace of availment of subsidy under this scheme for technology upgradation is likely to improve in
future.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.17.3  The Committee notes  the comments of the Ministry  that the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme could not
take off in some states like Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Jharkhand since the general level of industrial
activity in the product groups/sub- sectors approved under the scheme is low for these States.   The Committee is in
agreement  with the view of the Ministry of SSI  that with the inclusion of new product/sub- sectors and  improved
technologies, sensitisation activities undertaken to popularise the scheme among various stakeholders in these States and
general improvement in the business environment would lead to improvement in the working of the credit linked capital
subsidy scheme but question arises by when in how.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Government
should come out with growth promoting scheme having the potential of opening   venues for new opportunities.  Such
schemes must have effective implementing agencies at the field level.
 
Recommendation
 
3.18     Credit linked capital subsidy
 
3.18.1  The Committee recommends that the Government should undertake the following steps for improving  the
functioning of credit linked capital subsidy Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and
Gujarat:-
 
Organising awareness programmes at various location all over the country to increase the awareness level of industry
association, banks, SIDBI and Industry Departments of respective States;
 
Review of progress of the scheme in meetings State Level Bankers Committees(SLBCs);
 
Incorporating inputs on the scheme into in service training courses of Bank Managers; and
 
Publicity measures to increase general awareness about the scheme
(Para 2.2.7)
Action Taken
 
3.18.2  The  Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD) are the nodal agencies for implementing the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
Scheme(CLCSS). 
 
3.18.3  Both the nodal agencies have taken various initiatives for popularising the CLCSS for technology upgradation of
Small Scale Industries.  The operations of CLCSS are being reviewed at the State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)
meeting in most of the States.SIDBI has advised all the Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs) to conduct workshops,
seminars and conferences for popularisation of the scheme.  PLIs have also been advised to circulate the details of the
scheme at the meetings and seminars organised by Industry Associations and State Governments etc.SIDBI has written
letters to all the District Industry Centres (DICs) and various Industry Associations furnishing details of the scheme and
requesting them to circulate it among the industries located in their respective centres. The Officers from SIDBI are
deputed to make detailed presentation on entrepreneurship awareness camps conducted by DICs/Industries Departments
of various State Governments .Copies of the scheme have been forwarded to staff training centres of different banks by
the SIDBI   Sessions on CLCSS are also being taken in Staff Training Colleges. The other nodal agency i.e. NABARD
has also forwarded copies of the scheme to all the Regional Offices as well as to other related departments in office of

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
NABARD including NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS). Interactive sessions are held  inviting bankers and
entrepreneur in various potential centers/clusters viz. Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Bareilley, Ahemdabad, Faridabad
and Pune have been organised by SIDBI.
 
3.18.4  The Regional offices of NABARD have organised awareness meets in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Orissa, West Bengal, Gujarat and Maharashtra with a view to
highlight the distinct features of the scheme as well as to clarify certain issues relating to operational aspects,
documentation, coverage of sectors/activities etc.  The participants to the meets were entrepreneurs and also persons
drawn from banks, Industry Associations etc. A session on the Scheme is included in the training programmes being
organized by NABARD Training Colleges and Regional Offices for the officials of Banks, NGOs and other promotional
organisations. Some industry associations like Federation of AP SSI Associations (FAPSIA), Thane and Nasik
Industries Associations, Bihar  Industries Association and Bhojpur Chamber of Commerce and Industries have covered
the scheme in their periodic Bulletin for disseminating information among their members.  The scheme has also been
covered in the Journal of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
 
3.18.5  SIDBI has set up an exclusive CLCSS Cell at the Head Office level which is headed by a General Manager and
focused attention is being given to popularise the scheme and quick processing of the applications received for sanction
of subsidy. NABARD has informed that details of the Scheme covered in the news letter of NABARD-Prayas- issue of
April, 2003 and the quarterly issue June, 2003 of the NFS-Newsletter.  Both the newsletters are widely circulated among
Banks, Government Departments, Training Institutions, Voluntary/promotional organisations, Regional Offices and
District Development Offices of NABARD
Action taken by the Small Industries Development Organisation (SIDO), Ministry of Small Scale Industries
 
3.18.6  The Small Industries Development Organisation in the  Ministry of Small Scale Industries (SSI), Government of
India has been constantly monitoring the implementation of the CLCSS which is being operated through the nodal
agencies, namely, the  SIDBI and the  NABARD and providing required funds to nodal agencies for disbursement of
subsidy to the eligible beneficiaries. The total number of sub-sectors/products covered under the scheme is now 44. 
Awareness/sensitisation programmes for creating awareness among entrepreneurs, Industries associations, banks, State
Govt. officials were organised through SISIs in the States of Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh during 2004-
05.  
 
3.18.7  The scheme has been extended up to 31
st March,2007 or till the time sanction of the Capital Subsidy  by the
nodal agencies reaches Rs. 600 crore whichever is earlier.  The ceiling on loan under the scheme has been raised from
Rs 40 lakh t Rs. 1 crore.  The rate of subsidy has been raised from 12% to 15% for SSI units.  Calculation of admissible
subsidy will be done with reference to the purchase price of plant and machinery instead of the term loan disbursed to
the beneficiary unit.  “Categorisation of SSI units into different slabs on the basis of their present investment for
determining the eligible subsidy has been done away with.  It is expected that these amendments will result in
accelerated Upgradation f technology, machinery and equipment in the SSI sector.
 
Actions proposed to be taken during the financial year 2005-06
 
3.18.8  In regard to the recommendations made by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, this Office has advised
SIDBI, NABARD and the Small Industries Service Institutes to take further follow up action for implementing these
recommendations. Depending on the progress of the scheme over the year additional funds will be sought at the RE
stage during the current financial year for providing subsidy to maximum number of eligible beneficiaries under
CLCSS.
 
3.18.9  Awareness/sensitisation programmes for creating awareness among eligible beneficiaries, Industries associations
and banks are being organised throughout the country through field offices of SIDO, namely, SISIs. SISIs have been
advised to associate the nodal agencies, Commissionerate/Directorate of Industries, DICs and PLIs located in their
jurisdiction in organising these awareness workshops. SISIs located in the North-Eastern States have been specifically
requested to organise awareness /sensitisation programmes for creating awareness amongst eligible beneficiaries,
industry associations banks and State Government officials about CLCSS.  Sufficient funds will be provided to these

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
SISIs, depending on their requirements, for organising such programmes.  In the remaining parts of the country, priority
is being given to those States where such programmes have not been conducted earlier.  Other means of publicity about
the scheme will be adopted as per needs and availability of resources with the organization.
.
Further Recommendation
 
 3.18.10    The Committee is of the view that the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and the National
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) should play pro-active and effective role in implementing the
credit linked capital subsidy scheme (CLCSS) for ensuring its success in the states of  Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar
Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat where the scheme has to be implemented for producing positive
results.  The Committee would like to know  the response of the SIDBI, NABARD and SISIs  in regard to the
suggestion of SIDO for  taking up the follow up action to implement the recommendation of the Committee.
 
Recommendation
 
3.19    Credit GuaratneeTrust
           
3.19.1  The Committee recommends that the Credit GuaratneeTrust should make concerted efforts in Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand to create awareness about the Scheme among the Branch Managers of the
banks by organizing regional/zonal based Workshops-cum-Training Programmes where the information relating to the
Scheme and the benefits available are explained in detail.  There is, however, absence of mechanism assessing the
impact of success of credit guarantee scheme.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure the success of this
scheme.
(Para 2.5.2)
Action Taken
 
3.19.2  Workshops for branch level managers of banks are being held regularly to apprise them of the procedural details
of the Credit Guarantee Scheme and address any apprehensions they may have regarding the scheme. At present, the
Lead Banks of the States are providing a review mechanism through the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC).
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.19.3  The Committee would like to know the details of the success rate of Credit Guarantee scheme in Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand to create awareness about the Scheme particularly as the result of the efforts of
Credit Guarantee Trust.
 
Recommendation
 
3.20     Sickness in SSI sector
 
3.20.1  The Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should undertake following concrete steps for
rehabilitation of Sick units in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat:-
 
arresting the mortality rate in SSI sector and extending sufficient credit facilities to SSI units;
 
effective outcome of efforts made for Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee;
 
Result oriented outcome of  efforts made by State-level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLIICs) in regard to
avoiding delay in rehabilitations;
 
Expeditious Progress made in regard to setting up of Local Committees between State Government, SSI Associations
and Banks to sort out credit related issues at local level;and
 
Representation of SSI Associations in the Rehabilitation Cell.

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
(Para 2.9.4)
 
Action Taken
 
3.20.2  The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with the Directorate of Industries of the States
concerned. The State Level Inter-Institutional Committee (SLIIC) has been reviewing the problem of rehabilitation of
sick SSIs on quarterly basis. The SLIIC forum makes efforts in consultation with State Government agencies to remove
bottlenecks in rehabilitation of sick SSI units. The revised guidelines for rehabilitation of sick SSIs issued by the RBI to
the banks in January, 2002 already provide for detection of sickness at an early stage and taking remedial measures, and
rehabilitation of sick SSI units identified as potentially viable. As per the ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)’ recently announced by the Government, the RBI has circulated on 3
rd
September, 2005 the guidelines on One-Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme for SME accounts to all the public sector
banks. Further, the RBI has issued the guidelines on debt restructuring mechanism for SMEs on 8
th September, 2005 to
all the commercial banks.
 
3.20.3  The Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar Pradesh has informed that the State Government has issued
policy for rehabilitation of sick units. A Divisional Committee under the chairmanship of Divisional Commissioner is
functioning to redress the problem of sickness and rehabilitation of sick units. The RBI is proposing to constitute
Empowered Committees with the Regional Director of the RBI as the Chairman to review the progress in SME
financing and rehabilitation of sick SSI and medium enterprises and to co-ordinate with other banks/ financial
institutions and the State Government in removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of credit to the sector.  The
said Regional level Committees may decide the need to have similar Committees at cluster/ district levels. The
Government of Uttar Pradesh has established three tier system of problem redressal of industries with District Level
Udyog Bandhu, Zonal Udyog Bandhu (at divisional level) and State Level Udyog Bandhu at the apex level. Regional
and State level associations and Chambers are invited in all these forums. The representatives of SSI associations and
departments concerned are members of the Divisional rehabilitation committee for SSIs. The Directorate of Industries,
Government of Bihar has informed that District Level Committee of SLIIC have also been constituted and SSI
Associations have got representation in all the Committees constituted for rehabilitation of sick SSI units.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.20.4  The Committee would like to know the overall  impact of the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries, Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee, State-level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLIICs) and the Local
Committees in regard to the rehabilitation of Sick units in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Gujarat. The Committee is pleased to note that District Level Committee of SLIIC have been
constituted in Bihar and SSI Associations have got representation in all the Committees constituted for rehabilitation of
sick SSI units. However, the committee desires that the said District Level Committee of SLIIC would function in
effective manner for  rehabilitation of sick SSI units in the state.
 
Recommendation
 
3.21     Export Potential of SSI products
 
3.21.1  The Committee is of the view that feasibility study in respect of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand,Maharashtra and Gujarat be made in regard to assess the Export potential of SSI Sector and steps must be
undertaken to increase the export potential of SSI sector in these States.  The Committee feels that there is the need for
technology Upgradation, product & process development in small scale sector in these States. (Para 2.10.4)
Action Taken
 
3.21.2  In order to facilitate technology Upgradation and product & process development in small scale sector in the
country, six Process and Product Development Centres (PPDCs) were set up in mid eighties with the assistance of
UNIDO/UNDP.  These Centres cater the need of technology Upgradation for small scale sector including process
modification and product diversification in different product groups viz. Glass & Ceramics, Foundry & Forging,

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Essential oils, Sports goods, Hand Tools, Electronics items.  Four PPDCs have been set up in Uttar Pradesh and one in
Maharashtra.  These Centres are upgraded by adding more facilities/machineries from time to time to meet the present
day need.
           
3.21.3  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for Technology Upgradation in Small Scale Industries was started by this
office in year 2000 which provided 12% subsidy on term loan, subject to a maximum ceiling of term loan Rs. 40 lakh,
availed from financial institutions for induction of well established and improved technology in selected sub
sectors/products.  The technology related need for process modification and product diversification can be fulfilled by
SSI units through the scheme.  In order to give more impetus on technology Upgradation in small scale sector, the
scheme has been modified in September,05 by raising the rate of subsidy from 12% to 15% and ceiling of loan from Rs.
40 lakh to 1.0 crore, and the basis calculation of subsidy has been changed from term loan to purchase price of
machineries/ equipments.  By the end of 2004-05, number of SSI units assisted underCLCSS is 1 in Bihar, 1 in West
Bengal, 14 in Uttar Pradesh,  1 in Orissa, 8 in Maharashtra and nil in Gujarat and Jharkhand.  By recent modifications, it
is expected that more number of SSI units including those from the states mentioned above will be motivated to go for
technology Upgradation.
           
3.21.4  Under Small Industry Cluster Development Programme(SICDP), seventy six clusters have been taken up for
development including a project  for promoting exports from 38 clusters in the country.  The issue pertaining to
technology Upgradation, process modification and product diversification for small scale sector are also addressed
under the holistic approach of development of the cluster.  So far, number of clusters taken up for development in Bihar
is 4, West Bengal 3, Uttar Pradesh 8, Orissa 2, Jharknand 1,  Maharashtra 1 and Gujaat 3.  New clusters are included
every year under the programme.  Attempts are being made to cover situated in all states including those mentioned
above.
 
3.21.5  As regards the steps undertaken to increase the export potential of SSI sector in respect of Bihar, West Bengal,
Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra & Gujarat, the Development Commissioner (SSI) promotes participation
of SSI units in product specific as well as general exhibitions in India and abroad every year.  Besides this, training in
export marketing and packaging for exports is also provided to SSI units.  Sector Specific Market Studies are conducted
for selected SSI categories.  In addition, it may be decided to undertake feasibility study in respect of these States to
assessthe export potential of SSI sector and more participation in such export promotional activities.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.21.6  The  Committee feels that  the process and product development is the essential  link in any business, be  it
small  or big, therefore, opening of six center for process and product development   in mid  sixties  in SSI sector was a
good start but  confining   the same number in 2006   in vast country like our’s, it seems that proper and timely 
attention  has not been paid to the  principle of management for  organizing  SSI sector in India, particularly  in the
scenario of  intense global  competition. 
 
3.21.7  The Committee is pleased to find that Uttar Pradesh  has four out of  six Process  and  Product  Development
Center (PPDCs) but what about the other states?  What  sort of facilitation is being  extended  to other States by the
Ministry of SSI?  How the problem of  absolute  technology in  those  states are being tackled?    The Committee
wonders  and desires that  based on the availability of raw material, process and product development centers may be
opened in all States.
 
3.21.8  The Committee expresses its apprehension on the working of Credit  Linked Capital subsidy scheme for
technology  upgradation ( CLCSS) as no SSI units has been covered under the scheme in the states of Gujarat and
Jharkhand and  number of SSI units covered under the scheme in West Bengal, Orissa and Bihar i.e.  one each in these
states is quite on the lower side , therefore, the prevalence of sickness in SSI sector would not be surprise , if such
situation  exist.
3.21.9  The Committee also desires that proper thought is required to be given for making Small Industry Cluster
Development Programme (SICDP) a success in the country as taking up of just one cluster for development  in the
industrialize state like Maharashtra cast a shadow on the working of SICDP.
 3.21.10           The Committee  further desires that the specific and empirical facts and figures and in regards to step

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
taken during last three years for increasing the export potential of SSI sector in respect of  each state of Bihar , West 
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and   Gujarat along with the impact of  the steps so undertaken in
terms of  item-wise volume and value.
3.21.11            The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of SSI has agreed in principle  the need for undertaking  the
feasibility study  to  assess the export potential of SSI sector  in respect of  Bihar , West  Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and   Gujarat  but the modus –operedii has to be decided  and initiatives need to be taken by the
DC (SSI) under the overall supervision of Ministry of SSI.
CHAPTER - IV
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES    HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
 
Recommendation
 
4.0       State Investment Subsidy
 
4.1       The Committee desires that the outstanding dues to the tune of Rs. 429 crore as state investment subsidy
must be reimbursed to the state SSI units at the earliest.
 
(Para 1.3.3)
Action Taken
 
4.1.1    The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with the Government of Karnataka. 20,644 Tiny/SSI
units have been sanctioned subsidy for the period from 1.1.1999 to31.3.2005 amounting to Rs. 492.88 Crores based on
the industrial policies in force for the period 1990, 1993,1996-2001 and 2001-06.  Out of which, 50% subsidy
sanctioned to industrial units for the period from 1.1.1999 to 31.3.2004 have been disbursed (excluding poultry, bricks
and self financed units). Balance 50% subsidy sanctioned for the period from 1.1.1999 to 31.3.2000 has also been
released during this month.  Balance subsidy will be released during 2005-06 and thereafter.
           
Year-wise releases of subsidy are as follows:-
 
S.No. Year No. of units Amount(in lakhs)
1. 2000-01 369 542.87
2. 2001-02 2507 3457.14
3. 2002-03 308 501.51
4. 2003-04 Nil Nil
5. 2004-05 6865 8100.00
6. 2005-06 797 725.00
 
 It was only in 2004-05 that the maximum subsidy amount has been released to benefit the highest number of units.  The
State Cabinet has recently taken a decision to also provide subsidy to poultry layers and self-financed units pertaining to
silk reelers and textile units.  This subsidy would be disbursed shortly.
 
Recommendation
 
4.2       Bihar having the potential for Agro based industries
 
4.2.1    The Committee is pleased to note that Bihar has the potential for Agro based industries, fruits and vegetables,
therefore, the Central Government should open Food Park in the potentially identified districts of Bihar and a  Nodal
Agency for promoting SMEs in these areas should be set up for regulating food processing units and undertaking
research and development activities.  Opening of a branch each of Central Food Research Institute, Agriculture Science
Centres with advanced technology and APIDA would prove paramount in the promotion and furtherance of SMEs in the
state.
(Para 1.4.6)
Action Taken

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
 
4.2.2    The Central Govt. does not set up food parks on its own.  However, financial assistance upto Rs. 4.00 crore is
provided to implementing agencies for establishment of food parks.  So far MFPI has sanctioned financial assistance to
one food park in  Vaishali Distt. of Bihar.  More food parks may be considered if any such viable proposal is submitted
or recommended by the  Govt. of Bihar.  The MFPI has already designated Commissioner, Industrial Development as a
nodal agency for promotion of  FPI sector in Bihar.
 
4.2..3   Regarding opening of a Food Park in the potentially identified district in Bihar, the State Govt. of Bihar will be
advised by the Small Industries Service Institute, Patna & Muzaffarpur to set up Integrated Infrastructural
Development(IID) Centres at appropriate locations.  In this regard, Small Industries Service Institutes have already been
directed.
 
Recommendation
 
4.3       Vast potential of handicrafts in Bihar
 
4.3.1    The Committee has been apprised the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, therefore, an all out efforts should
be made for the encouragement and furtherance to the handicrafts in the state.  A detailed strategy should be chalked out
for promoting handicrafts as per the availability of raw material/opportunities viz. Madhubani Painting  in Darbhanga
and Madhubani; Store Chipping in Gaya and Aurangabad; brass and bell metal in  Nalanda, Gaya and Patna; Siki
Product in Sitamarhi and Madhubank; Terracotta Craft in Darbhanga and Muzaffarpur; Jute in Kathihar and Purnea; lac
bangles in Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga; Capur, Durri in Obra(Aurangabad ) and bamboo articles in Patna, Hazipur and
Bhagalpur.
(Para 1.4.7)
 
Action Taken
 
4.3 .2   The observation of the committee has been noted.  All out efforts are being made to develop and  promote the
handicraft in the country including state of Bihar.  As suggested, keeping in view the availability of raw material and
skilled craftpersons, the specific area based crafts are being promoted through various existing  schemes of the Office of
DC(Handicraft).
 
Recommendation
 
4.4       Encouraging  the weavers and crafts men in Bihar
 
4.4.1    Taking into consideration the vast potential of handicrafts in the state, the Committee recommends that the
Union Ministry of SSI&ARI and Textile in tandem with State Government should encourage the weavers and crafts
men of the state for developing and diversifying  rural products in the handloom and handicraft segments. (Para 1.5.8)
Action Taken
 
4.4.2    The matter has been taken up for appropriate action  with the O/o Development Commissioner(Handloom) and
Development Commissioner(Handicraft).
 
Recommendation
 
4.5       U .P : Bereft of actual industrialization
 
4.5.1    The Committee feels that Uttar Pradesh, like Bihar, has been bereft of actual industrialization and therefore the
State has more or less become an agriculture state.  The Committee, therefore, views that massive efforts should be
made for promoting and proliferating Agro Rural Industries and Food Processing Industries in the State.  The Union
Ministry of SSI and ARI should chalk out strategy for promoting SMEs in these field in the state and accordingly
institutional support like opening up of agree export zones and opening up of Agricultural development centers must be
provided in the state.  Suitable central assistance may be provided for R&D purposes in the field of agro rural industries.

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
(Para1.8.4)
Action Taken
 
4.5 .2   The matter has been taken up for appropriate action with the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries.
 
Recommendation
 
4.6       Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI)
 
4.6.1    The Committee reiterates that the Government should expeditiously fulfill its commitment towards building the
Corpus of Rs. 2500 crore with a view to enhance the comfort level of Members Lending Institutions(MLIs) participating
in the Scheme.  With the building of adequate corpus fund, the fears of MLIs could be allayed and the scheme may start
functioning on smooth track throughout the country. (Para 2.5.4)
Action Taken
 
4.6.2    The Government of India (GoI) and SIDBI contribute to the corpus fund of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for
Small Industries (CGTSI), operating the Credit Guarantee Scheme, in the ratio of 4:1.  In order to increase the comfort
level of the Member Banks/ Lending Institutions (MLIs) and encourage them to extend more collateral-free credit
facilities to the SSIs/ SSSBEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme, it is necessary to build the corpus fund of the Trust. 
Taking into account the progress under the scheme, the initial corpus of the Trust of Rs. 125 crore has been gradually
enhanced with contribution by the GoI and SIDBI.  As on 31
st March 2005, the corpus fund under the scheme has been
enhanced to Rs. 931.55 crore with contribution of Rs. 745.25 crore from the GoI and Rs. 186.30 crore from SIDBI.  
During the financial year 2005-06, a budgetary provision of Rs. 200 crore has been made under the scheme for
contribution towards the corpus of the Trust. The issue of enhancing the corpus under the Credit Guarantee Scheme to
the level of Rs. 2,500 crore is being taken up in the proposed package for promotion of micro and small enterprises.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
 
A paradoxical picture of poverty amidst plenty
 
            The Committee, keeping in view the  prevailing economic standard  in Orissa and more specifically  the
backward  districts  like  Koraput, Bolangir, and Kalahandi, reiterates  its view point that  Orissa is yet to be put  on
Industrial development track by  harnessing  the available raw material in each district  under integrated economic
planning  systems , if the vision as spelt out in the cherished  charter of planning commission  “to   combine a rapid rise
in the Standard of living of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, increasing production
and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the community”,  is to be realized . (Para 3.1.3)
 
Industrial  Infrastructure Development (IID)
 
            As  regard the   existence  of three Industrial  Infrastructure Development (IID) sanctioned  by the SIDO  is
concerned , the Committee is of the view that where structural existence is not  going  to have any  meaning unless the
same has bearing  on the functional aspects and that too  empirically  result -oriented .  Therefore the Committee 
recommends that  the Ministry of SSI must  encourage the upcoming  SMEs  by the younger entrepreneurs through to
Seminar Investment Meet  and Conference to establish  small and medium enterprises in the state. (Para 3.1.4)
Timely and adequate credit flow
 
            The action taken notes as furnished  by  the Ministry of SSI  shows the mirror –image of the  concerted efforts
being undertaken by the  financial institutions for providing timely and adequate credit to the  entrepreneurs for  
accelerated  industrial growth and promotion of SMEs in the State of Orissa, however, the Committee feels  that all
existing institutional arrangements  and financial  facilities  as seems to being extended  to SMEs in general has yet   to
have visible  bearing on State’s  economy, as  the State  remains  deprived of planned development.  Such situation 
prevails  probably because we have elaborate institutional arrangement and large number of  schemes  on paper  but on
the ground realities the  situation/circumstances  remain entirely different.  Need  is to take  action  on  the  ground level

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
so that its true bearing  is felt on the state’s  economy and  peoples’ standard of living. (Para 3.2.7)
 
GUJARAT
Co-ordinating activities with the State Government
 
            The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of SSI  should continue to encourage to  cluster development 
approach for SSIs  and ensure  that the Small Industries   Service Institute,  Ahmedabad co-ordinate with  Industries
Department of the State  for setting up of  Integrated Infrastructural  Development (IID) at  appropriate  location.  (Para
3.3.6)
 
Karnataka
Problem being faced by SSI Sectors in Karnataka
 
            While appreciating the efforts undertaken by the various  organs of the Ministry of  SSI in  order to promote and
proliferate  pharmaceutical industry in SME sector in Karnataka, the  Committee  wishes to make under  mentioned
further observations and recommendations :-
 
Accelerating efforts to enhance investment limit upto Rs. 10 crore for all the SSI  during  drug formulation  units in
SMEs  sector.
 
Setting up  of pharmaceutical  technology upgradation  fund  with adequate caution amount at the  earliest for injecting
competitiveness  among the manufacturing  units.
 
Checking out  sustainable strategy to undo the adverse impact of the notification dated  7
th January, 2005 of the
Ministry of Finance pertaining to pharmaceutical products under the MRP based  excise duty;
 
Review  the problems and prospects of pharmaceutical sector along with  SWOT  analysis in India in general keeping 
in view the  global trends and prospects along with strategy to combat  the problems
(Para 3.4.12)
 
Status of  Automobile and Auto components, textiles Garments , IT, ITES, Sugar, Food Processing and Engineering 
and Metallurgy
 
The Committee would like to know the status of  Automobile and Auto components, textiles Garments , IT, ITES,
Sugar, Food Processing and Engineering  and Metallurgy (Iron and Steel and Cement) sector  in Karnataka  as
recommended by the Committee and  on  the line of action taken notes as furnished by the Ministry of SSI in  regard to
Pharmaceutical sector.
(Para 3.4.13)
Promotion of Industrial Development through Cluster approach
 
            The Committee  would like to know as to  what  actions have been taken by Union Ministry of SSI or 
encouraging industrial    development through   cluster  approach in  backward  districts of  Karnataka like  Chitradurg,
Kolar, Tumkur and Bijapur. (Para 3.5.3)
Inviting  IIID scheme
 
The Committee is of view that the Ministry  of SSI should  not  sit across and  wait for the proposals pouring under  IID
scheme.  Rather the Ministry should  invite   and induce the  proposal under  the scheme and apprise the Committee of
the measures taken in this regard. (Para 3.6.2)
 
Central subsidy for the development of basic infrastructure for food processing industry
 
            The Committee  would like to seek  the clarification whether the figure of 50 food parks  as approved pertains to
State of Karnataka   or all India. Since  the Committee’s recommendations at present pertains to  State of Karnataka,

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
therefore, the facts and figures  should accordingly be furnished relating to the State. The Committee would like to
know the status the plan /schemes of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in Karnataka and how the Ministry of SSI
is co-ordinating with that  Ministry.
(Para 3.7.3)
Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID) Centres in Bihar
 
            The Committee would like to know the outcome of the direction being given to Small Industries Service
Institutes to set up Integrated Infrastructural Development(IID) Centres in Bihar. The Committee recommends that 
financial assistance may be provided for establishment of food parks at appropriate locations.  (Para 3.8.3)
Special package
 
            The Committee observes that the Ministry of SSI has not furnished the facts and figures pertaining to state of
Bihar as per  requirement of   recommendations of  the Committee.  The Committee reiterates its recommendation and
desires that the  Ministry should furnish the action taken note  in line with the recommendation of the  Committee
pertaining to Bihar. (Para 3.9.7)
Status of Power supply of Industries
 
            The Committee would like to know as to how many SMEs  and large units have been established in Bihar as a
result of renewed efforts under the industrial policy  2003.  The Committee would  further like to know the empirical
facts regarding the impact of the implementation of various provisions of the  said industrial policy  in the State. (Para
3.10.4)
Supply of power being  extended to SMEs in Bihar
 
            The Committee desires to know the initiatives being taken by the New Government in regard to supply of power
being  extended to SMEs.  (Para 3.10.5)
West Bengal
Thrust Areas for Development in SSI Sector
 
The Committee desires to know the action taken by the Ministry of SSI in coordination with state Government in regard
to relocation of tiny leather units at suitable  places.  The Committee is of the view that the Government should set up
the footwear Training  Institute in West Bengal for providing logistic and institutional support to the leather industry in
the state.
(Para 3.11.4)
 Goal of ancilliarisation   of industry
           
The Committee, while  appreciating  the continued efforts of Office of Development Commissioner (SSI) to achieve  
the goal of ancilliarisation   of industry in the State, would like to know the working  equilibrium  of ancillarisation of
industries in the State of Maharastra alongwith the SWOT analysis  of  the status and problems being faced by ancillary
units and the strategy required  for combating the problems.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the success
rate and quantum of Vendors Development Programme  in the State.  The Committee would  also like  to be apprised of
more specifically the number of  industrial town established and managed by First generation entrepreneurs. (Para
3.12.5)
Rehabilitation of sick units
 
The Committee would like to be  enlightened on the role of Central Government in regard  to rehabilitation  of sick SSI
units. The main concerns of the Committee is the rehabilitation of sick SSI units.
(Para 3.13.3)
 
General Recommendations
U. P.
Strive on the Part of each state to catch up with the globle pace to promote SMEs
 
            The Committee wishes to point out that emergence of SMEs  at the global level  is  the empirical fact in all  the
leading economies of the world and  each Government  in world  is giving special impetus to the growth and

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
development of SMEs.  Indian  Government, too,  is making efforts through budgetary announcement  for boosting the
SMEs  for its domestic consolidation and sharpening its competitiveness for global survival .   Therefore, the Committee
desires that  the State Governments  should also cope up with the global pace and  the policy  and priority of the Central
Government to make SMEs as the engine of growth.  That is possible only when the Ministry of SSI coordinate with the
state governments  in the effective manner.   (Para 3.14.9)
SWOT analysis of the prevailing SMEs
 
            The Committee is of the view that each State should make SWOT analysis of the prevailing SMEs in the state
and chalking out strategy for their consolidation  and  proliferation  in the state by availing the opportunity ahead and
combating the threats on its ways.   The Committee would like to know in detail as to what action have been taken in
regard to the development and strengthening of clusters, infrastructure support and development of AEZ and SEZ in the
State.   The Committee would further like to know the details of  the provisions of  industrial Policy, IT Policy, Bio-
technology Policy, Power Policy for the State of U.P.  for ensuring  the  sustained development and their overall  impact
on the economic development of the state.  Similarly, the Committee would like to know the details in the case of Bihar
in regard to progress made in implementation of  Industrial Policy   and its impact on the emergence of SMEs in the
state. (Para 3.14.10)
Formulation of district wise development strategy
 
            In regard to the Committee’s recommendation for formulation of district wise development strategy in each state
for promotion and proliferation of SSI units. The Committee does not merely mean the district-wise target under various
schemes for industrial development sponsored by State and Central Government  or the district-credit plan but chalking
out plan for massive action to boost the SMEs as per the distribution of raw material and opportunity for marketing
facilities and infrastructure.  For this, the Small Industries Service Institutes (SISIs) in the state has really to play pro-
active role in making awareness among the entrepreneurs of the first generation to undertake the SME activities. (Para
3.14.11)
 
Policy Package for stepping up credit to small and medium enterprises 
           
            While the Committee understands the merits of Policy Package for stepping up credit to small and medium
enterprises  but at the same time the Committee feels that  the policy has to be  implemented in letter  and spirit.  (Para
3.14.12)
 
Promotion and proliferation of  SMEs 
 
            The Committee is of the considered view that the Government should take up the issue of promotion and
proliferation of  SMEs  on the priority basis in economically  backward regions like Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and
Orissa  in order to tackle twin problems of unemployment and stark poverty prevailing in these states.   The impact of 
the various training programmes,  Market Development  Assistance schemes, credit facilities and the integrated
infrastructural development scheme  would be felt in real terms only when people of  the states  dwells in peace and
prosperity.
(Para 3.15.10)
 
Marketing assistance and export promotion
 
            The Committee finds that the action taken notes as furnished by the  Ministry of SSI merely enumerates policy
and programmes in operation but the ATN does not mention anything about chalking out action plan in the
economically backward regions for boosting SMEs  in the states.  The Ministry may categorically comment on the
committee’suggestion.(Para 3.16.6)
Working of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme
 
            The Committee observes that Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme is a very good scheme aimed at
technological up-gradation in SSI sector.  The progress so far in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat, as. (Para 3.17.1)
 

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Inclusion of new product/sub- sectors and  improved technologies, sensitisation activities
 
The Committee notes  the comments of the Ministry  that the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme could not take off
in some states like Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Jharkhand since the general level of industrial activity
in the product groups/sub- sectors approved under the scheme is low for these States.   The Committee is in agreement 
with the view of the Ministry of SSI  that with the inclusion of new product/sub- sectors and  improved technologies,
sensitisation activities undertaken to popularise the scheme among various stakeholders in these States and general
improvement in the business environment would lead to improvement in the working of the credit linked capital subsidy
scheme but question arises by when in how.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Government should come
out with growth promoting scheme having the potential of opening   venues for new opportunities.  Such schemes must
have effective implementing agencies at the field level.(Para 3.17.3)
Implementation of  the credit linked capital subsidy scheme
 
The Committee is of the view that the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) should play pro-active and effective role in implementing the credit
linked capital subsidy scheme (CLCSS) for ensuring its success in the states of  Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh,
Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Gujarat where the scheme has to be implemented for producing positive results. 
The Committee would like to know  the response of the SIDBI, NABARD and SISIs  in regard to the suggestion of
SIDO for  taking up the follow up action to implement the recommendation of the Committee.
 
(Para  3.18.10   )
 
Success rate of Credit Guarantee scheme in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand
           
            The Committee would like to know the details of the success rate of Credit Guarantee scheme in Bihar, West
Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand to create awareness about the Scheme particularly as the result of the efforts of
Credit Guarantee Trust.
(Para 3.19.3 )
 
Sickness in SSI sector
 
            The Committee would like to know the overall  impact of the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Small Scale
Industries, Sick Units Rehabilitation Committee, State-level Inter Institutional and Committee’s (SLIICs) and the Local
Committees in regard to the rehabilitation of Sick units in Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra and Gujarat. The Committee is pleased to note that District Level Committee of SLIIC have been
constituted in Bihar and SSI Associations have got representation in all the Committees constituted for rehabilitation of
sick SSI units. However, the committee desires that the said District Level Committee of SLIIC would function in
effective manner for  rehabilitation of sick SSI units in the state.(Para 3.20.4)
 
Export Potential of SSI products
 
            The  Committee feels that  the process and product development is the essential  link in any business, be  it
small  or big, therefore, opening of six center for process and product development   in mid  sixties  in SSI sector was a
good start but  confining   the same number in 2006   in vast country like ours , it seems that proper and timely 
attention  has not been paid to the  principle of management for  organizing  SSI sector in India, particularly  in the
scenario of  intense global  competition. 
(Para 3.21.6)
Process  and  Product  Development Center (PPDCs)
 
The Committee is pleased to find that Uttar Pradesh  has four out of  six Process  and  Product  Development Center
(PPDCs) but what about the other states?  What  sort of facilitation is being  extended  to other states by the Ministry of
SSI?  How the problem of  absolute  technology in  those  States are being tackled?    The Committee wonders  and
desires that  based on the availability of raw material, process and product development centers may be opened in all
States.

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
(Para  3.21.7)
 
Working of Credit  Linked Capital subsidy scheme
           
The Committee expresses its apprehension on the working of Credit  Linked Capital subsidy scheme for technology 
upgradation ( CLCSS) as no SSI units has been covered under the scheme in the states of Gujarat and Jharkhand and 
number of SSI units covered under the scheme in West Bengal, Orissa and Bihar i.e.  one each in these states is quite on
the lower side , therefore, the prevalence of sickness in SSI sector would not be surprise , if such situation  exist.
(Para 3.21.8)
 
Making Small Industry Cluster Development Programme (SICDP) a success
 
The Committee also desires that proper thought is required to be given for making Small Industry Cluster Development
Programme (SICDP) a success in the country as taking up of just one cluster for development  in the industrialize state
like Maharashtra cast a shadow on the working of SICDP.
(Para 3.21.9)
 
Specific and empirical facts and figures for increasing the export potential of SSI sector
 
The Committee  further desires that the specific and empirical facts and figures and in regards to step taken during last
three years for increasing the export potential of SSI sector in respect of  each state of Bihar , West  Bengal, Uttar
Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and   Gujarat along with the impact of  the steps so undertaken in terms of 
item-wise volume and value.
(Para  3.21.10)
 
Modus –operedii to assess the export potential of SSI sector  in respect of  Bihar , West  Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and   Gujarat
 
            The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of SSI has agreed in principle  the need for undertaking the
feasibility study  to  assess the export potential of SSI sector  in respect of  Bihar , West  Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra and   Gujarat  but the modus –operedii has to be decided  and initiatives need to be taken by the
DC (SSI) under the overall supervision of Ministry of SSI.(Para 3.21.11)
Minutes of the Meeting
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16
th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia              —        Chairman
     
Rajya Sabha
 
Shri Surendra Lath
Suresh Bhardaj
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
 
Lok Sabha
 
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
Smt. Susmita Bauri

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
Shri Suraj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
3.         The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:-
 
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in
Committee's One Hundred Sixty-eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) of the Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
                        (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Heavy Industries 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
           (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained
in One Hundred Seventy-first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
            (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various segments of industries  of  the
Ministry of Small Scale Industries;
                         (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants                 ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of 
Agro and Rural Industries;
           (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred  Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants           (2005-06) of the Ministry of 
Agro and Rural Industries ;
            (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-operation to Promote Small Scale
Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
             (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness of PMRY, REGP and KVI 
Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ;
        (ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained
in the One Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale
Industries;
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy Industries ( Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);  and
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
 
4.         The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification.
 
5.         The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the Report in Rajya
Sabha and Shri Ram Singh Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.
 
  6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm.
 
New Delhi K.P. Singh

187th Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/187threport.htm[04-07-2016 13:00:54]
16th May, 2006 Under Secretary
 