PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 223
ND  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 2, 2011/SRAVANA 11, 1933 (SAKA)AUGUST 2, 2011/SRAVANA 11, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON INDUSTR Y
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE REVIVAL AND RESTRUCTURING
OF
NORTH EASTERN HANDICRAFTS AND HANDLOOMS
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.
PERTAINING TO
THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 2 ND AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 2 ND AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 2, 2011/SRA V ANA 11, 1933 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—6
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 7—11

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution : 22 nd September, 2010 w.e.f. 30.09.2010)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
4. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
5. Shri K.B. Shanappa
6. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
7. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri K.V . Ramalingam
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Dr. Vijay Mallya
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
12. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
13. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
14. Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury
15. Shri Sabbam Hari
16. Shrimati Poonam Veljibhai Jat
17. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri Pakauri Lal
20. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
21. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
22. Shri Devendra Nagpal
23. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
24. Shri Kishanbhai V . Patel
25. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra
26. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
27. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
28. Shri Raju Shetti
29. Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware
30. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
31. Shrimati Putul Kumari
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
have been authorized by the Committee, hereby do present this Two Hundred and Twenty-Third
Report on the Revival and Restructuring of North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development
Corporation Ltd. pertaining to Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.
2. The Committee held detailed discussion with North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms
Development Corporation Ltd. at Shillong on 26
th October, 2010. The representatives of the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, BRPSE and Department of Public Enterprises
were also heard on the issue.
3. I thank the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, Ministry of Textiles,
Department of Public Enterprises and the North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development
Corporation Ltd. for furnishing the valuable inputs during the meetings.
4. The Committee in its meeting held on 9th May, 2011 considered and adopted the report.
TIRUCHI SIVA
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
9th May, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry

1
REPORT
Handicrafts and handlooms form rich textures of our civilisation and culture. Through the
length and breadth of our country these remain close to the lives of our people who are engaged
in producing them and are valued within and outside India. This is particularly so in the North
Eastern India which occupies a special place and receives focussed and sensitive attention. The
hills, forests, rivers and the larger natural setting of all the States of the region provide an artistic
and aesthetic backdrop for the handicrafts and handlooms to flourish and become part and parcel
of daily life of people. These are vital sources of employment for millions of people of the region
who quite often do not reap adequate benefits arising out of modern industrial enterprises and
economic establishments due to difficult terrain and topography. The plentiful availability of basic
materials such as cane, bamboo, Muga Silk and Eri Silk has nurtured a rich and enduring tradition
of making handicrafts and hand woven products which merit admiration from all parts of the
country. The wide variety of bamboo and cane products and decorative items which often adorn
premises, both residential and office, add charm and beauty to the surroundings. The handlooms
and handicrafts, as always, will evoke appreciation for their specific ethnicity and assume additional
relevance as eco friendly and biodegradable products in an age which is grappling with non-
perishable wastes seriously threatening environment.
2. Willing involvement of people of the North Eastern Region in making these products
testifies to their deep creative desire to produce beauty out of the material so abundantly supplied
by nature. These products cater to the daily needs of people and can be of immense use in
further improving their economic conditions and augmenting their entrepreneurial and commercial
activities.
3. The North Eastern Region was deliberately kept isolated from rest of India by the British
rulers. That led to its alienation and lack of tuning with modern development which other parts of
India had the relative advantage of experiencing. The observations of the Simon Commission
concerning the North Eastern region were indicative of the British mind. The Commission noted
“The stage of development reached by the inhabitants of these areas prevents the possibility of
applying to them methods of representation adopted elsewhere... Their contentment does not
depend so much on rapid political advance as on experienced and sympathetic handling and on
protection from economic subjugation from neighbours”. Such perceptions of the colonial masters
and the accompanied action led to the alienation of the North Eastern part of our country. As a
result it suffered in achieving modicum of progress and development.
4. Since independence several measures have been taken by the Government of India to
accelerate the growth and development of the States of the region. Of late the region has assumed
importance as the gateway for promoting trade and commerce beyond our boarders as part of our
vigorous look east policy.
5. It is heartening that a separate Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER)
has been set up by the Government of India since 2001 to give focussed attention to the region
and provide impetus to the Center’s efforts for augmenting the socio-economic development of its
people and make it as a nucleus of all round progress.
6. The Committee visited the North-Eastern India as per its decision to study the enterprises
of the Government of India working in remote regions of our country. It undertook a tour to
Shillong during 25 and 31 October, 2010 to have a first hand knowledge of the functioning of the
North-Eastern Handicrafts and Handloom Development Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC) which is

2
established as a Government of India undertaking in 1977 under the Companies Act, 1956 with its
registered office at Shillong, Meghalaya.
7. Its primary objective is to further the cause of the Handicrafts and Handloom Sector of the
region. As part of this strategy to carry forward the rich heritage of making hand woven products,
it reaches out to people who are engaged in the production level and takes measures to markets
these products across the country and in many parts of the world through a chain of emporia,
exhibitions, exports, trade fares, expositions and crafts fares.
8. The Committee interacted with the officials of the NEHHDC in Shillong. From the
statements made by the officials and from the catalogue of documents supplied to the Committee,
it has been found that the NEHHDC has been incurring loss since its inception. It was referred
to the Board for Reconstructions of Public Sector Enterprise (BRPSE) in December, 2009 with a
package for turnaround of the Corporation. The BRPSE was also given a copy of the corporate
plan prepared by the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) for its consideration.
9. The Committee was informed that the BRPSE advised the Ministry of North-Eastern Region
to convert the NEHHDC into a promotional body and finance its activity through budgetary support
for achieving its objectives. The BRPSE recommended for the liquidation of the company in its
present form and suggested its conversion from a commercial entity to a promotional body.
10. The Committee expresses its serious concern that the NEHHDC has not been
restructured even after the report given by the BRPSE for making it a promotional body.
All concerned must pay serious attention to the revival of this important organisation which
was set up to tap the enormous potential in the handloom and handicraft sector of the
region. It proposes a comprehensive revival package which should be implemented in a time
bound manner and not staggered over a long period of time. Till the Corporation is revived
and restructured full budgetary support should be extended by the Ministry for Development
of North-Eastern Region.
11. The Committee while interacting with the officials of the NEHHDC noted that they
were diffident in replying to the queries of the Members of the Committee and even were
not able to satisfactorily provide answers or clarifications on points raised by the Members
of the Committee. The Committee got the impression that the involvement of the officials
in running the affairs of the NEHHDC was not up to mark. It strongly felt that the half-
hearted manner in which they were dealing with the questions of the Committee and quite
often taking long pauses to say or make remarks on the points raised by the Members,
they were not at all efficiently running the work of the Corporation. The Committee,
therefore, tends to conclude that there is a high degree of mismanagement and lack of
interest in carrying forward the work of the Corporation.
12. The officials of the Ministry of Development of the North Eastern Region (DoNER)
deposed before the Committee on 17 April, 2011 and argued that the restructuring of the
Corporation by separating its promotional and commercial activities would not be helpful to the
cause of the Corporation and the artisans and weavers of the region. They pleaded that
promotional activities are closely interlinked with its commercial activities. Their main stand was
that while supporting the artisans, they have to ensure their access to the markets for their
products. Therefore, they stated that the commercial dimension would have to be inevitably
integrated with any measure to take forward the cause of promotional activities. The stand of
the DoNER was that it cannot be a fully commercial body due to the competition faced by it
from the Handloom and Handicraft Boards of the State Governments of the region and the private
players.

3
13. The officials of the DoNER differed with the officials of the Department of Public Sector
Enterprises on the issue of restructuring of the Corporation in the pattern of the India Trade
Promotion Organisation (ITPO) and National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC). The DoNER
officials maintained that the ITPO and NSIC are extending certain services and get compensated
by the concerned Ministry for implementing certain promotional schemes. Whereas, according to
them, the North Eastern Handlooms and Handicrafts Corporation is engaged in selling products and
goods of the artisans. They were of the opinion that the activities of the Corporation cannot be
equated with the activities of the ITPO and NSIC.
14. The Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises, while deposing before the Committee on
17 April 2011, raised a question as to why the Central Government should have NEHHDC when
all these sister States of the North Eastern Region have their Handlooms and Handicrafts
Development Corporation. He was of the opinion that both the NEHHDC and the Handloom and
Handicraft Development Corporation of each State are involved in doing the same job. He added
that the NEHHDC is duplicating the work of the State Handloom and Handicraft Development
Corporation. Adding further he emphatically put forth the point that multiplicity of organisations in
the same sector and doing the same job did not at all confirm to sound business principle.
15. Referring to the negative networth of the Corporation which stood at (-) Rs.27 crore as
on 31 March, 2010 he saw its bleak future and maintained that it had no hope at all to come up
as a profit making organisation. Raising the point that this is the age of competition he stated that
they faced competition from two sources: the State Governments and the private players.
Maintaining that it is a competition involving Government of India versus the State Governments,
he asked “Is it the right type of competition?”
16. Firmly arguing that the Corporation is plagued with the traditional problem affecting all
public sector companies, i.e., overstaffing, staggering overhead expenditure, etc., he gave a detailed
account of the sheer size of the Corporation which had 114 surplus staff members which included
ten executives. The Corporation, according to him, registered all attempts of giving VRS to its
employees in spite of the persuasion of the BRPSE to do so. He sensitized the Committee by saying
“Can this organisation which is overstaffed, overloaded, overburdened, completely at red, ever
sustain any market competition from private players? There is no chance of ever doing so.” He
was of the opinion that by bringing down overhead costs, the situation could be improved.
17. He recommended that the Corporation can be converted to a company under section 25 of
the Companies Act which provides that such companies can be engaged in some noble work as
decided by the Government of India. He argued that the example of ITPO and NSIC were given
not for making profit but for promoting design skills, marketing, opening new retail centres, etc.
The mother Ministry, i.e., the DoNER, can extend financial package to the Corporation to take
forward such goals.
18. When the officials of the DoNER and the Corporation expressed their opinion that given a
chance, the Corporation can register profit in two-three years, the Secretary, Department of Public
Enterprises, recommended for complete overhauling of the Corporation which would be include
upgradation of its efficiency, strengthen its delivery mechanisms, rectify its lacunae and a hard look
on the part of the Ministry of Development of the North Eastern Region to make it the best
possible outfit.
19. The good and sensible proposal of the Secretary was welcomed by the Committee. Besides,
the Committee felt that the huge interests on the loan accumulating over the years may be waived
off as an initial measure to help the Corporation to come out of its present pitiable condition. The
Committee also felt that the Corporation can establish its branches in all the States of the North

4
Eastern Region and thereby decentralise its activities from its headquarters located in Shillong. The
Committee strongly recommends that a monitoring mechanism may be placed to have a close look
on the funds supplied by the Central Government and judiciously check the way in which such
funds are utilized by the Corporation. The Committee took note of the statements of the officials
of the Corporation and the DoNER that suitable VRS Scheme should be introduced to rationalise
the staff strength in consonance with its capacity to emerge as a viable, vibrant and profit making
body. It is hoped that the budgetary support to be given by the DoNER would help the Corporation
to revive its financial health.
20. The paramount issue is the livelihood and well being of the poor artisans and weavers who
are mostly women. In fact, the North Eastern Handloom and Handicraft Corporation was
established in 1976 with its foundational objective of safeguarding the poor women engaged in the
handloom and handicraft sector. The central concern of the Committee, therefore, is the protection
of such weavers and artisans. It, therefore, strongly recommends that liquidation of the Corporation
may not be pursued and instead a chance may be given to it with adequate support from the
DoNER to restructure its size and make it competitive and business oriented. In doing so, it can
emerge as a successful public sector enterprise standing on its own strength and upholding the
cause of the artisans and weavers whose interests are of central concern in any scheme for revival
of the Corporation.
21. The Committee heard the Secretary, DoNER and the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles in its
meeting held on 27 April, 2011. The Secretary, DoNER in her presentation stated that as per the
prevailing scheme for organisation of exhibitions/craft bazars by the NEHHDC, the Ministry of
Textiles bears the 75 per cent cost and the rest of the 25 per cent is borne by the NEHHDC. The
Secretary pleaded for change of the funding pattern based on 75 per cent and 25 per cent to 90
and 10 per cent. She argued that in case of North Eastern States, which are special category
States, the funding pattern adopted for other Centrally-Sponsored Schemes is in 90:10 ratio. She
wanted the adoption of the such funding ratio for the NEHHDC.
22. The Committee understands that to move from 75:25 ratio to 90:10 ratio necessary changes
have to be affected at the Cabinet level and, therefore, the Ministry of Textiles has to initiate the
process in taking it forward and getting the approval of the Government of India.  The Committee
recommends that the 90:10 funding pattern may be seriously considered for the revival of
the NEHHDC.
23. The Secretary, DoNER also referred to the role played by the NEHHDC for conducting
many training/skill upgradation programmes and implementing projects like Design Bank and
Handicrafts Museums. She maintained that in respect of these programmes/projects, NEHHDC gets
only implementation cost without any services charges. Pleading that component of service charges
may also be included in the project cost of this programmes/projects, she stated that such
measures will help the NEHHDC to revive its financial health. The Committee strongly
recommends the Government to consider the aforementioned points raised by the Secretary,
DoNER and take appropriate steps for their early implementation.
24. Secretary, DoNER also put forth the point that the Ministry may also explore the possibility
of utilizing the services of the Corporation for implementing its various programmes by providing
it appropriate grant. The Committee feels that the observations of the Secretary, DoNER may be
seriously considered for making the NEHHDC a viable and profitable Corporation.
25. The Corporation through its replies to the questionnaires supplied to the Committee informed
that it is engaged in participating in regional exhibitions, craft fairs and special marketing events.
The Committee notes that its participation is confined to cities like Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata,

5
New Delhi, Shillong and Guwahati. The Committee recommends that the Corporation must
explore markets in the eastern region of the country which has potential buyers for
handicrafts and handloom products. These regions would be nearer to the North-Eastern
part and, therefore, the cost of transportation of the goods and finished products would be
relatively less.
26. The Committee was informed that the activities of the Corporation to develop skills,
particularly the business skills of the artisans, and promoting awareness in the region is based on
organisation of limited number of seminars and workshops. The Committee feels that the
Corporation must intensify its activities to spread awareness among the youth of the region and
associate them in many of its programmes for generating interest among them on the rich heritage
of hand made and hand woven products. As stated earlier, the North Eastern Handicraft and
Handloom Corporation originated in the context of the pitiable condition of the poor craft persons
and weavers most of whom are women. Over a period of time, it is noticed that the middle class
is reviving interest on handloom and handicraft in a big way. The Committee is constrained to
note that the Corporation is quite inert in understanding this trend among the youth,
particularly those belonging to the middle class, and taking advantage of it for taping the
prospective clientele. It, therefore, recommends that both the Corporation and the Ministry
of Development of North-Eastern Region must prepare a strategy to explore new markets.
It is not enough to maintain, as the Corporation did before the Committee, that the private
players have better competitive ability to market handloom and handicrafts products at a
price which is difficult for the Corporation to match. This is the age of innovation and
creativity. The Government of India is observing the decade from 2010 to 2021 as the
decade of innovation. When the term ‘innovation’ is used, its applicability in every sector
including the handloom and handicraft sector assume critical relevance. The Committee
strongly recommends that the officials of the DoNER and the NEHHDC must come together
to take appropriate measures so that the Corporation is revived and serves the purpose for
which it was established in 1970s.
27. Net worth of a company is indicative of the health and outlook which drives it and impacts
its activities. It is rather unfortunate to note that the net worth of the company has always been
negative and now stands at (-) Rs 2700.50 lakhs. This issue has been discussed in an earlier para.
The Committee notes that during the preceding three years, i.e., 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10,
the turnover of the Corporation and its gross trading profit has increased. It is a heartening trend.
The Committee also notes that during the year 2008-09 and 2009-10, the Corporation could bring
down, if not completely reverse, its annual loss. The Committee recommends that this new found
strength must be bolstered to restore the economic viability of the Corporation.
28. The Committee was informed by the Corporation that inadequate working capital for
sourcing and procurement of handicrafts and handloom products from various craft clusters in the
region is one of the factors responsible for not achieving the target of sales and profitability. It
was also told to the Committee that logistic and topography of the North-Eastern part of India and
the high cost of transportation, especially of the sofa sets and other household products came on
the way of sourcing such products as per the demand. The Committee strongly recommends the
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region to look into these difficulties and take measures
for addressing the problems faced by the Corporation.
29. The Committee understands from the documents supplied to it that there are several factors
which might handicap the Corporation in expanding its activities and reviving its financial
efficiency. One of them is paucity of specific raw materials such as matured cane and wood for
meeting requirements of artisan of the region. The second factor outlined by the Corporation is that
the production, procurement and sourcing of the material suffers due to poor work culture and

6
attitude of the artisans of the region. The Committee feels that a campaign must be launched to
alter the attitude of the artisans and weavers on a sustained basis. It will take quite long time to
change their outlook. The campaign must be combined with economic incentives which will
certainly motivate them to show interest in the handloom and handicrafts business.
30. The Committee appreciates the strength of the Corporation as outlined in the background
note given to it. It also takes note of the weaknesses. However, the Committee feels that the
strength and opportunities available to the Corporation can overcome the weaknesses and threats.
31. In the modern period of twenty first century, it is important to integrate business principles
for running any organisation be it the public or private. The Committee understands that one of
the problem areas confronted by the Corporation relates to non-commercial nature of weavers and
artisans of the entire North-Eastern Region who pursue the age old habit of weaving and crafting
for meeting specific family requirements on cultural and religious grounds. This is a challenge
which needs to be addressed boldly and creatively. The widespread acceptability of the handloom
and handicraft products and the manner in which these are valued, both in India and abroad, raises
hope that a larger market can be explored and tapped for the benefit of the artisans and weavers.
The Committee feels that apart from budgetary support it requires enormous effort on the part of
the Corporation and those engaged in organising the artisans and weavers for making their
profession commercially attractive and viable.
32. The Committee is of firm opinion that all concerned must summon their energy to stem the
loss suffered by the NEHHDC and slowly but surely make it a profitable company. Even as
budgetary support will go a long way in strengthening the Corporation, attempts must also be made
to create internal resources which would be the source of its sustenance and forward movement.
It is, therefore, appropriate that a road map must be prepared to materialise this vision.
33. As stated earlier, the officials of the Corporation were evasive in dealing with the questions
and concerns raised by the Members of the Committee in its meeting in Shillong. It is quite clear
that the system of accountability has suffered serious erosion. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that every action of the management must be scrutinised and it must be held
accountable for all acts of omission and commission. By enforcing the principle of accountability,
the Corporation can take a major step forward for using the budgetary support or other funds that
may be infused to revitalise the Corporation.
34. The Committee also impresses upon the Department of Public Enterprises to take up the
matter with concerned Ministries/Departments and apprise the Committee of the progress made in
the action taken notes.

7
MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th May, 2011 in Committee Room No. ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri K.B. Shanappa
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
11. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
12. Shri Raju Shetti
13. Shrimati Putul Kumari
SECRETARIAT
Shri S.N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF SELECT ASSOCIATIONS OF BSCL
1. Shri Narsing Rao, DGM
2. Shri Govind Swamy, S.O.
3. Shri P.L. Balamurali, Union Leader, BSCL, Salem Unit
9

10
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
1. Shri Arun Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary
2. Dr. Sharat Kumar, Adviser
3. Shri Rajendra Kumar, Director
BRPSE
Shri V .K. Jindal, Director
DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY
1. Shri Sundareshan, Secretary
2. Shri Shashank Goel, Joint Secretary (III)
3. Shri Manjit Kumar, Dy. Secretary
4. Shri Rajeev Gulati, Scientist
BBUNL
Shri S.P. Singh, Manager
MINISTRY OF STEEL
1. Shri P. K. Misra, Secretary
2. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati lndrani Kaushal, Director
SAIL
1. Shri C.S. Verma, Chairman
2. Shri Soiles Bhattacharya, Director
3. Shri N. Kothari, Executive Director
4. Shri Anil Verma, DGM
5. Shri Vinod Kumar, DGM
RAILWAY BOARD
1. Shri Sanjiv Handa, MM
2. Shri Sanjay Shadha, EDME
2. At the outset, since the Chairman of the Committee was yet to arrive, the Committee elected
Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita to chair the meeting. Thereafter, the 223
rd Report of the Committee on the
Revival and Restructuring of North Eastern Handicrafts and Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd.
(NEHHDC) was placed before the Committee for consideration and adoption. A brief discussion then
ensued on the additions made to the previous draft of the report which was presented to the
Committee in its meeting held on 27
th April, 2011. In the meantime, the Chairman joined the Committee
and took over the Chair from Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita. After the deliberations, the report was
unanimously adopted by the Committee for presentation to both the Houses of Parliament.

11
3. The Chairman then briefed the Committee that representatives of select associations of Burn
Standard Corporation Ltd. (BSCL), along with the representatives of Department of Heavy Industry
(DHI), Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), Ministry of Steel and the Railway Board would make
presentations on the subject of the revival and restructuring of BSCL. Firstly, the DGM, BSCL, Salem
Unit made a submission before the Committee that though the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) approved the takeover of the Salem unit by SAIL in September, 2009, the SAIL was yet to
affect the takeover. He maintained that it hampered the day to day functioning of the Company.
Another issue concerning the long delayed pay revision of the employees of BSCL who have not been
given pay revision since 1992 was taken up by him and he sensitized the Committee about it.
According to him two subsequent pay revisions which were supposed to have been done in 1997 and
2007 have not been implemented though the unit has been making profit from the very beginning.
Besides, the issue concerning the contractual nature of employment of the 145 workers who have not
been made permanent in the Company despite rendering regular service for 15 to 20 years, was raised
before the Committee.
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of DHI, DPE, Railway Board, Ministry of Steel, SAIL and Bharti
Bhari Udyog Nigam Ltd. (BBUNL) were welcomed to the meeting by the Chairman. He asked them
to present their views on the implementation of the revival package for BSCL. The first presentation
was made by DHI. Subsequently the members of the Committee raised certain queries. Foremost
among those was the non--implementation of 1997 pay scale revision in BSCL. Secondly, it was
pointed out that though the transfer of Salem unit to the Ministry of Steel was approved ‘in principle’
in September, 2009 the takeover was yet to materialize. The first inter-ministerial meeting to break this
deadlock was held only in April, 2011, almost two years since the ‘in principle’ approval. The
Committee wanted to know the reasons for such slackness in effecting the takeover.
5. The next presentation on the subject was made by the representative of SAIL. Thereafter,
queries were raised regarding the disapproval of SAIL Board for the transfer of Salem Unit under
section 293 (1A) of the Companies Act and the stand of SAIL in the absorption of 145 casual workers
in the light of favorable court orders. Besides, other matters concerning the clearance for renewal of
pending mining licenses, etc. were raised. All the queries were answered by the representatives of the
respective Departments.
6. In the face of the Committee’s criticism that the lack of inter-ministerial coordination was
hindering the takeover of the Salem Unit, the Secretary DHI submitted that the Department would
convene a meeting of the Ministries/organizations concerned within 15 days and would come back to
the Committee with a more updated status report.
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.