179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY NINTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE  168TH   REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON  DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2005-06)PERTAINING TO THE DEPARTMENT
 OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
               
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  22ND MAY, 2006)
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON  22ND MAY, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
                 NEW DELHI
                               FEBRUARY, 2006/FALGUN, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
 1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.                  INTRODUCTION      
3.                  REPORT   
          (i)          CHAPTER – I                                                                                                    
   Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.               
(ii)                   CHAPTER–II                                                    
         Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for now in view of the Government's
replies                                                                               
(iii)                 CHAPTER–III 
(iv)                 Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the
Ministry to review the reply or the replies of the Ministry are either not relevant to the question raised by the
Committee.                                                            
  (iv)         CHAPTER – IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received      
                            
              5.       OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE    
 
6. Minutes
 
                                 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
(Date of constitution 5th August, 2005)
 
                        Shri Santosh Bagrodia                  —             Chairman
    
      RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
3.        Prof. M.M. Agarwal  
4.        Shri Surendra Lath    
5.        Shri Suresh Bhardwaj

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
6.        Dr. K. Malaisamy     
7.        Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
8.        Dr. Vijay Mallya       
9.        Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan         
10.      Vacant
                   
                           LOK SABHA
11.      Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.      Shri Kailash Baitha   
13.      Shri Rajnarayan        
14.      Shri Swadesh Chakraborty         
15.      Shri Bapu Hari  Chaure             
16.      Shri Subhash   Sureshchandra Deshmukh      
17.      Shri Ram Singh Kaswan            
18.      Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria             
19.      Smt. Susmita Bauri                  
20.      Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato          
21.      Shri Prakash Paranjpe                
22.      Shri Kishanbhai V.  Patel           
23.      Shri Badiga  Ramakrishna
24.      Shri  Gurjeet Singh Rana
25.      Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana        
26.      Smt. Rubab Sayeda                  
27.       Kunwar  Manvendra Singh                        
28.      Shri Ganesh Singh                    
29.      Shri Suraj Singh                      
30.      Shri Girdhari Yadav
31.      Shri Chandramani Tripathi         
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri  K.P. Singh, Under  Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad,  Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having   been  authorized 
by the Committee, hereby present this  One hundred Seventy eighth Report on the  Action Taken  by the Government on the
Recommendations  contained in  the  168 th  Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) in respect of Department of Public Enterprises.
 
2.         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted  the Draft report at
its meeting held on the 22nd May, 2006.
 
NEW DELHI;
22nd May, 2006
 
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman
Department –related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry
 
REPORT
 
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Public Enterprises  on the Recommendations
contained in the 168th Report (of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry).
2.             Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Public Enterprises in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report.
These have been categorized as follows :-

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
 
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
 
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue for now in view of the Government's replies.
 
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the Ministry and has asked the Ministry
to review the reply or the replies of the Ministry are either not relevant to the question raised by the Committee. The Committee expresses its concern
over the non-implementations of recommendations contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanation in respect of
these recommendations. 
 
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been received. In respect of
recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry has either furnished the interim replies or matter has been forwarded to other agency/Department
whose reply is awaited or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry
should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects of recommendations categorised in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of
the recommendations of the Committee.
 
3.         A majority of replies have been put under Chapters III and IV, implying that the Department’s reply have fallen well
short of Committee’s estimates and the Committee would expect the Department to review its replies and furnish them
afresh. The Committee shall continue to pursue these issues and monitor the progress.
 
4.         The Details of the ATR are being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER - I
 
Observation of the Committee
 
1.1          The Committee acknowledges the initiatives taken by the DPE to enhance the
skills of the middle and senior level executives in PSEs.
 
Action Taken
 
1.2            The Department will continue its effort in this direction.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
1.3            The Committee finds the reply hardly convincing, and impresses upon the DPE to give a more serious effort to impart more structured and
elaborate orientation to the management and technical staff in this regard.(Para 17.6)
Action Taken
 
1.4       This recommendation of the Committee has been kept in view while identifying Executive Development
Programmes (EDP) for the year 2005-06. The subjects selected include, among others, the following:
(i)                  Management of Stress
(ii)                Managing stress related disorders
(iii)               Industrial operational and environmental healt
 
Observation of the Committee
 
1.5            The Committee desires that the Government should extend its support to the PSEs signing MoU without compromising the MoU parameters. 
The policy should be such so as to include more PSEs to sign MoU.  It desires the DPE to examine the issue.(Para 18.3)
Action Taken
1.6       The support being extended to MOU signing PSEs depends upon the nature of operations of individual PSE. The
measures are included in the MOU after consultation between PSE, concerned Administrative Ministry and Task Force. The
items relating to support to MOU signing PSES, which are included in the MOU, relate to support for land acquisitions,
project approvals, recovery of dues, etc.
Observations of the Committee
 
                1.7            The Committee feels that Purchase Preference Policy could be treated only as an interim arrangement. Such an arrangement
contributes practically nothing to the Consolidated Fund by way of earning from market. The PSEs must be increasingly encouraged to

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
diversify in the open market and re-align themselves with the emerging market through Joint Ventures and global marketing alliances instead of
relying solely on Government/PSEs for orders. Though the Policy provides a cushion for PSEs, they must take benefit of current buoyancy in
the market. (Para 27.6)
Action Taken
 
1.8       The Purchase Preference Policy (PPP) was introduced in January, 1992 with the objective of enabling the CPSEs to
adjust in the new environment of competitiveness and efficiency created by the liberalization of economic and trade
policies. This policy has been reviewed and extended from time to time taking into account the threat of competition from
private sector and multinationals in securing orders as well as certain social and other obligations being observed by the
CPSEs which is not the case for the private sector/multinationals. However, on the considered advice of a Group of
Ministers (GOM) which examined in detail the various issues involved, it has been decided to extend the policy for a period
of three years with certain modifications and with a clear-cut sun-set clause that it will be terminated after 31.3.2008. In the
competitive and fast changing environment, the Government has recognized the need for enhancing the marketing and
technological efforts of CPSEs. Therefore, the decision making powers including those for formation of joint ventures,
diversification etc. are proposed to be enhanced.
CHAPTER - II
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.1            The Committee observes that pending the notification to repeal SICA, the linkage between the two bodies BIFR and BRPSE remains
undefined.(Para 14.4)
2.2            The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should decide on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till such time a
final decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.(Para 14.5)
Action Taken
 
2.3       While BIFR is a statutory body created by an Act of Parliament i.e. the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA), under the Ministry of Finance, the BRPSE is an advisory body created by a resolution of the
Government. The jurisdiction of BIFR is larger as it covers both public and private sector enterprises, the BRPSE only deals
with CPSEs.  BIFR’s role is restricted to only industrial enterprises while BRPSE may deal with non-industrial CPSEs also.
Advice of BRPSE is also sought by the Government in case of CPSEs, which have already been referred to BIFR for
firming up Government’s view on revival/rehabilitation of CPSEs. As incipient sick CPSEs may also be referred to the
BRPSE, its advice may help the enterprises to avoid reference to BIFR.
Observation of the Committee
 
2.4       The Committee takes note with reservation that DPE has not conducted any specific survey conducted in relation to
technological obsolescence of PSEs.(Para 20.5)
 
2.5            In view of the fact that the PSEs were established as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee recommends that the Government
must undertake a survey to ascertain the technology status of PSEs that has definite bearing over profitability and efficiency of the Public Sector. The
DPE being the nodal coordinating Department on non-financial policies, must prepare a comprehensive approach paper on Sector-wise technological
status of PSEs in consultation with respective PSEs, Administrative Departments and expert agencies like DSIR.(Para 20.6)
 
Observations of the Committee
 
                2.6            The Committee also recommends that as a part of re-aligning with market, the PSEs should involve in technology trade and
consultancy services that may enhance their profitability at a lesser additional investment.(Para 20.10)
Action Taken
 
2.7       The adoption of technology depends upon the nature of activities, competitiveness and the size of the CPSE. Need
based efforts in this regard are made by the CPSE concerned. If necessary, they may seek the advice of their respective
administrative Ministry/Department or any other Department/organization such as Council/Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research etc.  The DPE has recognized the importance of technology up-gradation while evaluating the
performance of CPSE under MOU system.
 
Further Recommendation
2.8       DPE’s reply does not relate to  the issue that was raised in the Committee’s observation. Committee therefore
recommends that the DPE re-assesses  reply in view of Committee’s observations.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
Action Taken
2.9       The adoption of technology depends upon the nature of activities, competitiveness and the size of the CPSE. Need
based efforts in this regard are made by the CPSE concerned. If necessary, they may seek the advice of their respective
administrative Ministry/Department or any other Department/organization such as Council/Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research etc.  The DPE has recognized the importance of technology up-gradation while evaluating the
performance of CPSEunder MOU system.
 
Further Recommendation
2.10     In view of the reply, the Committee is convinced that the DPE, as the nodal coordinating Department on Non-
financial policies, has yet not appreciated the urgent need for PSEs to align with emerging markets. Technology in current
market dynamism, is a function of market profile, future projection of the business, strength of the prospective competitors.
Technological upgradation and absorption is a sustained process and has to be a part of business strategy instead of need-
based exigency. In Committee’s view such a reply does not reflect that the Department has yet given due importance to  the
enormous technological changes in industrial sector within the country and in the regional markets. Committee recommends
that the DPE re-assesses its reply in light of Committee’s observations and prepare a study paper to provide a basis for the
Government to up-date the policy to facilitate PSEs to undertake technological upgradation through R&D or through
Technological alliances.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.11     While interacting with the PSEs, the Committee has observed a clear disjoint in the Central and State Governments
that has seriously imperiled the viability of such PSEs. (Para 21.6)
Action Taken
 
2.12     Although the Central Public Sector Enterprises fall under the administrative control of the Central Government,
there are various issues concerning these enterprises where involvement of the State Government becomes necessary.
Therefore, the concerned administrative Ministries / Departments / CPSEs have been consulting the concerned State
Government (s) at appropriate level from time to time wherever such a need arises. The Government nominees on the Board
represent the shareholders of the CPSEs. Wherever the State Governments participate in the equity of CPSE, its nominee
may also be included as one of the Government Directors on the Board of concerned CPSE. However, in case of CPSEs like
Food Corporation of India, Central Warehousing Corporation etc. where interaction with the State
Governments/Organisations is necessary for smooth functioning, these CPSEs have been exempted from the rule of
immediate absorption so that the services of Government Officers having worked in State Governments may also be availed
of at Top/Regional/Zonal level for better coordination. In addition, in the revival packages for CPSEs  in many cases, State
Governments also extend concessions and relief. State Government nominees are treated as part-time Government directors
and adjusted within the quota available for part time official Directors as per para. 2(B) of DPE OM No. 18(6)/91-GM dated
16 .3 .1992.   
 
Observations of the Committee
 
2.13          The Committee is of the view that greater involvement of the stakes of the respective State government is essential to clear such disjoints.
Also a senior representative of the concerned State Government should be included in the Boards of PSEs as one of the two Government Directors. (Para
21.7)
Action Taken
 
2.14     The policy for appointment of representatives of State Governments on the Boards of Central Public Sector
Enterprises is laid down in the OM dated 22.5.1975 (copy enclosed) according to which if a company is located in one State
only, it would be desirable to have representative of the concerned State Government on the Board of Directors of the PSE.
In the case of multi unit enterprises operating in many States it would neither be desirable nor practicable to have
representatives of all State Governments and it would be discriminatory to select only from a particular State.
 
2.15     State Government nominees are treated as part-time Government directors and adjusted within the quota available
for part time official directors as per para. 2(B) of DPE OM No. 18(6)/91-GM dated 16.3.1992.
CHAPTER - III
 
Observations of the Committee
 

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
3.1       The Committee feels that abolition of some of the divisions is unacceptable.  It observes that without constant
monitoring and consultations, the policy formulation will be reduced to a mere academic exercise.  The Committee
considers that such a situation will limit the full-potential and utility of a Department and thereby affecting the efficiency of
the policy.  Governance requires an objective and periodic assessment of the policies by the agencies that formulate such
policies. As envisaged in its mandate, to evolve DPE as the key policy-coordinating department for CPSEs, it must
undertake constant monitoring, consultations and modifications of its guidelines.  It must also compile the data pertaining to
the PSEs under all the Ministries/Departments and make appraisal. This information should be posted at its Website for
public access.Para 2.5
Action Taken
 
3.2            The role and functions of BPE were reviewed by a high powered Group of Secretaries towards the end of 1985.  As per the revised role
envisaged by the Group of Secretaries and accepted by the Government, BPE would function as a policy planning group for performing its basic role in
laying down guidelines in the fields of personnel policy and training, wage policy, performance indicators, work norms, etc, and as a nodal point for
collection and maintenance of information in respect of public enterprises.  The BPE was restructured in accordance with the recommendation of the
Group of Secretaries.  Certain functions of the BPE performed by the erstwhile Production Division, Construction Division and Information & Research
Division of BPE which were thought to have outlived their relevance or usefulness were shed and these Divisions were wound up. Since then, DPE had
only two Divisions, namely, Management Division, Finance Division. DPE have been assigned additional works from time to time viz. MOU in 1988,
PMA in 1989, CRR in 2001-02 and BRPSE in 2004. Guidelines are issued by DPE after consultation with Ministries/Departments dealing with CPSEs
As regards modification of BPE/DPE Guidelines, this is a continuous process and based on the recommendations of Vittal Committee and Nair
Committee, substantial reduction in DPE guidelines have taken place in a bid to facilitate CPSEs to work in a free environment. One of the major works
is to prepare PE Survey which is a repository of information of CPSEs with regard to finance, production, man power, performance, etc. The PE Survey
2003-04, has already been posted on the Website and for the first time, PE Survey have been released  through CD as well.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.3            The Committee is of the view that in absence of a clear mandate to collect, collate the data from PSEs in respect of the guidelines, the
capability of the Department of Public Enterprises to formulate or modify guidelines is seriously hampered. Without monitoring and assessment of
existing trends for which there is no arrangement is made in the mandate of Department of Public Enterprises. With the  absence of such a mandate and
tools, Department of Public Enterprises guidelines remain more of academic exercise that are only persuasive in nature and do not have the force of
Government policy. Moreover to ensure the transparency, it would be better that data on  these guideline is compiled  and maintained by a focal agency
namely Department of Public Enterprises. There should therefore be a clear mandate in this regard.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.4            The Committee expresses its dismay over the non-utilisation of the fund for IT.  The Committee would like to know the reasons of DPE’s
inability to utilize the funds allocated for “Computerization of the Information on Personnel and Citizens Services”, as its objective is to improve
administrative efficiency. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to take necessary steps so that such a situation does not occur in future.
(Para 6.4)
Action Taken
 
3.5            Planning Commission while allocating the funds under CRR scheme had specified that 2% of the allocation would be exclusively for
Information Technology. As a result, Rs 60 lakh was earmarked for Information Technology out of Rs 30 Cr. of CRR Scheme. Planning Commission
has also earmarked Rs 35 Lakh as IT fund to Ministry of Heavy Industries and Department of Public Enterprises. Out of which DPE was allocated Rs15
lakh. Thus DPE was allocated IT Fund from two sources.viz from Ministry wise allocation and under specific plan scheme for CRR. During2004-2005,
Computers, Printers and other items amounting to Rs7.50 lakh were procured against the fund allocated to Department under IT.  No additional fund
was, therefore, required for IT purpose and as such no IT fund could be utilized from the funds available under CRR.  The steps are being taken to utilize
the funds meant for IT under CRR scheme during 2005-2006.NIC has been asked to design website for CRR scheme and linkup with website of the
Department of Public Enterprises.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.6            Department of Public Enterprises must use the IT fund allocated to the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises - to develop a
database of CPSE and post its guidelines on and other relevant information its website.  This will provide centralized information on the PSEs and
enable the Department to collate and analyze the data to modify the guidelines if needed.
 
Observation of the Committee
 

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
3.7            The Committee also recommends that the Website of the DPE must be enriched with updated information and statistics on PSEs particularly
on the schemes coordinated by the DPE. (Para 6.5)
Action Taken
 
3.8            All the DPE guidelines have been put on Website. Besides, PE Survey 2003-04 has been loaded in the DPE Website. MOU Guidelines have
also been posted on DPE Website. The action has already been started for designing a Website exclusively for CRR programme, and it is expected that
the exercise will be completed by the end of the current Financial Year.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.9       The Website of the Department still does not have sufficient information. Data regarding the Policy of
Professionalisation of the Boards of CPSEs, Purchase Preference Policy, details of EDPs and other training programmes and
the participants too should be compiled and posted. Also since the Department of Public Enterprises is the administrative
Ministry of BRPSE, its Website should have information pertaining to the cases referred to BRPSE and its
recommendations. In addition to this the Department’s Website  should be linked with the sites of the relevant organizations
like SCOPE and PSEB. It will be useful if the Website posts the media reports and articles on the PSEs as also the studies
and Reports by the expert agencies that are relevant to the CPSEs. The Website should also post the annual MoU scores of
the CPSEs.
 
Observation of Committee
 
3.10          The Committee takes a serious note of under-utilization of funds for NE Region and under achievement of annual targets of CRR
beneficiaries. The Committee finds such case to be a sorry state of Governance and indicative of serious disjoint in Government departments that must
be avoided in public interest.(Para 8.5)
Action Taken
 
3.11     Existing nodal agencies have shown inability to conduct training programme in NE Region in view of insufficient
nominations from VR Optees. Some more agencies are being engaged to counsel and conduct training programmes.
Proposals received from Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), Guwahati and Indian Council of
Small Industries(ICSI), Kolkata have been approved by the Selection committee and they are likely to start the work in the
region soon. It has also been decided to invite proposals from Small Industries Service Institutes located in the region so that
they could also be engaged as nodal agencies under the CRR Scheme. Another effort to increase the coverage under the
scheme   is being made by having a residential programme so that the trainees need not commute daily from remote and
inaccessible places under the difficult circumstances unique to the North East. Concurrence has been given by Planning
Commission to start a residential training programme to attract more VR optees in NE Region on a pilot basis.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.12          The Committee is of the view that an effort was required to be  made to assess the causes of insufficient nominations  Ministry must ensure
that training should be linked to the demands of job market. The purpose is socio-economic rehabilitation of VRS optees. The Committee  recommends 
that benefits of Centrally sponsored employment schemes like SJSRY, PMRY etc. should be available to such VRS optees who had some years of
service still left. Such VRS optees should have prior elementary training while working in the PSE. Another way of helping such optees is to encourage
them to form a cooperative and training and finances could be provided to such a cooperative. The Committee would like the Department to explore
such possibilities and inform the Committee.
 
Observation of Committee
 
                3.13          The Committee, keeping in view the lack of cooperation among various Departments, recommends the DPE to undertake a serious
study to ascertain the causes of under achievement of CRR beneficiaries and make corrections in the policy. The training should have forward
linkage with market. The Department must also look for the possibility to cover at least one of the family members of the beneficiaries under
CRR scheme so as to increase the family income.(Para 8.6)
Action Taken
 
3.14          Overall target under the scheme have generally been achieved although there have been difficulties in utilizing the allocation made for NE
Region. Annual target is fixed every year based on allocation of funds and action plan submitted by the nodal agencies. The scheme is in operation and
the assigned overall physical target has been achieved. In terms of rate of redeployment on an average around 45% retrained employees have been
rehabilitated. Nodal agencies undertake market surveys to ascertain the trades or the small businesses, which would be in demand in the area.  Agencies

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
have been instructed from time to time to conduct training programmes in the trades which are market oriented keeping in mind that not too many are
trained in a particular trade   / sector.  The trainees are also required to prepare feasibility reports and carry out market study as part of their course
curriculum to find out the potential of a particular trade or business.  Planning Commission has not approved extending coverage under the Scheme for
family members.  However, Planning Commission is being approached with the recommendations of the Standing Committee once again.
               
Further Recommendation
 
3.15          The Committee feels that there is still a considerable scope of improvement in the coverage of the scheme. The Committee reiterates that one
of the family members should be given training to increase family income. The DPE must explain the need for such an arrangement to Planning
Commission. The Department must inform the Committee the reasons on the basis of which Planning commission declaimed its approval. Rate of
redeployment is meager as compared to VRS optees. And DPE must improve its performance in respect of redeployment of VRS optees.  
 
Observation of Committee
 
3.16          The Committee observes with concern the huge gap between VRS optees and the target set by the DPE for CRR coverage. Though the
Committee appreciates that the yearly targets are achieved, however it seeks reasons for such a gap between actual VRS optees and annual target for
CRR.(Para 11.3)
 
Action Taken
 
3.17     CRR Scheme is being implemented by various nodal agencies selected by the Government. To begin with, nodal
agencies conduct preliminary survey after obtaining lists of VR Optees from CPSEs. As per available data the number of
VRS/VSS optees in CPSEs, the number of optees covered under the CRR  Scheme and funds released under CRR  for the
last three years in given below:
 
Year No. of VR Optees Amount spent  to
settle VRS dues(Rs.
crore)
Budget Allocation
under CRR (Rs.
Crore)
No. of trainees covered
under CRR
2001-02 54,371 2376
8   8064
2002-03 63,741 2633 10 12066
2003-04 46,069 2121 10 12134
 
3.18     The success of this scheme depends on willingness shown by the VRS optee, availability of funds under CRR and
preparedness on the part of nodal agencies for imparting training to VRS optees. From the above table, it may be observed
that the number of VRS optees covered under scheme has gone up on account of enhancement of allocation of funds under
CRR in the subsequent years. Allocation of funds under this scheme has been enhanced from Rs. 8 Crore in 2001-02 to Rs.
10 Crore in 2002-03 and 2003-04.   It was further enhanced to Rs. 30 Crore in 2004-05 and 2005-06.  Numbers of VRS
optees availing benefit under the scheme has also increased accordingly.  During 2004-05, 28000 VRS optees got the
benefit of CRR Scheme. On an average a VRS optee gets more than Rs. 2.5 lakh as ex-gratia in addition to other terminal
benefits. Many of them might opt   to start their own venture and might have done so. Further, in practice, it is observed that
with the passage of time, significant number of VR Optees are not available at the time of survey conducted by nodal
agencies. Some of them may get alternative employment or may be engaged in a gainful business. Keeping in view the
preparedness of Nodal Agencies and availability of funds, targets are earmarked.  Depending on budget allocation, all
efforts are made to achieve the target as far as possible.  Some gap, therefore, between VRS optees and target remains.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.19          The reply  states the dues accorded to a VRS optee. Such dues are the right of any employee and as such need not have been mentioned. On
the average only 45% of the CRR trainees are redeployed. Compared to total number of the VRS optees this figure would be meager. It is a telling
comment on the HR policies that have been pursued in the PSEs. The employees despite spending long years in a technology and skill intensive
organization, do not have the skills to realign with the job market. It was in view of this situation that Committee had been asking regular training and
skill update of the Shop floor level technicians. However, Department of Public Enterprises did not provide any worthwhile reply. The Committee would
however,  like to know as to on what basis the training agencies are chosen and if they have made sufficient efforts to encourage and enroll such VRS
optees. The Committee feels that  the level of competence and efforts on the part of Department of Public Enterprises and concerned agencies  need to be
strengthened.
Observation of Committee
3.20     The Committee appreciates that the success rate is gradually increasing. Yet compared with the total VRS optees of

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
whom CRR beneficiaries are only a small part, it can be safely   inferred that the rate of rehabilitation of the rationalized
employees is hardly satisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must look the success rate in
comparison with total VRS optees and make serious corrections to increase the success rate of rehabilitation. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken
 
3.21     CRR has been administered by DPE since the year 2001-2002. Since inception Of VRS, more than 5 lakh employees
of CPSEs have been separated under VRS/VSS.  CRR Scheme had a budget allocation of Rs 8 crore in 2001 which has now
gone up to Rs. 30 crore in 2004-2005 and 2005-06.  As a result, the number of beneficiaries of this scheme has also   gone
up from 8000 during 2001 to 28000 in 2004-05. The survey conducted by nodal agencies reveals that after a lapse of a few
years, a large number of VR Optees are not available and also, may not be inclined to join the scheme. Some of them may
get alternative employment or be engaged in a gainful business.  Since a VRS optee on an average gets more than Rs. 2.5
lakh as exgratia in addition to terminal benefits, some of them may be in a position to begin their own business or set up a
commercial venture. With the increased budget allocation, however, more VRS optees can now be covered as already
mentioned in reply to para 11.3. The success of this scheme depends among other things on the willingness shown by the
VRS optees, availability of funds under CRR, preparedness on the part of nodal agencies imparting training to VRS optees
and post training support and monitoring.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.22     The Department's reply does not indicate the efforts to improve the execution of the scheme. The benchmark of the
success should be the percentage of total number of VRS optees availing the CRR instead of year after year increase is
figures of CRR beneficiaries.
 
Observation of Committee
 
            3.23     The Committee also feels that in the CRR scheme, preference should be given to those junior level
functionaries to whom the VRS dues have still not been paid. Also the Committee would like to know about the
interim measures taken to provide sustenance to such VRS optees whose dues are still pending with the PSEs.(Para
11.6)
Action Taken
3.24     The endeavor of Nodal Agencies is to cover all the VRS optees irrespective of the distinction of those who have
received VRS dues or not. VRS dues are paid by the CPSEs through internal resources of CPSEs or through budgetary
support provided by the administrative Ministries. CPSE’s have been instructed to pay the dues of all employees along with
their salaries on regular basis.   
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.25     Committee appreciates that at least the stated objective of the policy is to cover all VRS optees irrespective of any
distinction is indeed a commendable and ambitious. However, as per the figures on coverage of the scheme and the eventual
redeployment, as furnished by DPE, it is clear that despite such robust pronouncements the objective is nowhere near the
reach. It was only in view of the limited resources and reach of the programme that Committee had asked the DPE to
prioritize the beneficiaries in a way so that Junior level functionaries, and those who have not received the dues get
preference are given preference. It will be useful if  the DPE makes a study of VRS optees as per the category/class of
employees and also how many of each category have been covered under CRR.  The Department did not however, reply to
Committee’s suggestion for interim measures to provide sustenance to such VRS optees whose dues are still pending with
the PSEs and the Committee expects that Department will furnish its comments in this regard.
Observation of Committee
 
3.26     The Committee recommends that DPE must take up the issue involved in the implementation of CRR Scheme with
respective PSEs and their Administrative Ministries to remove these constraints. The Committee would also like to know
the steps taken on the evaluation study conducted by V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, to overcome the above
constraints.(Para 12.2)
Action Taken
 
3.27          DPE has written to all the CPSEs from time to time emphasizing the need for proper implementation of CRR scheme. As suggested by the
Committee, all the administrative Ministries/Department are being requested to direct the CPSEs under their administrative control to sincerely associate
themselves and extend full support in achieving the basics objectives of the scheme. The findings and suggestions on the evaluation study conducted by

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
V.V. Giri National Labour Institute have been considered and discussed in this department. The study highlighted some constraints in regard to
implementation of the Scheme. Based on findings, DPE has already issued instructions to all the CPSEs and nodal agencies involved in the scheme to
take note of the findings of the study and assume greater role and responsibility in implementing the suggestions/action agenda.
 
Further Recommendation
3.28     Committee  observes that despite repeated advisories of DPE to CPSEs, the coverage and impact of the scheme is
unsatisfactory. The reply does not elaborate on the steps taken to address the constraints as identified by the V.V. Giri
National Labour Institute. DPE must be more proactive in pusuing with the Administrative Ministries of  the CPSEs and the
nodal agencies.
Observation of the Committee
 
                3.29          The Committee would like to know the details of professional eligibility criterion for the non-official Members of the BRPSE and
the way they are selected.
(Para 13.3)
Action Taken
 
3.30     Non-official Members are experts with adequate knowledge and experience in the fields of Management, Industry,
Finance, Engineering and Human Resource.They are nominated  by the Prime Minister in consultation with Minister for
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises. Chairman, BRPSE is a management expert having rich experience in management
and administration of PSEs. One of the members is  a sitting professor of Indian Institute of Mangement, Kolkata and expert
in the filelds of finance & strategic management. The second member is an expert in management and was the Chief
Executive of  a navratna PSE in the steel sector. The third member is also an expert in management and was administering
PSEs in petroleum and heavy industry sector.
Further Recommendation
 
3.31          The Committee desires that the Government should select Chairman & non-official members from a larger pool of experts instead of from a
narrow group of ex-bureucrats. The idea is to involve a larger spectrum of proven expertise and talent and avoid inbreeding in order to make BRPSE 
truly autonomous.
 
3.32          The Committee also feels that the Government should hold consultation with the wider spectrum of industry chambers, professional
Institutions of Charterd accountants, Cost and Work Accountants or Company Secretary, and Industry consultants before finalising the members of the
Board. The Members of the Boards should have proven excellence among industry/ professional peers. The Board should have the power to design its
methods and processes while considering the case.
 
3.33          Furthermore the Government must record in writing the reasons for not accepting  the recommendations of the Board.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.34          The Committee, however, expresses concern over delay in finalizing the revival of PSEs that has incurred heavy cost of such delay in terms of
depleting net worth and rising liabilities of PSEs. The Committee hopes that the delay in finalization of the revival of PSEs would be avoided.(Para 13.7)
Action Taken 
 
3.35     The action for revival/rehabilitation of sick/loss making Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) is taken by the
concerned administrative Ministries/Departments from time to time on case to case basis. Under the provisions of Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,1985 (SICA), an industrial enterprise whose accumulated loss is equal to or
exceeded the networth during any Financial Year, is referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
(BIFR) for formulation of suitable revival/rehabilitation schemes. In case of other loss making CPSEs the concerned
administrative Ministries/Departments and CPSE take similar action. The performance of CPSEs is reviewed periodically
by the Ministries/Departments and action for improvement is initiated.  Further, a Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
Enterprises (BRPSE) has been set up to examine the cases of revival/restructuring of sick and loss making CPSEs and make
recommendations accordingly. The concerned administrative Ministries/Departments have also been advised to take
appropriate timely measures.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.36     Department's reply is barely factual but betrays the lack of any perspective on the issue. These facts existed even
before the Committee formed its recommendations. However, Committee's recommendation regarding  delay in decision for

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
revival remains unanswered. It has been the view of the Committee that multiplicity of institutions, mechanism and law
have existed for long but have not solved the problem. Rather multiplicity of the institutions has been resorted to as an
excuse to prolong the process. Also the Committee would like to know if there have been cases where a Committee of
Secretaries has contradicted BRPSEs recommendations. If yes, reason therefor? Committee feels that the BRPSEs
recommendations should be considered only by the competent authority at Cabinet level and should not be referred to any
other body.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.37     The Committee suggests that the Administrative Ministries/Departments should be given time limit to refer to the
complete proposal to BRPSE.(Para 13.8)
Action Taken
 
3.38     The administrative Ministries/Departments are expected to prepare a comprehensive package for
revival/rehabilitation/closure of loss making PSEs after due consultations with all stakeholders. After constitution of
BRPSE, all the concerned administrative Ministries/Departments were requested to submit revival proposals in respect of
sick PSEs under their administrative control for the consideration of BRPSE in the prescribed proforma. Subsequently,
administrative Ministries/Departments have been reminded from time-to-time to expedite the proposals. In view of the
complexities involved in preparation of comprehensive packages for the revival of sick PSEs, it may not be desirable to set
a time limit for the administrative Ministries/Departments to refer the proposals for the consideration of BRPSE. BRPSE is
expected to make recommendations within two months from the date of receipt of complete proposal from the
administrative Ministries/Departments. The administrative Ministries/Departments have been requested to process the
recommendations of BRPSE and obtain the approval of the competent authority within 8 weeks of the receipt of the
recommendations of BRPSE.
 
Further Recommendation
3.39     DPE should have indicated time limit for the mandatory reference of loss making CPSEs to BRPSE. Committee
notes while on time of limit of 4 months has been set for the finalization of recommendation by BRPSE   and subsequent
process by the concerned Department/Ministry - however, reference to BRPSE itself remains an open ended issue. Repeated
studies, consultations and reports have only added to the cost of delay.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
                3.40          The Committee also notes that management development courses are the main benefit of DPE’s membership of ICPE, which has
been availed by only 76 executives in last three years with DPE paying an annual membership fee of US $ 75000. The Committee may be
apprised of the items included under this contribution. The Committee would also like the DPE to take a fresh look into the cost benefit ratio of
such membership and justify the same of next year’s Demands and inform the Committee accordingly. (Para 16.3)
Action Taken
 
3.41          International Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE) is an inter-governmental organization. The ICPE designs, develops and imparts a
variety of tailor made and standardized programmes to meet the requirement of Managers and Administrators.  These programmes are offered to Civil
Servants, Executive Managers, Entrepreneurs in the Public and Private Sector.  India is a founder member country.  Presently, the President of the
Council of ICPE is Secretary to the Govt. of India, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises. Besides, in the field of management
development and training, ICPE regularly conducts an International one year MBA program for practicing managers and policy makers of organizations
from various countries in which India has been taking an active part.  So far, about 250 executives from PSEs, Govt. of India and other organizations in
India have availed the benefits of this program. ICPE also conducts short term training programme in different areas of management viz. Total Quality
Management, Public Policy and Management, Sustainable Development, Advanced Management for the benefit of the Executives Programme.  So far
more than 50 executives from PSEs and Govt officials have already availed  training under these short duration programmes. The executives of the
CPSEs and Government officials get trained under the programmes  conducted by  ICPE and acquire knowledge and management skills.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.42     DPE's reply factual and  does not respond to query raised by the Committee in respect of cost benefit ratio. The
Committee recommends that there should be tangible benefit to be achieved in terms of the performance of the PSE, from
such a huge expenditure. As  DPE was not able to inform the specific advantages of such expensive courses, the Committee
is of the view that such expenditures need to be justified. And present plight of PSEs give no evidence of efficacy of such
courses.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
 
Observations of the Committee
 
                3.43          The Committee may also be apprised of the criteria and process for the selection of candidates for such courses.(Para 16.4)
Action Taken
 
3.44          ICPE conducts full year MBA Course every year.. For MBA course the candidate must possess a bachelors degree and proficiency in English.
In addition, following  four short duration courses have also  been launched by ICPE recently.
 
·
          Total Quality Management
·          Public Policy  and  Management
·          Sustainable Development
 
For the above Courses,  the executive to be nominated for this Programme should possess a bachelor Degree and minimum 10 years
experience of working in senior level in  Public Enterprises
 
·
          Advanced Management Programme – The participant will be senior/middle management executives with at least 15 years experience
from Public Sector Enterprises in India.
 
3.45          DPE circulates these course programmes to various CPSEs to nominate Executives who fulfill the qualification/ experience prescribed for
these courses.  Nominations of candidates for these courses are being made by the concerned CPSE and names of eligible candidates  are forwarded to
ICPE for final selection.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.46     The Committee reiterates that it will be advisable to conduct a cost benefit assessment of such costly courses. Plight
of loss making PSE, requires overall improvements instead of individual excellence.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.47     The Committee would like to know the nature of such support to PSEs in achieving the targets in MoU.  The
Committee observes that the number of PSEs earning favourable ratings is increasing while those getting  ‘Poor’ rating have
decreased.   Keeping this in view, the Committee has also observed that the number of PSEs entering the MoU has been
falling from 108 in 1999-2000 to 96 in 2003-04.  The Committee wonders, if the PSEs having poor ratings are being
excluded from the MOU system. If that is true, is it safe to construe that the Government’s support under MOU system is
practically not available to the loss making PSEs.  The Committee would like to know if there is a policy to exclude such
PSEs from signing the MOU.  If so, the Committee would like to know the rationale behind such policy.(Para 18.2)
Action Taken
 
3.48          The nature of support to achieve the MOU targets depends upon the operations of the PSEs. However, the coordination between concerned
Administrative Ministry and PSEs helps the PSEs to achieve their MOU targets. There is no policy to exclude PSEs having Poor ratings from the MOU
System.  The reduction in number of PSE signing MOU from 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 was on account of disinvestment of some PSEs and due to taking
over of some PSEs by other PSEs as their subsidiary companies. During this period, 8 PSEs viz. Modern Foods Industries (I) Limited, Bharat
Aluminium Co. Limited, HTL Ltd., Indian Petrochemicals Limited, Hindustan Zinc Ltd., Paradeep Phospate Ltd, CMC Ltd, Videsh Sanchar Nigam Ltd
were disinvested and 5 PSEs, viz. Lubrizol India Limited, IBP Co. Limited, Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Bongaigaon Refinery &
Petrochemicals Limited and Kochi Refineries Limited became
subsidiary companies of other Public Sector Enterprises. The details of the MOUs signed and performance evaluation during the period 1999-2000 to
2003-04 is as follows.
 
Rating                                       No of Public Sector Enterprises
 
1999-2000  2000-01     2001-02     2002-03     2003-04
Excellent                    49                             50                             41                             46                             54
Very Good                  29                             28                             25                             21                             21
Good                                        09                             09                             15                             12                             10
Fair                                          16                             14                             12                             16                             11
Poor                                         03                             05                             03                             02                             00

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
Excluded                    02*           -               01**                         08***                        03#                           --
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total                                        108                           107                           104                           100                           96
 
*              2 PSEs viz. LIL and MFIL excluded from evaluation as they ceased to exist as PSE during the year.
**             1PSE viz.  BALCO excluded from evaluation as it ceased to exist as PSE during the years.
***           8 PSEs viz CMC,IBP,HTL,IPCL,HZL,PPL,ANIFDC, VSNL  excluded from evaluation as it ceased to exist as PSE during
the year.
#              3PSEs viz. CPCL, Kochi Refineries Limited and BRPL excluded from the evaluation as they are now subsidiary companies
of IOC and BPCL.
 
3.49          There is no policy to exclude loss-making PSEs from signing MOU. Only those PSEs that have been referred to BIFR are excluded from
signing MOU till the Government approves their rehabilitation plan. For the year 2004-05, 99 PSEs had signed MOU and evaluation of these PSEs
ratings is in progress. 103 PSEs have signed MOU for the year 2005-06 so far. 
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.50          The Committee feels that existing   policy may extend to loss making PSEs too. However since BIFR cases are excluded from MoU coverage,
it is implied that all those cases were indeed of loss making PSEs. And by implication were excluded from MoU. The Committee would like to know if
there are PSEs who are loss making but not referred to BIFR. and of those how many have signed MoU. The Committee would like to know if the PSEs
that have recommended for revival by the BRPSEs to have to sign the MoU anew. If so, will the MoU indicate the specific time bound obligations on the
part of Government.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.51     The Committee feels that the financial parameters in the MoU system still do not reflect the fact that the PSEs are
still largely dependent on bulk Government orders.  Most of the PSEs still do not have any significant presence in global
export market despite being in the business for long.  Most of the Excellent rated PSEs function in monopoly market
environment.  The PSEs have not been able to secure the ‘Brand loyalty’ of customers, wherever the sector has been opened
up for private sector and this is reflected in the receding market share of such PSEs.  The Committee would like to have
DPE’s comment on its observations.(Para 20.4)
Action Taken
 
3.52     The dependence of some of the PSEs on bulk Government orders is mainly on account of the fact that
Government/Government organisations continue to be dominant players in infrastructure and related sectors. Government
has classified some PSEs as Navratnas/Miniratnas, having the potential to operate successfully in global market, and these
PSEs have been delegated additional powers to improve their performance in domestic as well as foreign markets. To secure
brand loyalty of customers, improvement in Marketing, Customer satisfaction and Technology aspects is critical and
accordingly Customer satisfaction has been incorporated as one of the parameters in the MoU Guidelines.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.53          The Committee feels that the PSEs should be encouraged to secure larger market. Despite including relevant parameters in the MoU, the fact
remains that PSEs still rely on Government for orders and soon as the sector is thrown open for competition, the market share declines sharply. The
PSEs have not been able to create a Brand Loyalty among their customers, which is  a key marketing strategy in modern corporate policies. Marketing
including the exports remain a critical concern in respect of PSEs.  The Committee recommends that the DPE as nodal Department, must begin
consultations with the PSEs and expert bodies on this issue and provide a status pape on this vital issue.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
3.54  Considering that the PSEs were envisaged as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee observes that
Technology and R&D have not been suitably factored in MoU ratings of the PSEs that are essentially Techno-commercial
entities. As such Technological upgradation and R&D should be an integral part of revival strategy of the PSEs.  It is
observed by the PSEs that most of the PSEs do not have an elaborate R&D set up.  The Committee wonders if PSEs have
owned any patent in recent years, which itself is a distinct commercial activity.  (Para 20.8)
 
3.55   The Committee recommends that technology upgradation and R&D must be given due weightage in MoU parameters in consultation with expert

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
bodies like DSIR.(Para 20.9)
Action Taken
 
3.56     Government has provided a number of tax incentives on scientific and research development. Foreign Technology
Collaboration Agreement (FTCA) are permitted under the automatic route subject to lump sum payment not exceeding US $
2 million royalty.  PSEs have been specifically delegated powers under the Navratna and Miniratna scheme to obtain by
purchase or other arrangements, technology and know how.
 
3.57     In the financial year ending March, 2003, about 70 PSEs have incurred R&D expenditure of an amount equal to
Rs.837.97 crore. The expenditure on R&D is about 0.20% of the total turn over of these PSEs. Some of the PSEs which
have incurred substantial expenditure R&D are as under:
 
S.No. Name of PSE Expenditure on R&D Turnover Expenditure on R&D as % of Turnover
( Rs. in crores )
1 HAL 205.74     3120.42   6.59
2 BEL 108.66     2508.01   4.33
3 ONGC   92.93   34738.49   0.27
4 BHEL   81.70     7482.22   1.09
5 SAIL   54.82   19420.97   0.28
6 IOC   51.08 123628.15   0.04
7 ITI LTD.   44.69     1794.65   2.49
8 BRIDGE   42.15       351.05 12.01
9 ECIL   22.16     1000.56   2.21
10 BPCL   20.49   48502.35   0.04
 
3.58     Under the scheme of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), emphasis has been made on the efforts made by a PSE
for improvement in R&D for sustained & continuous innovation. Out of a weight of 30 for non-financial (dynamic
parameters), a weight of 4 has been given to R&D. Thus R&D is very important parameter of evaluating the performance of
PSEs.
 
3.59     Technology upgradation/R&D is generally considered as an integral part of revival strategy depending upon the
requirement of the concerned PSEs including sick PSEs.  Sick units are sometimes unable to spend on R&D activities.
Efforts have been made by the Administrative Ministries and PSEs to accord due consideration to R&D at the time of
preparation of corporate plan/strategic plan/annual plan/revival plan. However, as observed by the Standing Committee the
issue related to Technology upgradation, R&D and patents is being taken up with the Administrative Ministries/DSIR.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.60     The Committee notes that the DPE is in agreement with the Committee’s observation but its claims are not
corroborated by  the figures.  It is claimed in reply that due consideration was being given to  R&D and Technology
upgradation. However by DPEs own admission only 0.2% of the total turnover of 70  PSEs, has been incurred on R&D, 
which is reflective of dismal reality of Technology obsolesance   of PSEs that were supposed to be Industrial technology
pioneers.   The Committee may  be informed as to how the PSEs are ranked/rated for R&D in the MoU evaluation. What are
the benchmarks that are taken into account while assessing the R&D performance of the PSE. The DPE may also give the
list of PSEs that are rated as Excellenct, Good, Fair and Poor, only on account of R&D.
 
3.61     Committee directs DPE to obtain the replies from the Ministries & DSIR and furnish them to this Committee along 
with its own comments and purposed plan of action on this count.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.62          Despite elaborate policy intentions to include persons of proven expertise in the Boards of PSEs, the Committee has observed that former
bureaucrats, serving representatives of autonomous organizations under government, representatives of subsidiary companies have been included in the
Boards as Independent Directors in addition to Functional and Official Part- time Directors. In several cases retired bureaucrats are reappointed as
Independent Directors. The Committee feels that such an arrangement does not fall in the spirit of the policy of appointing Independent Directors on the
Boards of Directors of the PSEs. The Committee also expresses reservation on the practice of renewing the tenures of existing Directors in some cases.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
The Committee urges the department to ascertain that the implementation of the policy is in consonance with its true objectives and bring to the notice of
this Committee any dilution in the “Professionalisation” of Boards.(Para 21.5)
 
Action Taken
 
3.63     The policy relating to the appointment of Independent Directors and the criteria for their selection has been laid
down in the guidelines issued for this purpose. The Independent Directors are selected through the mechanism of Search
Committee in the case of Navratna and Miniratna PSEs. In other cases the appointments are made from the panel prepared
in consultation with the Public Enterprises Selection Board. In both the cases the approval of the Appointments Committee
of the Cabinet is also obtained. The appointments are made for a period of 3 years at a time. On completion of the three year
tenure, there is no bar to their fresh appointment for tenure of 3 years provided they continue to fulfil the laid down criteria. 
 
3.64     State Government nominees are treated as part-time Government Directors and adjusted within the quota available
for part time official directors as per para. 2(B) of DPE OM No. 18(6)/91-GM dated 16 3 1992.   
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.65     The reply does not address to the issue of earnestness in implementing the spirit rather than letters of the policy. The
purpose of the policy is to have fresh talent from non- government sectors. The guidelines and their execution must do
justice to the very purpose of the policy.
Observations of the Committee
 
3.66   The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the qualification, selection and mandate of Non-Functional Part-Time
Directors, as too many categories within the Board may affect its efficiency and autonomy. The Board must be defined in terms of its mandate and the
interest of the Company and not by the categories of its Directors. The Committee would like to have Government’s comments on the need for
uniformity in Part-Time Directors.(Para 24.3)
Action Taken
 
3.67     The specific requirement of each company is taken into account while selecting independent directors. The policy
for selection provides for a having a mix of eminent professionals from various fields relevant to the functioning of the PSE
concerned. The existing policy helps in the professionalisation of the Boards of PSEs.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.68          The reply gives only  basic objectives of the policy but lacks earnestness in addressing the issue raised by the Committee. Indeed specific
requirements of a company should be kept in mind that is why Committee has emphasized that Board of Directors as a body should be defined in terms
of its mandate and by the Company’s objectives. Categories of the Directors may undermine the unity of purpose that must guide the Board’s decisions. 
That is why Committee had recommended uniformity in selection of Directors. Government may explain as to how does such a categorization facilitate
the ‘specific requirements’ of each Company or if the eligibility criteria for Government Directors actually infuses professionlisation in the Board of
Directors. And if it were so what was the need to create another category of Independent Directors. The Committee would also like to know about the
steps taken to ensure the compliance  of DPE’s Guideline on the ‘ Role of Government Directors’.
The DPE must re-assess its reply.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.69 The Committee recommends that the government must impress upon the concerned Ministries to adhere to the time frame for the selection of
Directors and expedite the appointments of Directors.(Para 25.4)
Action Taken
 
3.70     The concerned Ministries/Departments have been advised from time to time to strictly adhere to the time frame for
selection and also make appointments well in time.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.71     The Committee still observes that delays in appointments of Directors. Government  must ensure that appointments
are made in conformity with the guidelines of DPE. The Government must provide sufficient force to the guidelines of the
DPE, which so far have been only directive/instructive in nature.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
 
Observations of the Committee
3.72     The Committee is constrained to observe that the information provided by the DPE was not only evasive but also
insufficient and incomplete.  The Committee observes that DPE  has not reacted  to the criteria of “Independent Directors”
as elaborated by the Naresh Chandra  Committee.  Similarly  the DPE  has not responded to the Narayan Murthy
Committee’s recommendation on “Nominee Directors”. (Para 25.6)
 
3.73     The Committee observes that these expert Committees were set up by the Government or the agencies under its
control. The Reports of these expert Committees are extremely relevant to the issue of Professionalisation of Boards as they
deal extensively the mandate, functional autonomy, obligations and the constitution of Boards of Diretors. Their findings
can be applied to enhance the autonomy and efficiency and draw greater degree of professional excellence to the Boards of
Directors. (Para 25.7)
 
3.74     The Committee recommends that the DPE should assess these reports more fruitfully instead of dismissing them for
administrative nuances and inform the Committee of its views and rationale thereof. (Para 25.8)
 
Action Taken
 
3.75       25.6, 25.7 & 25.8 Concept of independent directors is one of the basic pillars of Corporate Governance. In India,
Kumar Manglam Birla Committee (1999)   for the first time recommended that at least one-third of board should comprise
of independent directors and in case a company has an executive chairman at least half of board should comprise of 
independent directors.  Meanwhile Department of Company Affairs appointed Committee on Corporate Audit and
Governance (Naresh Chandra Committee 2002) which also recommended that “ not less than 50 per cent of the Board of
Directors of any listed   company, as well as unlisted public limited companies with a paid up share capital and free reserves
of Rs.10 crore and above, or turnover of Rs.50 crore and above, should consist of independent directors". Thereafter,
Department of Company Affairs issued a Concept Paper on Company Law 2004 which provided that "every public
company having paid up capital or turnover of such amounts may be prescribed shall have a minimum of seven directors out
of shich not less than three or such number  as near to fifty percent of the strength of the board, whichever is higher , shall
be independent director as defined in sub-section (45) of section 2 and possessing such attributes necessary for being
appointed as an independent director as may be as prescribed”.    Another committee (J.J. Irani Committee) established by
Department of Company Affairs recommended in May 2005 that “ a minimum of one third of the total number of directors
as independent directors should be adequate for a company having significant public interest, irrespective of whether the
Chairman is executive or non-executive.  In the first instance, this requirement should be extended to public listed
companies and companies accepting public deposits.”  Thus all committees have recommended to include independent
directors on the Board of Directors.  However, there are different views on the number of independent directors to be
included in Board.   While Securities and Exchange Board of India has mandated that 50 % of members of Board should be
independent if the Chairman is executive otherwise number of independent directors can be one third, Ministry of Company
Affairs has to firm up its views on this subject.
 
3.76     DPE has been pro- active in professionalisation of Board of Directors of CPSEs and to include independent directors
in their Board.  DPE vide its O.M. no 18/1/84- GM dated 19
th September, 1984 suggested that “ the possibility of drawing
suitable persons from non-Government sources should be considered”.  The question of composition of Board of Directors
of CPSEs was again considered and it was decided  vide OM NO 18 (6)/91-GM dated 16 th March 1992 “the number of
Non-Official Part Time Directors on a Board should be atleast one-third of its actual strength”.  Government while
enhancing the autonomy and financial powers under the scheme of ‘Navratna’ and ‘Miniratna’ in 1997 ,  it was made
prerequisite to restructure the  Board of Directors by inducting at least one third of total number of directors as non-official
part time (independent) directors subject to minimum of four in case of Navratna and three in case of Miniratna, for exercise
of enhanced financial powers.   Pursuant to guidelines issued by SEBI,  it was advised by DPE vide its OM no 18(6)/2000-
GM dated 26
th November, 2001to reconstitute the Board of listed PSUs by inducting 50% of directors as independent in
case the Chairman is executive and in case of companies having non-executive chairman by inducting at least one third
number of directors as independent. 
 
Criteria for Independent Directors
 
3.77     Naresh Chandra Committee has defined independent director as a non-executive director who:
1.
      apart from receiving director’s remuneration does not have any material pecuniary relationships or transactions with

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
the company, its promoters, its senior management or its holding company, its subsidiaries and associated
companies;
2.      Is not related to promoters or management at the board level, or one level below the board ( spouse and dependent,
parents, children, siblings);
3.      Has not been an executive of the company in the last three years;
4.      Is not a partner or an executive of the statutory auditing firm, the internal audit firm that are associated with the
company, and has not been a partner or an executive of any such firm for the last three years.  This will also apply to
legal firm(s) and consulting firm(s) that have a material association with the entity.
5.      Is not a significant supplier, vendor, or customer of the company;
6.      Is not a substantial shareholder of the company, i.e., owning 2 per cent or more of the block of voting shares;
7.      Has not been a director, independent or otherwise, of the company for more than three terms of three years each (
not exceeding nine yeas in any case);
 
      This criteria has been adopted more or less by Narayana Murthy Committee and J.J. Irani Committee also. SEBI has
adopted this criteria  by an amendment in clause 49 of listing agreement which is applicable on all listed companies
including listed CPSEs
DPE also laid down the requisite criteria for appointment of part-time non-official directors on the Board of CPSEs vide
its O.M. no 18 (10)/2003-GM-GL-55 dated 11
th March 2004 to ensure that only qualified, experienced and professional
persons are appointed as part time directors. 
 
Nominee Directors
 
3.78  Narayana Murthy Committee recommended that there shall be no nominee  directors.  Where an institution wishes
to appoint a director on the Board, such appointment should be made by the shareholders.  An institutional director, so
appointed shall have the same responsibilities and shall be subject to the same liabilities as any director.  Nominee of the
Government on public sector companies shall be similarly elected and shall be subject to the same responsibilities and
liabilities as other directors.   In a separate report on clause 49, it was stated that “An institutional director on the boards
of companies shall be considered as an independent director unless he does not satisfy the requirements of any of the
clauses (a) to (f)”.  Accordingly, as per revised clause 49 of listing agreement “nominee directors appointed by an
institution which has invested in or lent to  the company shall be deemed to be independent directors”.  Naresh Chandra
Committee recommended that Nominee Directors should neither be included in total number of directors nor should be
treated as independent directors.  J. J. Irani Committee took the view that such nominees represented specific interests
and could not, therefore, be correctly termed as independent.
 
3.79   As far as DPE is concerned, following the advice of SEBI, the nominee directors appointed by Government
known as “official Directors” are not treated as ‘independent’ directors.
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.80     Naresh Chandra Committee had also recommended for  the extensive training of Independent Directors. This
will orient  them into the requirements and needs of the PSEs. Committee would further recommend  that such training
programme should be instituted for all the Part time Directors. Such training should include audit and accounting,
corporate governance. IT, industry specific marketing, material management, International trade, Labour Laws, etc. that
are relevant to the Commercial enterprise. Govt. may consider creating a pool of such Part time Directors out of which
Part time Directors of the PSEs could be appointed. 
 
Regarding the Nominee Directors, Committee would like to know the Government's view on Narayanmurthy,
Committee's recommendation that institutional Directors too should be elected by the Share holders and that there
should be no Nominee Directors.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
3.81     Many PSEs particularly in Heavy Industry Sector have complained lack of orders from Government and PSEs as
major cause of their financial constraints. The Committee would like DPE to identify the Sectors that still rely heavily on
Government orders.”
(Para 27.5)
Action Taken 

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
 
3.82     The overall percentage of sales of PSEs to the Government sector with reference to their total net sales was 23%
during 2003-04. There were 7 sectors namely Coal and Lignite, Computer Services, Contract and Construction Services,
Heavy Industry, Industrial Development, Industrial Development and Technical Consultancy and Trading and Marketing
whose percentage of sales to the Government sector with reference to their net sales was more than 50% during 2003-04 and
previous two years, thereby heavily relying on Government sector. The sector-wise details are indicated below:
 
Sl. No. Name of sectors
Years
2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
( Figures in % )
1. Coal and Lignite 61.28 60.64 73.02
2. Computer Services 100.00 100.00 100.00
3. Contract and Construction Services 49.80 65.38 74.08
4. Heavy Industry 69.57 60.73 60.58
5. Industrial Development 81.77 87.11 87.87
6. Industrial Development and Technical Consultancy 58.40 60.25 56.39
7. Trading and Marketing 69.01 72.17 72.20
 
Source :            Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Commercial)  for the year ended as on 31.3.2004
(Report No. 1 of 2005 – Review of Accounts)
 
Further Recommendation
 
3.83     PSUs in these sectors rely heavily on Government and its agencies for business. With such heavy reliance on
Government these companies have actually become the captive companies of the Govt. instead of autonomous commercial
entities. In view of the investment in these companies  and their heavy reliance of Government. for orders, it will be
reasonable to apprehend whether these companies can at all survive their autonomy in an open market scenario. The
Committee recommends that such PSUs must look for diverse alternative   markets and investment possibilities.   The
objective must be to make PSUs an autonomous and commercially sustainable companies.  Reliance on Govt.  is untenable
in longer term, as Government too is looking for competitive    prices in its orders. DPE must  begin  consultation with
respective administrative ministries and PSEs on these issues and formulate guidelines in this respect.   
CHAPTER - IV
Observations of the committee
 
                4.1            The Committee does not approve such an arrangement of allocating funds for the DPE under Iron & Steel Industry head.  This needs
to be corrected.  The Committee accordingly directs the DPE to take up the matter with appropriate Department to correct the same.(Para 5.2)
Action Taken
 
4.2            CRR Scheme was assigned to this Department in 2001-02 and the developmental account head of this scheme has been grouped under Iron &
Steel Industries.   Allocation of Funds of CRR under Iron & Steel Head does not necessarily mean the fund is meant only for the development of Iron &
Steel Sector. However, this Department is also of the view that there is no synergy between the CRR Programme and Iron and Steel Industries. The
Department has already requested Ministry of Finance to change the Developmental Head of CRR Programme from Iron & Steel Industries to Industries.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.3       Final reply is still awaited.  Department of Public Enterprises must pursue its request with Ministry of Finance and
apprise the Committee of the reply.
 
Observation of Committee
 
                4.4            The Committee be apprised of the reasons on which is recommendation to extend the benefits of CRR scheme to family members
was refused by the Planning Commission. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in its 150th Report in this respect, and
recommends a re-look into the issue as it will increase the family income of the VRS optees.
(Para 11.7)
Action Taken
 
4.5            With regard to extending the benefits of CRR Scheme to family members, DPE contemplated a separate scheme for dependant of ex-

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
employees of CPSEs who were separated through VRS/VSS, which required funding to the tune of Rs.30 crore. Planning Commission while considering
the annual Plan of 2004-05 in the meeting held on 24.12.2003 expressed its inability to the revision in the scheme to accommodate dependents of VR
optees. This issue was once again discussed in the meeting of Apex Review Committee meeting held on 15.7.2005. Planning Commission reiterated
their earlier stand.  Planning Commission is being informed of the views of the Standing Committee and is being requested to reconsider its stand and
consider the proposal for including family members of VRS optees for the benefits under the Scheme.
Further Recommendation
 
4.6       Committee fails to understand the need for a separate scheme of Rs.30 crore for the dependants of the VRS
employees instead of extending the existing scheme to cover them. DPE’s reply does not give the reasons for Planning
Commission’s refusal. The Committee impress upon the DPE to pursue with Planning Commission either for approval  of
separate scheme or more funds in the existing scheme.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
4.7       The Committee feels that sufficient provisions should be made available to meet BRPSE’s requirements for
providing expert advise on techno-financial issues pertaining to revival of PSEs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
the Government to provide sufficient funds for the smooth  functioning of the BRPSE. (Para 13.5)
Action Taken
 
4.8       Normally, the Administrative Ministries/Departments who are responsible for preparartion of comprehensive revival
packages appoint consultants. Further, BRPSE has started refering the proposals received from the Administrative
Ministries/Departments to the Chief Adviser (Cost) and Controller General of Accounts in the Ministry of Finance who
have professional expertise to advise on such proposals.  Ministry of Finance have advised this Department to approach
them for additional funds at RE  stage through supplementary demand.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.9            The Committee would like to be apprised of the funds allocated to DPE.
 
4.10     The Committee observes that   the BRPSE has to rely on the reports of consultants appointed by Administrative
Ministry which are further referred to Ministry of Finance Chief Adviser (Cost) and controller General. This obviously is
time consuming and compromises with autonomy and independence of BRPSE. The DPE may propose to reduce the delay
and maintain autonomy of BRPSE and inform the Committee accordingly. 
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.11          The Committee recommends that DPE must make efforts with concerned Departments and Institutions, to conduct similar EDPs in India, with
Indian Professional Institutions, for other ICPE members. Indian institutions must enter into huge global market of professional training and
consultancy.  Such programmes for other countries will enhance the academic and professional profile of our premier professional institutions. (Para
17.2)
Action Taken
 
4.12          Department of Public Enterprises organizes Executive Development Programmes in collaboration with Premier Management & Training
Institutions in the country for the executives of Public Sector Enterprises. As recommended by the committee, matter is being taken up with ICPE to
collaborate with the premier professional institutions of the country for imparting training to participants from member countries of ICPE. In addition,
DPE is also taking up this matter with various scientific organizations such as, CSIR, etc. and also with Ministry of Human Resource Development to
advise premier Institution like Indian Institutes of Management and Indian Institutes of Technology to implement this recommendation.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.13          Committee would like the DPE  to pursue with Ministry of HRD and apprise the Committee of its outcome.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
                4.14          The Committee notes with reservation that there was no specific programme for enhancing the skills of shop floor level techniques.
The Committee views it to be a stunted approach towards overall human development in PSEs.
(Para 17.3)

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
                4.15          The Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE must organize orientation and skill development programme for shop-floor level
technical functionaries as they are the end users of new material management and production techniques. The efficiency at shop-floor level
ultimately reflects in the corporate performance of the Company. The Committee recommends that CPSEs adhere to the principles of Total
Quality Management.
(Para 17.4)
Action Taken
 
4.16     17.3 & 17.4     The Department of Public Enterprises organize Executive Development Programmes (EDPs) in
collaboration with premier Management and Training Institutions in the country.  The EDPs are generally meant for middle
and senior level executives of PSES. As the managements of respective PSEs are responsible for skill development of shop
floor level workers, these recommendations have been sent to the Administrative Ministries/Chief Executives of the PSEs
for action at their end. (A copy of the OM is enclosed)
 
 Further Recommendation
 
4.17          Committee recommends that DPE should obtain the response of its recommendation from the concerned Ministries and the Chief Executives
of the PSEs  in  this regard. Committee is of the view that if DPE can organize EDPs for all the PSEs why cannot it design development programmes for
the shop floor level technicians.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
                4.18   The Committee observed that distinct preference was given to serving officers from the Armed Forces in the Board level appointments
in the PSEs under the Ministry of Defence, on the plea that Armed forces were premier customers of these PSEs. The Committee wonders, if
such an arrangement reduces PSEs as a captive Company instead of an autonomous commercial entity. The Committee is of the view that the
products of these PSEs have a large civilian market too. The Committee feels that if the private sector is being involved in the defence sector,
why cannot the defence related PSEs harness potential in civilian and export market with their duel-use products and technology.
(Para 21.8)
Action Taken
 
4.19     The policy relating to composition of Board of Directors and appointment of various categories of Directors like
official part-time Directors and independent directors is common to all PSEs including PSEs in the defence sector.
However, a copy of this recommendation has been forwarded to the Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence
Production for action at their end.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.20     Committee is yet to receive the reply from Department of Defence Production and Supply (MOD). Committee
recommends DPE to pursue the Department of Defence Production and Supply to furnish reply immediately.
 
Observations of the Committee
 
4.21     The Committee feels that the minimum educational qualification should be raised to a Post Graduate
Degree/Diploma from a premier institution in a professional course, management, engineering, financial management or
HR  management. Also the size of corporate body should be specified for the CMD/MD being appointed as the Independent
Directors.(Para 26.2)
4.22          The Committee feels that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service, he may not have requisite and relevant expertise to become an
Independent Director in a PSE unless he has the experience of those many years in the field relevant to the functioning and corporate objectives of the
PSE.  The Committee recommends that this aspect should be specified in the eligibility criteria for Independent Directors.(Para 26.3)
4.23          The Committee feels that the maximum age for Independent Directors too should be appropriately reduced to
maintain uniformity in the Board of Directors.(Para 26.4)
 
Action Taken
 
4.24     The recommendations are under consideration.
 
Further Recommendation
 

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
4.25     Committee may be apprised of decision at the earliest.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
4.26          The Committee seeks information on the action taken by the DPE and the Government on the outcome of these meetings.(Para 27.10)
Action Taken
 
4.27          On the basis of the recommendations of Adhoc-Group of Expert, government      have already issued instruction enhancing delegated powers
of Nav-ratna, Mini-ratna and other profit making CPSEs. The recommendations of Expert Group relating to audit, vigilance, article 12 of constitution etc
are under consideration of Government.
        
4.28          As regards implementation of Nair Committee Report, out of 72 guidelines recommended by Nair Committee for deletion, 66 guidelines have
been deleted. 11 guidelines have been removed from the DPE compendium.   With regard to recommendations of Nair Committee relating to merger,
modification, merger/modification, action has already been completed in respect of almost all the cases barring few cases, which are under consideration
in consultation with other Ministries/Departments.
  
4.29          Government have constituted Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) to address the problems relating to
strengthening, modernizing, reviving and restructuring of Public Sector Enterprises vide Resolution dated 6th December, 2004.
 
4.30          As regards out come of the conference of the Chief Executives of CPSEs held on 4th September 2004, the Prime Minister emphasized the
need for greater autonomy to CPSEs.The Government have since delegated further powers to Navratna,Miniratna and other profit making CPSEs
 
4.31          As regards out come of Summit of Indian CEOs-Competence for Success, the Summit was organized by Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
(BPCL) and Public Enterprises Selection Board (PESB), BPCL &  PESB have been requested to intimate the outcome of the Summit along with the
action taken.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.32     Committee would like to be informed of Action Taken on the outcome of  the Summit of India  CEOs and also on
the meeting on Corporate Governance in PSEs. DPE  may furnish on elaborate reply of recommendation & action taken.   
 
Observation of the Committee
 
4.33          The Committee seeks DPE to apprise it on Revised Estimates and Supplementary Demands.(Para 27.11)
 
Action Taken
 
4.34          Ministry of Finance while approving the Budget Estimates of this Department for the Financial Year 2005-06 did not approve additional
allocation on account of expenditure likely to be incurred for setting up of BRPSE.  They however, advised this Department to accommodate the
expenditure within the approved BE 2005-06 and if necessary, additional fund may be obtained at RE 2005-06 stage. There may be shortage of fund in
this Department to meet the likely expenditure in the third and fourth quarter of the Financial Year. If required, this Department will approach Ministry
of Finance for additional fund at RE stage through Supplementary Demand.
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.35          The Committee would like to know if the non-availability of Budget to BRPSE, has hampered its activities? If so, what steps have been taken
by Department of Public Enterprises is manage activities of BRPSE smoothly.
 
Observation of the Committee
 
4.36          The Committee directs the DPE to give its comments on the Committee’s queries, observations and recommendations contained in this
Report. (Para 27.12)
 
Action Taken
               
4.37          Comments/action taken on the Committee’s observations contained in the 168th report are given in the Action Taken Note in the preceding
paragraphs.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
 
Further Recommendation
 
4.38          The Committee recommends that DPE  should  furnish its replies after taking view of Committee’s observation in the Action Taken Report.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  AT A GLANCE
 
                The Committee acknowledges the initiatives taken by the DPE to enhance the skills of the middle and senior level executives in PSEs.(Para
16.2)
 
                The Committee finds the reply hardly convincing, and impresses upon the DPE to give a more serious effort to impart more structured and
elaborate orientation to the management and technical staff in this regard.
 
                The Committee desires that the Government should extend its support to the PSEs signing MoU without compromising the MoU parameters. 
The policy should be such so as to include more PSEs to sign MoU.  It desires the DPE to examine the issue.       (Para 18.3)
               
                                The Committee feels that Purchase Preference Policy could be treated only as an interim arrangement. Such an arrangement
contributes practically nothing to the Consolidated Fund by way of earning from market. The PSEs must be increasingly encouraged to
diversify in the open market and re-align themselves with the emerging market through Joint Ventures and global marketing alliances instead of
relying solely on Government/PSEs for orders. Though the Policy provides a cushion for PSEs, they must take benefit of current buoyancy in
the market.      (Para 27.6)
 
1              The Committee observes that pending the notification to repeal SICA, the linkage between the two bodies BIFR and BRPSE remains
undefined.(Para 14.4)
 
                The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should decide on linkage between BIFR and BRPSE at least, till such time a final
decision on BIFR is taken by the competent Court.   (Para 14.5)
 
            The Committee takes note with reservation that DPE has not conducted any specific survey conducted in relation to
technological obsolescence of PSEs.      (Para 20.5)
 
                In view of the fact that the PSEs were established as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee recommends that the Government
must undertake a survey to ascertain the technology status of PSEs that has definite bearing over profitability and efficiency of the Public Sector. The
DPE being the nodal coordinating Department on non-financial policies, must prepare a comprehensive approach paper on Sector-wise technological
status of PSEs in consultation with respective PSEs, Administrative Departments and expert agencies like DSIR.(Para 20.6)
 
                                The Committee also recommends that as a part of re-aligning with market, the PSEs should involve in technology trade and
consultancy services that may enhance their profitability at a lesser additional investment.(Para 20.10)
 
            While interacting with the PSEs, the Committee has observed a clear disjoint in the Central and State Governments
that has seriously imperiled the viability of such PSEs. (Para 21.6)
 
                The Committee is of the view that greater involvement of the stakes of the respective State government is essential to clear such disjoints. Also
a senior representative of the concerned State Government should be included in the Boards of PSEs as one of the two Government Directors. (Para
21.7)
 
                The Committee feels that abolition of some of the divisions is unacceptable.  It observes that without constant monitoring and consultations,
the policy formulation will be reduced to a mere academic exercise.  The Committee considers that such a situation will limit the full-potential and utility
of a Department and thereby affecting the efficiency of the policy.  Governance requires an objective and periodic assessment of the policies by the
agencies that formulate such policies. As envisaged in its mandate, to evolve DPE as the key policy-coordinating department for CPSEs, it must
undertake constant monitoring, consultations and modifications of its guidelines.  It must also compile the data pertaining to the PSEs under all the
Ministries/Departments and make appraisal. This information should be posted at its Website for public access.Para 2.5
 
                The Committee expresses its dismay over the non-utilisation of the fund for IT.  The Committee would like to know the reasons of DPE’s
inability to utilize the funds allocated for “Computerization of the Information on Personnel and Citizens Services”, as its objective is to improve
administrative efficiency. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to take necessary steps so that such a situation does not occur in future.
                The Committee also recommends that the Website of the DPE must be enriched with updated information and statistics on PSEs particularly
on the schemes coordinated by the DPE.

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
(Para 6.5)
                The Committee takes a serious note of under-utilization of funds for NE Region and under achievement of annual targets of CRR beneficiaries.
The Committee finds such case to be a sorry state of Governance and indicative of serious disjoint in Government departments that must be avoided in
public interest.(Para 8.5)
 
                                The Committee, keeping in view the lack of cooperation among various Departments, recommends the DPE to undertake a serious
study to ascertain the causes of under achievement of CRR beneficiaries and make corrections in the policy. The training should have forward
linkage with market. The Department must also look for the possibility to cover at least one of the family members of the beneficiaries under
CRR scheme so as to increase the family income.(Para 8.6)
 
                The Committee observes with concern the huge gap between VRS optees and the target set by the DPE for CRR coverage. Though the
Committee appreciates that the yearly targets are achieved, however it seeks reasons for such a gap between actual VRS optees and annual target for
CRR.(Para 11.3)
 
            The Committee appreciates that the success rate is gradually increasing. Yet compared with the total VRS optees of
whom CRR beneficiaries are only a small part, it can be safely   inferred that the rate of rehabilitation of the rationalized
employees is hardly satisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must look the success rate in
comparison with total VRS optees and make serious corrections to increase the success rate of rehabilitation.(Para 11.5)
 
                        The Committee also feels that in the CRR scheme, preference should be given to those junior level
functionaries to whom the VRS dues have still not been paid. Also the Committee would like to know about the
interim measures taken to provide sustenance to such VRS optees whose dues are still pending with the PSEs. (Para
11.6)
 
            The Committee recommends that DPE must take up the issue involved in the implementation of CRR Scheme with
respective PSEs and their Administrative Ministries to remove these constraints. The Committee would also like to know
the steps taken on the evaluation study conducted by V.V. Giri National Labour Institute, to overcome the above
constraints.
(Para 12.2)
 
                                The Committee would like to know the details of professional eligibility criterion for the non-official Members of the BRPSE and
the way they are selected.(Para 13.3)
 
                The Committee, however, expresses concern over delay in finalizing the revival of PSEs that has incurred heavy cost of such delay in terms of
depleting net worth and rising liabilities of PSEs. The Committee hopes that the delay in finalization of the revival of PSEs would be avoided.(Para 13.7)
 
            The Committee suggests that the Administrative Ministries/Departments should be given time limit to refer to the
complete proposal to BRPSE.(Para 13.8)
 
                                The Committee also notes that management development courses are the main benefit of DPE’s membership of ICPE, which has
been availed by only 76 executives in last three years with DPE paying an annual membership fee of US $ 75000. The Committee may be
apprised of the items included under this contribution. The Committee would also like the DPE to take a fresh look into the cost benefit ratio of
such membership and justify the same of next year’s Demands and inform the Committee accordingly. (Para 16.3)
 
                3.43          The Committee may also be apprised of the criteria and process for the selection of candidates for such courses.(Para 16.4)
            The Committee would like to know the nature of such support to PSEs in achieving the targets in MoU.  The
Committee observes that the number of PSEs earning favourable ratings is increasing while those getting  ‘Poor’ rating have
decreased.   Keeping this in view, the Committee has also observed that the number of PSEs entering the MoU has been
falling from 108 in 1999-2000 to 96 in 2003-04.  The Committee wonders, if the PSEs having poor ratings are being
excluded from the MOU system. If that is true, is it safe to construe that the Government’s support under MOU system is
practically not available to the loss making PSEs.  The Committee would like to know if there is a policy to exclude such
PSEs from signing the MOU.  If so, the Committee would like to know the rationale behind such policy.(Para 18.2)
 
                The Committee feels that the financial parameters in the MoU system still do not reflect the fact that the PSEs are still largely dependent on
bulk Government orders.  Most of the PSEs still do not have any significant presence in global export market despite being in the business for long. 
Most of the Excellent rated PSEs function in monopoly market environment.  The PSEs have not been able to secure the ‘Brand loyalty’ of customers,
wherever the sector has been opened up for private sector and this is reflected in the receding market share of such PSEs.  The Committee would like to

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
have DPE’s comment on its observations.(Para 20.4)
 
  Considering that the PSEs were envisaged as the pioneers in industrial technology, the Committee observes that
Technology and R&D have not been suitably factored in MoU ratings of the PSEs that are essentially Techno-commercial
entities. As such Technological upgradation and R&D should be an integral part of revival strategy of the PSEs.  It is
observed by the PSEs that most of the PSEs do not have an elaborate R&D set up.  The Committee wonders if PSEs have
owned any patent in recent years, which itself is a distinct commercial activity.  (Para 20.8)
 
The Committee recommends that technology upgradation and R&D must be given due weightage in MoU parameters in consultation with
expert bodies like DSIR.             (Para 20.9)
 
                Despite elaborate policy intentions to include persons of proven expertise in the Boards of PSEs, the Committee has observed that former
bureaucrats, serving representatives of autonomous organizations under government, representatives of subsidiary companies have been included in the
Boards as Independent Directors in addition to Functional and Official Part- time Directors. In several cases retired bureaucrats are reappointed as
Independent Directors. The Committee feels that such an arrangement does not fall in the spirit of the policy of appointing Independent Directors on the
Boards of Directors of the PSEs. The Committee also expresses reservation on the practice of renewing the tenures of existing Directors in some cases.
The Committee urges the department to ascertain that the implementation of the policy is in consonance with its true objectives and bring to the notice of
this Committee any dilution in the “Professionalisation” of Boards.(Para 21.5)
 
The Committee is of the opinion that there should be uniformity in the qualification, selection and mandate of Non-Functional Part-Time
Directors, as too many categories within the Board may affect its efficiency and autonomy. The Board must be defined in terms of its mandate and the
interest of the Company and not by the categories of its Directors. The Committee would like to have Government’s comments on the need for
uniformity in Part-Time Directors.(Para 24.3)
The Committee recommends that the government must impress upon the concerned Ministries to adhere to the time frame for the selection of
Directors and expedite the appointments of Directors.(Para 25.4)
 
            The Committee is constrained to observe that the information provided by the DPE was not only evasive but also
insufficient and incomplete.  The Committee observes that DPE  has not reacted  to the criteria of “Independent Directors”
as elaborated by the Naresh Chandra  Committee.  Similarly  the DPE  has not responded to the Narayan Murthy
Committee’s recommendation on “Nominee Directors”.(Para 25.6)
 
3.73     The Committee observes that these expert Committees were set up by the Government or the agencies under its
control. The Reports of these expert Committees are extremely relevant to the issue of Professionalisation of Boards as they
deal extensively the mandate, functional autonomy, obligations and the constitution of Boards of Diretors. Their findings
can be applied to enhance the autonomy and efficiency and draw greater degree of professional excellence to the Boards of
Directors. (Para 25.7)
 
3.74     The Committee recommends that the DPE should assess these reports more fruitfully instead of dismissing them for
administrative nuances and inform the Committee of its views and rationale thereof. (Para 25.8)
 
            Many PSEs particularly in Heavy Industry Sector have complained lack of orders from Government and PSEs as
major cause of their financial constraints. The Committee would like DPE to identify the Sectors that still rely heavily on
Government orders.”             (Para 27.5)
 
                                The Committee does not approve such an arrangement of allocating funds for the DPE under Iron & Steel Industry head.  This needs
to be corrected.  The Committee accordingly directs the DPE to take up the matter with appropriate Department to correct the same.(Para 5.2)
 
                                The Committee be apprised of the reasons on which is recommendation to extend the benefits of CRR scheme to family members
was refused by the Planning Commission. The Committee reiterates its recommendation as contained in its 150th Report in this respect, and
recommends a re-look into the issue as it will increase the family income of the VRS optees.(Para 11.7)
 
            The Committee feels that sufficient provisions should be made available to meet BRPSE’s requirements for
providing expert advise on techno-financial issues pertaining to revival of PSEs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
the Government to provide sufficient funds for the smooth  functioning of the BRPSE.(Para 13.5)
 
                The Committee recommends that DPE must make efforts with concerned Departments and Institutions, to conduct similar EDPs in India, with
Indian Professional Institutions, for other ICPE members. Indian institutions must enter into huge global market of professional training and

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
consultancy.  Such programmes for other countries will enhance the academic and professional profile of our premier professional institutions. (Para
17.2)
 
                                The Committee notes with reservation that there was no specific programme for enhancing the skills of shop floor level techniques.
The Committee views it to be a stunted approach towards overall human development in PSEs. (Para 17.3)
 
                                The Committee, therefore, recommends that DPE must organize orientation and skill development programme for shop-floor level
technical functionaries as they are the end users of new material management and production techniques. The efficiency at shop-floor level
ultimately reflects in the corporate performance of the Company. The Committee recommends that CPSEs adhere to the principles of Total
Quality Management.(Para 17.4)
 
                                The Committee observed that distinct preference was given to serving officers from the Armed Forces in the Board level
appointments in the PSEs under the Ministry of Defence, on the plea that Armed forces were premier customers of these PSEs. The Committee
wonders, if such an arrangement reduces PSEs as a captive Company instead of an autonomous commercial entity. The Committee is of the
view that the products of these PSEs have a large civilian market too. The Committee feels that if the private sector is being involved in the
defence sector, why cannot the defence related PSEs harness potential in civilian and export market with their duel-use products and
technology.           (Para 21.8)
            The Committee feels that the minimum educational qualification should be raised to a Post Graduate
Degree/Diploma from a premier institution in a professional course, management, engineering, financial management or
HR  management. Also the size of corporate body should be specified for the CMD/MD being appointed as the Independent
Directors.(Para 26.2)
 
                The Committee feels that a Joint Secretary belongs to a generalized service, he may not have requisite and relevant expertise to become an
Independent Director in a PSE unless he has the experience of those many years in the field relevant to the functioning and corporate objectives of the
PSE.  The Committee recommends that this aspect should be specified in the eligibility criteria for Independent Directors.(Para 26.3)
4.24The Committee feels that the maximum age for Independent Directors too should be appropriately reduced to maintain
uniformity in the Board of Directors.(Para 26.4)
 
                The Committee seeks information on the action taken by the DPE and the Government on the outcome of these meetings.(Para 27.10)
 
                The Committee seeks DPE to apprise it on Revised Estimates and Supplementary Demands.(Para 27.11)
 
                The Committee directs the DPE to give its comments on the Committee’s queries, observations and recommendations contained in this Report.
(Para 27.12)
 
MINUTES
Rajya Sabha
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
Minutes of the Meeting
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 16th May, 2006  in the Committee Room  ‘A’  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Shri Santosh Bagrodia                  —             Chairman
     
Rajya Sabha
 
Shri Surendra Lath
Suresh Bhardaj
Dr. K. Malaisamy
Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
 
Lok Sabha
 
Shri  Guharam Ajgalle
Shri Rajnarayan
Shri Bapu Hari Chaure
Shri Ram Singh Kaswan

179th report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/179threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:58:48]
Smt. Susmita Bauri
Shri Suraj Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Committee Officer
 
2.             The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members of the Committee.
 
2/-
 
-2-
 
3.             The Committee then took up the following reports for   consideration and adoption:-
 
(i) One Hundred Seventy-ninth Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in Committee's One Hundred Sixty-
eighth  Report on Demands for Grants             (2005-06) of the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
            (ii) One Hundred Eightieth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Heavy Industries  (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
                (iii) One Hundred Eighty- first  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Seventy-
first  Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)  of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
                 (iv) One Hundred Eighty- second Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Sixtieth Report on  the Tax Proposals affecting various segments of industries  of  the Ministry of Small Scale Industries;
             (v) One Hundred Eighty- third  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventieth  Report  on  the Demands for Grants                 ( 2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries;
                (vi) One Hundred Eighty- fourth  Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred 
Seventy- second Report on Demands for Grants           (2005-06) of the Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ;
                (vii)  One Hundred Eighty- fifth  Report  on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventy-third Report on Inter-Sectoral  Strategic Co-operation to Promote Small Scale Industries of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries; 
                 (viii) One Hundred Eighty- sixth   Report  on  Action Taken by theGovernment  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred
Seventy-fourth   Report on  Operational Effectiveness of PMRY, REGP and KVI  Schemes  in Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Maharastra of the
Ministry of  Agro and Rural Industries ;
 
3/-
 
-3-
 (ix) One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report  on  Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fifth
Report on Key concern areas  of SSI in select states of the Ministry of  Small Scale Industries;
(x) One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)   Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries;
(xi) One Hundred Eighty-ninth   Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07)  Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
(xii) One Hundred Ninetieth  Report  on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of  Department of Heavy Industries ( Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises);  and
(xiii)  One Hundred Ninety - first Report on   Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
 
4.             The Committee, after a brief discussion, adopted all the above reports without any modification.
 
  5.           The Committee authorized Shri Surendra Lath  and in his absence Dr. Malaisamy  to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Ram Singh
Kaswan and in his absence Shri  Guharam Ajgalle to ley a copy of the Report in Lok Sabha.
 
  6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.25 pm.
New Delhi
16th May, 2006
K.P. Singh
Under Secretary
 