150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORTS
 
ON
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-05) PERTAINING TO
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26TH AUGUST, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2004/Bhadrapada, 1926 (SAKA)
 
E-mail: rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6. MINUTES
 
 
COMPOSITION OF PRESENT COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution – 5th August, 2004)
   1.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia–    Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shri Surendra Lath
   4.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
   5.  Dr. K. Malaisamy
   6.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   7.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
   8.  Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
   9.  Dr. Vijay Mallya
10.  Vacant
        LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalle
12.  Shri Kailash Baitha
13.  Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
14.  Shri Subhash Deshmukh
15.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16.  Dr. Vallabhbhai Kathiria
17.  Shri Sunil Khan

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
18.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mahato
19.  Shri Prakash Paranjpe
20.  Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
21.  Shri Rajnarayan
22.  Shri Bagida Ramakrishna
23.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
24.  Shrimati Rubab Sayeda
25.  Shri Rana Gurjeet Singh
26.  Shri Manvendra Singh
27.  Shri Ganesh Singh
28.  Shri Suraj Singh
29.  Shri Chandramani Tripathi
30.  Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
31.  Shri Girdhari Yadav
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
        Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
        Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised by the
Committee, hereby present this One Hundred Fiftieth Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
2.      The Committee heard the oral evidence of the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Public
Enterprises on 9th August, 2004. The Committee also considered the pre-budget expectation and post budget reactions of the
Department of Public Enterprises to have in-depth account of the impact of budget proposals (2004-05) on the Public
Enterprises as a whole.
3.      The Committee examined the relevant documents and budget-papers furnished by the Ministry. The Committee is
thankful to the representatives of the Department of Public Enterprises who appeared before the Committee. The Committee
also wishes to thank the Ministry for furnishing the replies to the questionnaire and the points raised during the course of oral
evidence
4.      The Committee at its meeting held on 25th August, 2004 considered and adopted the Report.
 
NEW DELHI
25th August, 2004
SANTOSH BAGRODIA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry
 
 
REPORT
         The Department of Public Enterprises acts as a nodal agency for all central PSEs and assists in policy formulation
pertaining to the role of PSEs in the economy as also in laying down the policy guidelines on the performance improvement
and evaluation, financial accounting, personnel management and in related areas. It also collects, evaluates and maintains
information on several areas in respect of PSEs. DPE also provides an interface between the administrative Ministries and the
PSEs.
2.      The important role and tasks of the Department are listed below:
(i)     General policy relating to Public Sector.
(ii)     Matters relating to issue of Presidential Directives and guidelines to Public Sector Enterprises.
(iii)    Formulation of policy guidelines pertaining to Public Sector Enterprises in areas like performance improvement
and evaluation, financial management, personnel management, board structures, wage settlement, training,
industrial relation, vigilance, performance appraisal, etc.
(iv)    Matters relating to reservation of posts in the public sector enterprises for certain classes of citizens.

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
(v)    All matters relating to Memorandum of Understanding between the Public Sector Enterprises and the
administrative Ministries/Departments.
(vi)    Matters relating to delegation of powers to Board of Directors.
(vii)   To undertake indepth studies in respect of significant areas of functioning of Central PSEs.
(viii)  Matters relating to International Centre for Public Enterprises (ICPE).
(ix)    Matters relating to Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE).
(x)    To monitor and evaluate the performance of PSEs and to act as a repository of data and to bring out an Annual
Survey for the Parliament.
(xi)    Permanent Machinery of Arbitrators for settlement of disputes among public sector enterprises and Government
Departments except disputes relating to tax matters.
(xii)   Appraisal of proposal from different administrative Ministries/Deptt. pertaining  to restructuring, revival, joint
venture etc.
ORGANISATION OF DPE
3.      The Department is headed by a Secretary who is assisted by an establishment with an overall sanctioned strength of 121
personnel. The Department has following Five constituent Divisions:
(i)    The Financial Policy Division: It comprises the Public Enterprises Survey unit, the policy planning unit, the wage
policy unit and the work relating to disinvestment of shares of public sector enterprises.
(ii)    The Management Policy Division: It comprises the personnel policy unit, training unit, performance indicator and
work norms unit (PIWN Unit) and SC & ST Cell.
(iii)   The MOU Division; It comprises MOU Unit, Data Bank and Computer Cell.
(iv)   The Administration & Coordination Division: It comprises the Administration Library, Parliament and
Coordination Wings and Hindi Cell.
(v)   The Permanent Machinery of Arbitration (PMA): It provides a forum for settlement of commercial disputes
between two or more PSEs as well as between Government Departments and PSEs.
4.      The Committee was further informed of the brief resume of activities of the Department included an Annual Survey of
all CPSEs. The Survey is a repository of the information on performance of all CPSEs. The highlights of the performance may
be stated as under:
(i)    The Department issued new MOU guidelines based on interim report of Consultant (NCAER) and MOU were
signed with 100 CPSEs.
(ii)    To enhance the managerial capabilities of the Executives in the CPSEs, 47 Executive Development Programme
(EDPs) were organized.
(iii)   An appraisal of the performance of all the Mini-ratna CPSEs was made.
(iv)   Non-official part-time Directors have been appointed on the board of the Navratna PSEs and 24 of 44 Mini-ratna
PSEs. .
(v)   As a support system to CPSEs, Government have given purchase preference to CPSEs. During 2003-04, 35 CPSEs
and 2 privatised companies and 1 joint venture were benefited by getting orders of around Rs. 1500 Crores under
this scheme.
(vi)   12,200 rationalised employees of CPSEs were imparted retraining for rehabilitation under CRR scheme.
5.      The Committee was further informed that the extension of the purchase preference policy beyond 31.3.2004 and
enhancement of autonomy and financial power to CPSEs particularly Navratnas and Miniratnas  were under active
consideration of the Department for the year 2004-05.
6.      The Committee acknowledges DPE’s role as the nodal department for all the CPSEs and as such its importance in the
economic development of the country. While specific action is to be taken by the concerned administrative Ministry, DPE
provides policy framework and facilitates atmosphere for better productivity, smooth functioning and higher contribution to
national economy.
7.      BUDGET ALLOCATION
Demand No.51
(Rs. in crores)
           Budget 2003-2004 Revised 2003-2004 Budget 2004-2005

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
 Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total
  Plan   Plan   Plan  
Major Head ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
Revenue 10.00 2.61 12.61 10.00 2.61 12.61 30.00 2.65 32.65
Capital ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
TOTAL : 10.00 2.61 12.61 10.00 2.61 12.61 30.00 2.65 32.65
 
Sub-Head Wise Layout
(Rs. in crores)
           Budget 2003-2004           Revised 2003-2004           Budget 2004-2005
  Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total
   Plan   Plan   Plan  
I. Sectt.  — — — — — — — — —
Economic 3451 — 2.22 2.22 — 2.22 2.22 0.60 2.26 2.86
Services           
2. Contribution 2852 — 0.39 0.39 — 0.39 0.39 — 0.39 0.39
to I.C.P.Es.           
3. Retraining           
and           
Redeployment 2852 9.00 — 9.00 9.00 — 9.00 26.40 — 26.40
of rationalized           
workers of           
CPU’s           
4. Lumpsum           
provision           
for projects 2552 1.00 — 1.00 1.00 — 1.00 3.00 — 3.00
schemes for           
North Eastern           
Area and           
Sikkim           
GRAND TOTAL :  10.00 2.61 12.61 10.00 2.61 12.61 30.00 2.65 32.65
 
Plan Outlay
1 .Secretariat           
Economic           
Services 3451 — — — — — — 0.60 — 0.60
(Information           
Technology)           
2. Iron and           
Steel 12852 9.00 — 9.00 9.00 — 9.00 26.40 — 26.40
Industries           
3. North           
Eastern 22552 1.00 — 1.00 1.00 — 1.00 3.00 — 3.00
Areas           
GRAND TOTAL :  10.00 — 10.00 10.00 – 10.00 30.00 — 30.00
 
APPRAISAL OF DEMAND OF GRANTS
Plan Allocation
8.      The plan outlay under the CRR Scheme (Counselling , Retraining and Redeployment) of rationalized employees of
CPSUs, has been raised to Rs. 30.00 crores as against a plan allocation of Rs. 10.00 crores during 2003-04. Out of this, Rs.
3.00 crores is earmarked for the North-East and Rs. 60.00 lakhs for IT Plan. The Committee was informed that substantial
increase in plan outlay is on account of growing demand of the scheme by VR optees of CPSEs. The Committee is in
agreement with the enhanced budget as larger number of VRS optees would be covered and benefited through rehabilitation

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
under the Scheme.
9.      The Committee during the course of interaction with the representatives of the PSEs was informed that several PSEs
were borrowing money at a higher interest rate to meet their dues to VRS optees. This was adding to their financial burden.
10.    The Committee therefore recommends that one time comprehensive package should be given to the PSEs which
should be enjoined with accountability clause on the part of management.
NON-PLAN ALLOCATION
11.    The Non-Plan allocation has been raised by Rs. 4 lakhs to Rs.2.65 crores for B.E. of 2004-05 from Rs. 2.61 crores under
B.E. of 2003-04. The Committee was informed that the increase of Rs 4 lakh in non-plan allocation in BE 2004-05 is on
account of filling up of some senior level posts in this Department in last quarter of the financial year of 2003-2004. These
posts had been lying vacant for the last some years.
SECRETARIAT ECONOMIC SERVICE
12.    The Committee took note of the allocation of Rs. 60 lakhs provided for the Secretariat Economic Services for the year
2004-05. For the year 2003-04 no allocation was made in this regard. The Committee was informed that the demand was
meant to meet expenses on information technology. This is as per provision of 2% of the total plan allocation for augmenting
the use of Information Technology, including training, acquisition of hardware, software as well as development and
maintenance of software. Earlier plan allocation under Information Technology for DPE was made in the Budget of DHI.
13.    The Committee concurs with the plan allocation for IT sector, and hopes that it would result in improvement of
efficiency of the Department. As the Department functions as the centralized coordinating unit for all the CPSEs, the
IT would be useful for maintaining a comprehensive database for all the stakeholders. The Committee further suggests
for creation of an exclusive website for the CRR scheme to create and maintain a comprehensive database for the use
of all the stake holders.
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR PROMOTION OF  ENTERPRISE
14.    The Committee takes note that Rs.39 lakh were allocated towards ICPE. It was informed that India was a founder
member of International  Center for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE), Ljubljana , Slovenia. Secretary (DPE) is currently the
President of the ICPE Council. India makes an annual membership contribution of US $ 75000 to ICPE from DPE budget.
New programmes introduced by ICPE if the area of Total Quality Management, Advanced Management and Sustainable
Development are helpful in providing internation  exposure to the middle/senior level executives of PSEs to the best
management practices.
ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EASTERN REGION
15.    The Committee takes note of the allocation of Rs 3.00 crores as proposed under the B.E. for the year 2004-05 for the
development related works / schemes for the benefit of North Eastern Region and Sikkim. The Committee was also informed
that as per the norms, 10% of the total plan allocation is earmarked for the North Eastern Region including Sikkim. For
implementation of the CRR scheme initially one agency namely Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati was selected.
During last three years (2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04), IIE, Guwahati was allotted a total fund of Rs. 47.40 lakhs but it could
utilize only 7.93 lakhs. The past experience since 2001 indicated that low utilisation  of budget allocation was due to low
number of VRS optees in North East region.
16.    The Committee recommends that extensive initiative by the DPE must be taken in consonance with the overall policy for
economic development for North Eastern region. As such the Department should take concerted initiatives with Ministry for
the Development of North Eastern region.
17.    The Committee further observes that in view of rich natural resources and traditional industries of this region, the CRR
scheme should cover the traditional industries, agro-based, small scale and cottage industry specific to the region. The region
has vast potential of tourism. Rationalized employees of this region may be involved in such region-specific industries. In
view of the geographical, climatic and environmental factors IT based enterprises have great potential in the NE region. The
Committee recommends that the Government should ensure that IT potential is suitably exploited.
AUTONOMY AND PROFESSIONALISATION OF PSE BOARDS
18.    To make public sector enterprises autonomous, the government have granted additional financial powers to the Boards,
of the profit making enterprises to sanction capital outlay without prior approval as per details given below:-
(Rs. in crores)
Gross Block of the PSEs Amount
Less than Rs.100 crores 10.00
Rs.100 crores - Rs.200 crores 20.00

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
Rs.200 crore - Rs.500 crores 40.00
Above Rs.500 crores 100.00
 
19.    In order to give greater functional autonomy to the management of CPSEs, the guidelines issued by the Department of
Public Enterprises have been reviewed and rationalized from time to time. Under Articles of Association, the Board of
Directors of PSEs enjoy autonomy in respect of recruitment, promotion and other service conditions of below Board level
employees. MOU signing companies have been delegated higher powers in respect of wage revision, for evolving incentive
scheme, voluntary retirement scheme and transfer of functional directors within PSU, etc.
NAVRATNA CPSEs
20.    In July, 1997 the Government identified 9 Public Sector Enterprises that had comparative advantages and potential to
emerge as global giants as Navratnas. These PSEs are given enhanced autonomy and delegation of powers to incur capital
expenditure, to enter into technology Joint Ventures/Strategic Alliances, to effect  organisational restructuring, to create and
wind up below Board level posts and to raise capital from domestic and international market. Restructuring of Board by
inducting at least 4 non-official Directors is a pre-condition for exercise of the enhanced powers. The 9 Navratna PSEs are
BHEL, BPCL, GAIL, HPCL, IOC, MTNL, NTPC, ONGC and SAIL.
MINIRATNA CPSEs
21.    In October 1997 the Government decided to grant enhanced autonomy and delegation of financial powers to other profit
making companies subject to certain eligibility conditions and guidelines to make them efficient and competitive. These
companies are called Miniratnas and these are in two categories, namely, Category I & II.
22.    The Committee was informed about the criteria for conferring the status of Miniratna  are (i) the PSE should be profit
making for the: last 3. years continuously and should have positive net worth, (ii) should not have defaulted in repayment of
loans/interest payment on loans due to government, (iii) should not depend upon budgetary support or government guarantee
and (iv) its Board is restructured by inducting at least 3 non official Directors PSEs which have made pre-tax profit of Rs.30
Crore or more in at least one of, the 3 years will be given Category I while others are given Category II status. The
administrative Ministries are empowered to declare a PSE as a Miniratna if it fulfils the eligibility conditions.
23.    The enhanced powers given to Miniratna PSEs include the power to incur capital expenditure, enter into joint ventures,
set up technological and strategic alliances and formulate schemes of human resources management. Presently there are 42
Miniratna PSEs (29 Category I and 13 Category II).
24.    The Committee desires DPE to furnish an appraisal of the effect of such status and directs the Department to ensure a
mechanism of making any assessment of the benefits of such schemes.
PROFESSIONALISATION
25.    The Committee was informed about the several measures that have been initiated to professionalise the management of
Public Enterprises. Induction of professionals on the Boards of PSEs as non-official part-time Directors is being done. As per
the guidelines issued by DPE, the number of such non-official part-time Directors should be at least 1/3rd of the actual
strength of the Board whereas the number of Government Directors on the Boards should not exceed two. As per SEBI’s
guidelines on corporate governance, in the cases of the listed companies headed by non-executive Chairman at least 1/3rd of
the Board should comprise Independent Directors and in the cases of companies headed by executive Chairman at least half of
the Board should comprise Independent Directors; According to the Navratna  and Miniratna  schemes, the Boards of these
companies should be professionalised by inducting a minimum of 4 non-official Directors in the case of Navratnas and 3 non-
official Directors in the case of Miniratnas before the Board exercise the enhanced powers.
26.    The Committee takes note of the fact that non-official Directors have been appointed in 24 of 44 Mini-Ratna  PSEs. The
remaining vacancies are yet to be filled up. The Committee therefore recommends that the non-official part time directors of
remaining Mini-ratna ‘PSEs must be appointed at the earliest to facilitate efficient functioning of the concerned PSEs.
27.    The Committee recommends that lower and medium level executives and technical staff too should be given opportunity
to enhance and upgrade their skills through regular short duration courses at reputed professional and technical institutions.
The Committee is of the view that views management techniques and office process must be adopted to make respective PSEs
competitive. For this there should be regular interface between PSE management and management experts and institutions.
MOU SYSTEM IN CPSES
28.    The system of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was initiated on the recommendations of the Arjun Sengupta
Committee which was set up to review the policy on PSEs. According to this scheme the targets of performance are set up for
respective PSEs along with the obligations on the part of the Government. The system envisages enhanced performances in
successive years with greater accountability. The MOU system has grown over time from 4 MOUs signed in the year 1987-88,
101 MOU’s were signed for the year 2002-2003. In fact many of these 101 PSE’s are the holding companies and if their
subsidiaries are also included then the total No. of PSE’s covered under MOU system works out to be as 159. The number of
MOUs signed/finalised since the inception of the MOU system are as follows.

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
 No. of MOU’s  No. of MOU’s signed/
Year signed/finalised Year finalised
1987-88 4 1995-96 104
1988-89 11 1996-97 110
1989-90 18 1997-98 l08
1990-91 23 1998-99 108
1991-92 72 1999-2000 108
1992-93 98 2000-01 107
1993-94 101 2001-02 104
1994-95 100 2002-03 101
 
29.    The Committee was apprised of the institutional mechanism for the MOU process. A High Power Committee of
Secretaries headed by the Cabinet Secretaries is the apex institution to finalise  the draft MOU before signed and to make year
end evaluation to assess the achievement of objectives and commitments. At the preliminary level, a Task Force provides
technical expertise for MOU negotiations .and evaluation. To maintain objectivity and credibility, the Task Force consists of
retired civil servants, executives of public sector, management professionals and independent members with considerable
experience.
30.    The guidelines for MOU are prepared by MOU Division and circulated among the respective PSEs and their
administrative Ministries. These guidelines indicate broad structure and aspects to be covered in the draft MOU including the
graded weights to be assigned to various parameters. The guidelines reflect main objectives of the Government and the
guidelines to the PSEs. The MOU Division in the Department of Public Enterprises acts as the permanent secretariat to this
High Power Committee and Task Force. The Division develops information and database on MOU signing PSEs. It monitors
the progress of MOUs. The Division also coordinates research and training on various aspects of MOU policy.
31.    Performance of MOU signing PSEs is evaluated twice in a year with reference to their MOU targets. First the
performance is evaluated on the basis of provisional results and secondly on the basis of audited data. ‘The PSEs are graded as
“Excellent”; “Very Good”, “Good”, “Fair” & “Poor” on’ the basis of the evaluation of MOUs.The summary performance of
MOUs signing PSEs as reflected in their MOU rating till 2002 is as follows.
Rating                                           No. of Public Sector Enterprises
 1997-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 (Prov. )
Excellent 45 44 49 50 42
Very Good 25 30 29 28 24
Good 13 13 09 09 15
Fair 22 19 16 14 12
Poor 03 02 03 05 03
 
32.    On the basis of interim report submitted by NCAER, new guidelines for the year 2004-05 were prepared and circulated
to MOU signing PSEs and Administrative Ministries. According to these guidelines, total weight in the MOU assessment
format has been divided into common parameters (80%), sector specific parameters (10%) and enterprise-specific parameters
(10%). Common parameters include financial and dynamic parameters and are applicable to all PSEs. Sector-specific
parameters reflect sectoral thrusts and priorities and enterprise-specific parameters reflect performance improvement measures
at the enterprise/unit level.
33.    The Committee observes that MoU system has been relevant in the past and still holds relevance in the current’ scenario
though it needs a review. It is desirable if the weightage  given to the financial parameters is significant and the targets should
be sufficiently high with a view to improve performance and productivity, year after year.
34.    The Committee also feels that the MoU Division in DPE, which implements the MoUs, needs to be strengthened by
induction of additional manpower. More funds needs to be allocated to MoU Division/DPE, so that it is able to get MoU
related studies done by professional bodies. It should also be ensured that senior officials of the administrative Ministries
actively associated in all MoU related matters.

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
35.    The Committee also desires to have some feedback/report from the PSEs who have signed MoU particularly those who
have been graded as excellent or poor. Such a feedback will help the Committee to assess the strengths of MoU system and the
constraints some PSEs are still facing. The Committee also seeks the Department’s view on the PSEs that have been graded as
Poor. Does the Department suggest any corrective measures for such PSEs.
36.    The Committee further desires to be apprised about the obligations on the part of Government as the contracting party
signing the MoU.
PURCHASE  PREFERENCE  POLICY
37.    The Purchase Preference Policy provides purchase preference in supply of goods and services to the Government
Departments, Autonomous bodies and other PSEs if the price quoted by the supplying CPSE is within 10% of the lowest valid
bid price, other things being equal. Besides CPSEs, the policy is applicable to the joint venture companies where holding of
Government and / or CPSEs is 51% or more. The policy will also be available to those privatized CPSEs where specific
approval has been accorded for the specific periods from the date of disinvestment.
38.    The Committee acknowledges that the purchase preference policy, which was in force till 31.3.2002, has been extended
for two more years i.e. up to 31.3.2004 on its recommendation. The Committee recommends a study to be done on the
efficacy of this policy. In consonance with its pronounced policy, Government may consider to extend this policy for next 3 to
5 years.
PERMANENT  MACHINERY  OF  ARBITRATION
39.    The Committee was apprised of the mandate of the DPE in this regard. Permanent Machinery of Arbitrators has been set
up in Department of Public Enterprises for resolving commercial disputes except relating to taxation and Railways between
PSEs as well as between a PSE and a Central Government Department/Ministry.
40.    An appeal against the award of the Arbitrator can be made to the Secretary, Ministry of Law, in case either party is not
satisfied with the award. The decision of Secretary, Ministry of Law is final and binding on the parties. No appeal can be made
in the Court of Law/Tribunal against the decision of Secretary (Law).
41.    The Committee considers it to be a positive initiative. It desires to be apprised of the impact of this mechanism in speedy
settlement of disputes.
SCHEME  FOR  COUNSELLING,  RETRAINING  AND  REDEPLOYMENT
42.    The Committee takes note of the allocation of Rs. 30 crores made in the B.E. of 2004-05 out of which an amount of Rs.
26.40 crores is earmarked for Re-training, Re­deployment of rationalized workers of CPU’s. There is an increase of Rs. 17.40
crores from Rs. 9 crores in the R.E. of 2003-04 to Rs. 25.40 crores for the year 2004-05 under Plan allocation.
43.    About the allocation of Rs. 26.40 crores as budgetary support to Iron and Steel industries, it was explained to the
Committee that the CRR scheme falls under Iron and Steel Head of Development under Sectoral  Central Plan Outlay as
categorized by the Planning Commission for the purpose of budget allocation. However the expenditure to be incurred under
the CRR scheme is not limited only to Iron and Steel Industries but it covers other sectors also.
44.    The Committee was informed that with objective to rationalize the labour force in CPSEs VR Scheme was introduced in
CPSEs in 1988. The scheme was reformulated and notified in May, 2000. The objective and scope of the scheme is to provide
opportunities of counselling, retraining and redeployment to the rationalized employees of Central. Public Sector Enterprises
through short duration training programmes to enable them to adopt new vocations and take advantage of available
opportunities of self employment. The Department of Public Enterprises is the coordinating agency to arrange for government
funds on annual basis, monitor the implementation of the scheme with the nodal agencies and the CPSUs , and provide
necessary direction and guidance. Accordingly the DPE also draws the Plan of Action.
45.    The Committee expresses its concern that the displaced employee needs psychological counselling to absorb the trauma
of loss of job and to face the new circumstances. They need advise for the prudent management of compensation amount and
other financial benefits from the CPSU. They also need to be made aware of the new environment of market opportunities so
that they may, depending upon his aptitude and expertise, take up economic activities.
46.    The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) selects suitable nodal agencies for implementing the scheme of counselling,
retraining and redeployment These agencies may be government/semi government and non government organization having
experience in the field. Financial assistance for such progragmme is provided to the nodal agencies by the DPE. In all 34 nodal
agencies have been selected so far all over the country. They are required to develop suitable curriculum and teaching material
for training. They maintain the data with regard to counselling , training, redeployment and self- employment of such
employees. Planning Commission also undertakes a midterm review of the CRR Scheme. The Director, Personnel of the
respective CPSUs are the key resource persons in respect of counselling , retraining and redeployment of rationalized
employees and maintains regular touch with the trainees and maintain records about their deployment either in new
organizations or self employment.

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
47.    Various fields of training depend on prevailing demand in market Broadly, general and specialized fields of trainings are
selected by the trainees. General fields include trades like learning basic and specialized courses in computer, courses related
to electricians, fitters, welders, repair and maintenance of various equipments and appliances; screen printing etc. besides
retail trading and establishment of various types. There is also demand for market oriented specialized courses like mushroom
growing fishery, plantation of medicinal plants etc.
48.    The nodal agency/concerned CPSU sponsors their applications for seeking financial assistance from commercial banks
and other institutions under various schemes of self employment. Committee was informed of the assessment that in view of
the present trend, on an average nearly 50000 employees may opt VRS every year. Department’s effort in rehabilitating such
employees vis-a-vis total number of VRS optees in last three years is as follows:
(Rs. in crores)
Year Number of employees Amount spent of
 opting for VRS Rehabilitation
2000-01 45625 7.00
2001 -02 54371 8.68
2002-03 63741 8.74
 
49.    The Committee expresses its concern that due to fund constraints, only about l0% of the rationalised employees could be
covered under CRR scheme. The number of workers covered under the scheme during the 3 years is around 30,000. The
Committee is of the view that the success of current economic policy will largely depend of the productive rehabilitation of
rationalized employees. The CRR scheme is a vital initiative in this regard and should get adequate budgetary support to cover
maximum numbers of employees in effective manner.
50.    The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the CRR scheme, during 2003-04; a physical target of 10000 VRS
optees was fixed which was subsequently revised to 12000. Against this, 12200 rationalized employees were covered under
the scheme. The Committee hopes that with enhanced budget; a physical target of 32000 would be achieved during 2004-05.
The substantial increase in budget and overall physical targets would enable to cover larger number of VR optees and help
adopt new avocation through skill upgradation and entrepreneurship development to enable them to engage themselves in
income generating activities by taking advantage of market opportunities.
51.    The Committee is of the view that the financial assistance particularly under the Rural Employment Generation
Programme of the KVIC (Margin money scheme), Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY); various schemes formulated by
the SIDBI and other similar schemes of self employment, must be availed for the benefiit of VRS optees-of the PSUs.
Preference may be given to such employees in the schemes launched by Departments/Ministries of Agro and Rural Industries,
Small Scale Industries, Rural and Urban Development. Training and credit facilities should be extended also to the family
members of rationalized employees so that the family income can be enhanced. The respective PSEs and nodal agencies
should impart training according to region-specific requirements or in the traditional industries of the region.
52.    The Committee recommends that the facilities of medical, educational and other social securities should remain available
to the former employees in respective PSEs.
53.    The Committee is of the view that the social audit of such rationalization in respective PSEs should be conducted.
Rationalisation if remains unattended may become a factor of social disruption and delinquency in the region. The conclusions
of such social Auditing may help in upgrading the CRR Schemes.
BOARD  FOR  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  PUBLIC  SECTOR  ENTERPRISES  (BRPSES)
54.    The Committee takes note of the Finance Minister’s Budget speech, wherein it was proposed to establish a Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) to advise the Government on the measures to be taken to restructure
PSEs, including cases where disinvestment or closure or sale is justified. The BRPSE is to examine each case objectively and
make recommendations on disinvestment, consistent with the NCMP.
55.    The Committee appreciates that the proposed Board as it is likely to expedite the process of advice to the questions of
revival, restructuring, disinvestment or closure, as the case may be. However, the exact details of its constitution, terms of
reference, modalities including the Ministry in which it is to be set up (locus) are under consideration of the Government. The
Committee urges upon the Government to finalise it at the earliest.
56.    The Committee observes that the recommendations of Expenditure Reforms Commission regarding the existence of
Department of Public Enterprises may be viewed considering the activities, achievements and proposed plans of the
Department. The Committee is of the view that the effective implementation of these plans is of critical importance for

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
success of current economic reforms.
57.    The Committee recommends greater focus on the following areas:
(i)    Initiatives for policy planning in providing financial and functional autonomy to the CPSEs in order to help make
them globally competitive.
(ii)    Initiatives for the revival/ reconstruction/ restructuring/ closure etc. of the sick/ loss making CPSEs including
decisions related to disinvestments by the administrative ministries/ departments should be in consultation with
DPE.
(iii)   Constant review of the guidelines in line with changing industrial and business scenario so as to facilitate the
CPSEs in fulfilling their commercial and social objectives in a prompt and competitive manner.
(iv)   Enhanced use of information system i.e. web based computer applications, networking etc.
(v)   Higher impetus in facilitating the CPSEs in the areas of Human Resource Development through training and
development and their exposure to latest management models and techniques through EDPs and training abroad.
(vi)   Focus on social safety net schemes, i.e. Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment Scheme and promoting it with a
wider coverage.
(vii)  The Committee further recommends that in order to make the Department more efficient and effective, there is a
need to induct more professionals, in this Department specially in Management, CRR, MoU and Restructuring
Divisions.
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE
         The Committee acknowledges DPE’s role as the nodal department for all the CPSEs and as such its importance in the
economic development of the country. While specific action is to be taken by the concerned administrative Ministry, DPE
provides policy framework and facilitates atmosphere for better productivity, smooth functioning and higher contribution to
national economy.                                                                                                               (Para 6)
         The Committee therefore recommends that one time comprehensive package should be given to the PSEs which should
be enjoined with accountability clause on the part of management.
                                                                                                                                        (Para 10)
         The Committee concurs with the plan allocation for IT sector, and hopes that it would result in improvement of
efficiency of the Department. As the Department functions as the centralized coordinating unit for all the CPSEs, the IT would
be useful for maintaining a comprehensive database for all the stakeholders. The Committee further suggests for creation of an
exclusive website for the CRR scheme to create and maintain a comprehensive database for the use of all the stake
holders.                                                                                                                   (Para 13)
         The Committee recommends that extensive initiative by the DPE must be taken in consonance with the overall policy for
economic development for North Eastern region. As such the Department should take concerted initiatives with Ministry for
the Development of North Eastern region.
                                                                                                                                        (Para 16)
         The Committee further observes that in view of rich natural resources and traditional industries of this region, the CRR
scheme should cover the traditional industries, agro-based, small scale and cottage industry specific to the region. The region
has vast potential of tourism. Rationalized employees of this region may be involved in such region-specific industries. In
view of the geographical, climatic and environmental factors IT based enterprises have great potential in the NE region. The
Committee recommends that the Government should ensure that IT potential is suitably exploited.(Para 17)
         The Committee desires DPE to furnish an appraisal of the effect of such status and directs the Department to ensure a
mechanism of making any assessment of the benefits of such schemes.
                                                                                                                                        (Para 24)
         The Committee takes note of the fact that non-official Directors have been appointed in 24 of 44 Mini-Ratna  PSEs. The
remaining vacancies are yet to be filled up The Committee therefore recommends that the non-official part time directors of
remaining Mini-Ratna PSEs must be appointed at the earliest to facilitate efficient functioning of the concerned PSEs.        
(Para 26)
         The Committee recommends that lower and medium level executives and technical staff too should be given opportunity
to enhance and upgrade their skills through regular short duration courses at reputed professional and technical institutions.
The Committee is of the view that new management techniques and office process must be adopted to make respective PSEs

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
competitive. For this there should be regular interface between PSE management and management experts and
institutions.                                                                                                                 (Para 27)
         The Committee observes that MOU system has been relevant in the past and still holds relevance in the current scenario
though it needs a review. It is desirable if the weightage  given to the financial parameters is significant and the targets should
be sufficiently high with a view to improve performance and productivity, year after year.(Para 33)
         The Committee also feels that the MOU Division in DPE, which implements the MOUs, needs to be strengthened by
induction of additional manpower. More funds needs to be allocated to MOU Division/DPE, so that it is able to get MOU
related studies done by professional bodies. It should also be ensured that senior officials of the administrative Ministries
actively associated in all MOU related matters.                                                                  (Para 34)
         The Committee also desires to have some feedback/report from the PSEs who have signed MOU particularly those who
have been graded as excellent or poor. Such a feedback will help the Committee to assess the strengths of MOU system and
the constraints some PSEs are still facing. The Committee also seeks the Department’s view on the PSEs that have been
graded as Poor. Does the Department suggest any corrective measures for such PSEs.(Para 35)
         The Committee further desires to be apprised about the obligations on the part of Government as the contracting party
signing the MOU.                                                                                                             (Para 36)
         The Committee acknowledges that the purchase preference policy, which was in force till 31.3.2002, has been extended
for two more years i.e. up to 31.3.2004 on its recommendation. The Committee recommends a study to be done on the
efficacy of this policy. In consonance with its pronounced policy, Government may consider to extend this policy for next 3 to
5 years.                                                                                                              (Para 38)
         The Committee considers it to be a positive initiative. It desires to be apprised of the impact of this mechanism in speedy
settlement of disputes.                                                                                           (Para 41)
         The Committee expresses its concern that the displaced employee needs psychological counselling to absorb the trauma
of loss of job and to face the new circumstances. They need advise for the prudent management of their compensation amount
and other financial benefits from the CPSU. They also need to be made aware of the new environment of market opportunities
so that they may, depending upon his aptitude and expertise, take up economic activities.         (Para 45)
         The Committee expresses its concern that due to fund constraints, only about l0% of the rationalised employees could be
covered under CRR scheme. The number of workers covered under the scheme during the 3 years is around 30,000. The
Committee is of the view that the success of current economic policy will largely depend of the productive rehabilitation of
rationalized employees. The CRR scheme is a vital initiative in this regard and should get adequate budgetary support to cover
maximum numbers of employees in effective manner.                                                (Para 49)
         The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the CRR scheme, during 2003-04; a physical target of 10000 VRS
optees was fixed which was subsequently revised to 12000. Against this, 12200 rationalized employees were covered under
the scheme. The Committee hopes that with enhanced budget; a physical target of 32000 would ‘be achieved during 2004-05.
The substantial increase in budget and overall physical targets would enable to cover larger number of VR optees and help
adopt new avocation through skill upgradation and entrepreneurship development to enable - them to engage themselves in
income generating activities by taking advantage of market opportunities.       (Para 50)
         The Committee is of the view that the financial assistance particularly under the Rural Employment Generation
Programme of the KVIC (Margin money scheme), Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY); various schemes formulated by
the SIDBI and other similar schemes of self employment, must be availed for the benefiit of VRS optees-of the PSUs.
Preference may be given to such employees in the schemes launched by Departments/Ministries of Agro and Rural Industries,
Small Scale Industries, Rural and Urban Development. Training and credit facilities should be extended also to the family
members of rationalized employees so that the family income can be enhanced. The respective PSEs and nodal agencies
should impart training according to region-specific requirements or in the traditional industries of the region.         (Para 51)
         The Committee recommends that the facilities of medical, educational and other social securities should remain available
to the former employees in respective PSEs.                                                        (Para 52)
         The Committee is of the view that the social audit of such rationalization in respective PSEs should be conducted.
Rationalisation if remains unattended may become a factor of social disruption and delinquency in the region. The conclusions
of such social Auditing may help in upgrading the CRR Schemes.                                       (Para 53)
         The Committee appreciates that the proposed Board as it is likely to expedite the process of advice to the questions of
revival, restructuring, disinvestment or closure, as the case may be. However, the exact details of its constitution, terms of
reference, modalities including the Ministry in which it is to be set up (locus) are under consideration of the Government. The
Committee urges upon the Government to finalise it at the earliest.                                      (Para 55)
         The Committee observes that the recommendations of Expenditure Reforms Commission regarding the existence of

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
Department of Public Enterprises may be viewed considering the activities, achievements and proposed plans of the
Department. The Committee is of the view that the effective implementation of these plans is of critical importance for
success of current economic reforms.                                                                                (Para 56)
The Committee recommends greater focus on the following areas:
(i)    Initiatives for policy planning in providing financial and functional autonomy to the CPSEs in order to help make
them globally competitive.
(ii)    Initiatives for the revival/ reconstruction/ restructuring/ closure etc. of the sick/ loss making CPSEs including
decisions related to disinvestments by the administrative ministries/ departments should be in consultation with
DPE.
(iii)   Constant review of the guidelines in line with changing industrial and business scenario so as to facilitate the
CPSEs in fulfilling their commercial and social objectives in a prompt and competitive manner.
(iv)   Enhanced use of information system i.e. web based computer applications, networking etc.
(v)   Higher impetus in facilitating the CPSEs in the areas of Human Resource Development through training and
development and their exposure to latest management models and techniques through EDPs and training abroad.
(vi)   Focus on social safety net schemes, i.e. Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment Scheme and promoting it with a
wider coverage.                                                                                             (Para 64)
(vii)  The Committee further recommends that in order to make the Department more efficient and effective, there is a
need to induct more professionals, in this Department specially in Management, CRR, MOU and Restructuring
Divisions.                                                                                                          (Para 57)
 
 
MINUTES
I
FIRST MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday the 9th August 2004 in Room 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         Present
   1.   Shri Santosh Bagrodia – Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
         LOK SABHA
   6.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   7.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   8.   Shri Sunil Khan
   9.   Shri Kishanbhai Vestabhai Patel
10.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
11.   Shri Manvendra Singh
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
         DEPARTMENT OF HEAVY INDUSTRY
   1.   Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Secretary
   2.   Shri Naresh Chaturvedi, AS & FA
   3.   Shri A. Didar Singh, Joint Secretary
   4.   Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary, Joint Secretary
   5.   Shri S. V. Bhave, Joint Secretary
   6.   Shri A.K. Rath, Joint Secretary
   7.   Smt. Archana Nigam, Chief Controller of Accounts

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
         REPRESENTATIVE OF COMPANIES
         Shri G.P. Pandey, CMD, Heavy Engineering Ltd.
         Shri H.W. Bhatnagar, Chairman, Committee of Directors,
         Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.
   1.   Shri A. Mukharjee, CMD, Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd.
   2.   Shri Neeraj Misra, MD, HMT (Bearing) Ltd.
   3.   Shri Raji Philip, CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
   4.   Shri A.K. Bhattacharya, Hindustan Cables Ltd.
2.     Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and appraised them of the work done by the previous Committee
and the agenda to consider the Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 pertaining to Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public
Enterprises. In the pre-noon session the Committee interacted with the representatives of six PSEs. Members were appraised
of the constraints, expectations and prospects of these Units in new market scenario.
3.     Shri Raji Philip, CMD, Hindustan Paper Corporation informed the Committee about improving performance of the Unit.
However, among other issues he sought Committee’s urgent attention on the long pending demand for excise concessions on
the lines of petroleum refineries in the NE region. The HPC is facing locational constraints and shortage of Bamboo as raw
material as the Units have still not been allowed to take up Bamboo plantation in degraded land.
4.     Shri H.W. Bhatnagar , Chairman, BHEL, appraised  the Committee of the vision and mission of BHEL to become an
Indian Multi-national Engineering enterprise The Company sought level playing field through fiscal incentives vis-a-vis other
engineering majors entering into Indian market. The Company also asked for Government’s policy support in facilitating the
transfer of technology and also the duty incentives for using indigenous R&D products.
5.     Shri A. Mukharjee, CMD, Andrew Yule & Co. informed about the performance of the Company in recent years that was
adversely affected by the recession in Tea prices in international market. The Company seeks financial assistance to further
strengthen its recent improved performance.
6.     Shri Neeraj Mishra, MD, HMT( Bearing) Ltd., informed the Committee of improved prospects of the Company. The
Company’s financial performance suffered a setback due to lack of orders from tractor industry as also because of heavy
burden of dues of VRS optees.
7.     Shri G.P. Pandey, CMD, HEC, informed about the constraints faced by the Company due to change of management,
Trade Union activities, high cost of maintenance of equipments. He also informed the Committee about the steps taken to
improve productivity and reducing the cost of production.
8.     Shri A.K. Bhattacharya, CMD, HCL, informed the Committee about the pending unresolved issue between HCL and
BSNL that has affected the financial performance of the Company.
9.     The Committee heard the presentations of the representatives and made appropriate comments and observations on the
need to enhance their performance in order to meet their obligations towards national economy and social development.
10.   In the afternoon session, the Committee listened to presentation by the Secretary ,  Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public
Enterprises. Members were informed of the Government plans and policies particularly in the context of constraints faced by
the PSEs.
11.   A verbatim record of the meeting was kept. The witnesses then withdrew.
12.   The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
 
IV
FOURTH MEETING
         The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25
th
August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
         PRESENT
         Shri Santosh Bagrodia    —    Chairman
         RAJYA SABHA
   2.   Shri Surendra Lath
   3.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   4.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   5.   Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
         LOK SABHA
   6.   Shri Kailash Baitha

150th Report of The Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/150threport.htm[04-07-2016 12:47:19]
   7.   Shri Swadesh Chakraborty
   8.   Shri Subhash Desmukh
   9.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
10.   Shri Sunil Khan
11.   Shri Rajnarayan
12.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
13.   Shri Chandramani Tripathi
         SECRETARIAT
         Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
         Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
         Shri K.P. Singh, Under Secretary
         Dr. S. Sivakumar, Committee Officer
2.      The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the Meeting and apprised them of the agenda of the Meeting.
2.      Thereafter, The Committee took up following Reports for consideration: ----
(i)    146
th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in Maharashtra (Ministry of Small Scale Industries);
(ii)    147th Report on Credit Flow to SSI Sector in the Region of Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh (Ministry of Small Scale
Industries);
(iii)   148 th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings, Department of Public
Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises);
(iv)   149 th Report on MoU performance in respect of select Public Sector Undertakings in Civil Aviation Sector,
Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises);
(v)   150 th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises).
(vi)   151 th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises);
(vii)  152th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Agro and Rural Industries; and
(vii)  153rd Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
3.      After a brief discussion, all the obove Reports were adopted by the Committee with some modifications in the 151 st 
Reports on Demands for Grants (2004-05) pertaining to the Department of Heavy Industries (Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises).
4.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
4.1    *                                                                  *                                                                      *
5.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
6.      *                                                                  *                                                                      *
7.      The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M. to meet again on 1
st September, 2004.
 