Ind. 16/95 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENT~RY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY FOR 1995-96 
(Presented on the lStb May, 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DEL.HI 
May, 1995/Vaisakha. 1917 (Saka) 
··. 
, 

1. 
II. 
111. 
C ONTENTS 
CoMJ'Osmo N oF TilE CoM Mrrn:E ........................... . .... ... .. ... ....................... . 
R.uo ttT OF TI-ll COMMrrn: E ...................................... .. ... .... .. .. .. ... . ........ . .... . 
ANNEX URE (MlN U"I"eS OF TilE M Etmt< GS) ................. .. ..... ..... . ....... . .. .. ........... . 
P ACES 
(i) . (ii) 
1-9 
10--19 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
L Shri Ashok Mitra- Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Saoatan Bisi 
4. Smt. Chandrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri Bbubaneswar Kalita 
6. Shri Anil Kumar 
7. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
8. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
9. Shri V. Rajesbwar Rao 
10. Shri Raj Nntb Singh 
ll. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
12. Shri Nyodek Y onggam 
13. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
14. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
15. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
17. Shri Gurudas Kamal 
18. Smt. Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
19. Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil 
20. Shri Rama Krishna Konathul~ 
21. Shri K. Ramamurthy 
22. Shri Balin Kuli 
23. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
24. Shri Vishveshwar Bbagat 
25. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
26. Shri MullappaUy Ramachandran 
27. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwod 
28. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
29. Sbri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
30. Smt. Sumitra Mahajao 
31. Shri Rajendra Agnihoui 
32. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
33. Shri S.N. Vekaria 
34. Shri Ramdew Ram 
35. Shri Prabhu Dayal K.atheria 
36. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
RS2051 
(i) 

(ii) 
37. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
38. Shri Naval IGshore Rai 
39. Shri Manjay LaJ 
40. Shri Rasheed Masood 
41. Sml. Suseela Gopalan 
42. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
43. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
44. Shri P.G. Narayanan 
45. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satisb Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Shamsher Singh Ran a, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
RS20SI 

SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
I, the Chairman, Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, 
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report of the Committee 
on the Demands for Grants for 1995-96 of the Ministry of Industry. 
2. The Committee considered it important to seek views of the representative bodies of 
industry and chambers of commerce like the FICCI and the Cll in order tO rake a stock of 
the present as W4;11 as the likely industrial scenario that might emerge in th~ light of the 
reoent budget proposal of the Ministry of Industry. Besides, the Committee also got benefit 
of the v1ews of the representatives of central trade unions in the same context. 
3. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry (1995-96) as presented arc as under:­
(i) Demand No. S~ 
Department of Industrial Development 
Total Demand Rs. 783.97 crore (Voted) 
(ii) Demond No. 51 
Department of Heavy Industry 
Total Demand Rs. 259.96 crore (Voted) 
(iii) Demand No. 52 
Department of Public Enterprises 
Total Demand Rs. 1.62 crore (Voted) 
(iv) Demand No. SJ 
Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and 
Rural Industries 
Total Demand Rs. 9ro.72 crore 
Charged Rs. 35 lakhs 
Voted Rs. 960.37 crore 
4. The Committee also held detailed discussions with the Secretaries of all the four 
Departments of the Ministry of Industry in the context of Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry. 
s. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its sitting helcl on 8th May, 
1995. 
6. The Committee would like to offer a few prelimuw-y observations on the 
appropriations sought in recent years for the Ministry ot Industry relative to the overall 
magnitude of the Union budget. For instance, the size of the Union budget as proposed for 
1995-96 is around Rs. 1,66,000 crore, while if one were to add the Demands-for-Grants 
together for the four Departments constituting tJ1e Ministry ot Lndustry;-the Department of 
Industrial Development, the Department of Public Enterprises, the Department of Heavy 
[ndustry aod the Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries-it 
amounts to barely Rs. 1,600 crore, that is, less than one per cent of the aggregate 
appropriations sought. Many important industries, such as Steel, Mines,.Power, Petroleum, 
Textiles, Sugar, etc., are of course outside the purview of the Ministry of Industry. Even -;o, 
the relative smallness of the budgetary appropnatioos CDr industrial activities cannor but 
attract attention. The point will conceivably be made that, with increasing liberalisation, the 
1 

2 
government will henceforth have only a supervisory and monitoring role as far as industrial 
growth is concerned and therefore direct outlay on its part need not, and should not, be of 
any impressive magnitude. In the present phase of the country's industrialisation, it would 
nonetheless be hazardous to deny the significance of the guiding hand of the government in 
several strategic directions. There would be few supporters of the excessive bureaucratisation 
of rules and procedures pertaining to industry pursued in the past. The decision reached in 
appropriate quarters to pare down the scale of operations of public sector industrial units 
and, in some instances, to close them down bas also to be taken into !tccount. All this 
notwithstanding, the ,State, the Committee does not have the toast doubt, will need to 
continue to play a pi_votal part in propelling the country's economic growth. It will, in any 
case, has to stay in the field as promoter of the last resort; its blessings would also be called 
for should a private sector unit require resources to be tapped from financial institutions, 
including from external agencies. The role model India is constantly being urged to follow in 
the recent period is that of the East Asian countries including Japan, Korea, China and 
Singapore. Perhaps China belongs to a somewhat different category and her experience may 
not be particularly relevant for India given our vastly different socio-political structure. It is 
however difficult to ignore the instances of Japan, Korea and Singapore. ln the case of each 
of these nations, industrial growth has been largely dependent upon the directly 
interventionist role played by the government and various official agencies. The entire 
history of industrial resurgence in Japan in the post-World War·ll period is encapsulated in 
the activism of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry. Over the decades, it is this 
Ministry which has planned the overall framework of industrial growth, has arranged for 
subsidies and loans wherever necessary and bas been the catalytic agent for ensuring the 
coordination of monetary, fiscal and legislative policies for ensuring the fastest possible pace 
or industrial growth. 
6.01 The Committee bas taken note of the marked improvement in industrial output 
during 1994-95. ln the Committee's opinion, no particular reason however exists to feel 
overly confident about the general industrial situation. lf the data for the past four years are 
considered together, the compound rate of industrial growth works out to only around 3.5 
per cent, which is far below the rate of growth experienced in the 1980s before the economic 
reforms were initiated. Nor can the real ity be brushed aside that the excellent progress 
registered by the goods industries in 1994-95 has to be assessed against the negative rates of 
growth during the preceding three years. New endeavours and experiments with indusLrial 
policies and practices are therefore much called for. The authorities could in this context do 
no better than study the cumulative experience of Japan, Korea and rome of the smaller 
countries in East Asia. This experience bas one overriding lesson to convey; indusLrial 
development in East Asia has been l<lrgely a direct function of the presence, depending on 
ciscumstances either overt or demure, of the guiding hand of the government. If were to 
take a leaf out of East Asia's example it follows that budgetary appropriations for purposes 
of industrial growth deserve to be increased substantially from the current level of less than 
one per cent of the total government budget. 
6.02 The reason for arguing in the manner as above is not diCficult to explain. 
Throughout the 1980's, the rate of growth of industrial production had maintained a steady 
compound rate of growth of around 8 per cent per annum.· As just stated, the undoubtedly 
impressive recovery in 1994-95 notwithstanding, industrial production in the four years since 
1990-91 can hardly compare favourably with the performance in the preceding decade. With 
1990-91 as base the compound annual rate of growth for mining and quarrying works out to 
2.72 per cent, for manufacturing sector, it i s 3.53 per cent, and for electricity generation , 
7.35 per cent per, yielding an overall rate of industrial growth of only 3.95 per cent per 

3 
annum. As far :1~ the c~pit;~l 1.\0<.)CI\ sector •~ concerne d, the dose to 20 per cent rate of 
growth m 1994-95 ha• to h. a'-.e"cd again a' already noted. against the steep absolute 
decline in output durmg the three ea rlier year, , 
6.03 That um·erta111tie' IOlllll on the mdll'.trial (ront is borne out by the deep depres.~ion 
tn share prices m recent wee I.. .md the rclJtavely poo r response to new capital issues. Among 
supply con,train ts affcctmg ~rowth in recent year> it is important to mention the shortage of 
domestic savings. nae ovcrJII decline of domestic savings from the level of around 24 per 
cent toward the clo'e of the I 'ISO\ to roughly 20 pei cent last ye.•r is a datum which canno t 
be pushed under th,· tarpt·t The l ac ~ of adeq uate savings has. an the view of the 
Commiuec, exercised a l'u1111nuuu' prcs;urc on the availab ility o[ funds in the capatal 
markets. The govcrnana•nt h:t' ,•villcntly been caught in a dilemma. It has, 111 the course o f 
1994-95, 50ught to rcJucc; the rate: of interest so as to stimulate industrial produ ction. 
Liberalisation ho .. ·c-~r amplon the end or the regime of governmcnt ·dirccted fixat ion o r the 
inter est r;He strm:ture Th<' fn·c pby of market fon.:e~ encourJgcd in recent months has not 
however helped to lo.,.,cr the r.ttc of borrowing. The paucity of saving> has pushed the rate 
of interest for medium or lomg· tcrrn capat al to levels not altogether very far from 20 per cent 
ur thcreabouh A simtl4r '''t!l.tncs:. has been witnessed in the call money market too; the 
rate for call money durang th<' past \i x month~ has sometimes sho t up to even 50 to 75 per 
cent. thereby gnevomly tnhohotmg mdustrial actavny 
6.04 Were at po~,ibk t" c<~mpen,ate ior the short age o f domestic savings by a 
significantly largca· inflow of capita l from overseas for direct industrh•l outlays, the process of 
growth need not have been held bade But, as already discussed in the Twelfth Rcpo11 of 
the Committee, direct forctgn anvcstments have till now been considerably less than what 
was expected at the time the cmnumic reforms were introduced . Over the four years 1991· 
92 to 1994~95, inflow of direct foreign investment barely add> upto Rs. 6,000 nore . If one 
considers sepu,ately the mo~;t recent year for which datu are available. namely. 1994-95, 
dorect foreign investment dunng the year is \till less than Rs 3000 crore A~ a pmportion of 
$-rOS~ domestic product, this is equiva lent to not even onc·half of one per cent , while the 
decline in domestic savmgs since 1990-91, as already noted, i~ by as much as 4 per cent of 
gross domestic product A cl~ar need, In the Committee's view, therefore ~merges on the 
~upply side to augment industrial rupitul through active participation by tht government. To 
achieve the objective, budgetary appropriations of the departments Involved in the indusiiial 
process obviously ba v~ to be augmen ted in a major way. 
6.05 This conclusion the Committee has been led to is further confim•ed by another 
finding which has its roots to the phenomenon of demand. Private industrial investment in 
this country, the records suggest, ha5 trad itiona lly experienced a boost whe never the size of 
public investment has gone up; To repeat what has now become almost a cliche, public 
investment does not crowd out. but crowds in, privat e investment. For stimulating private 
Industrial Investment, which in turn could propel growth In output liS well as employment, it 
Is therefore Important to enlarge the scale of public investment as well, lind pari passu the size 
or the budgetary appropriations of the relevant depnrtonenls and minbtries. 
6.06 Another possability for expanding industrial investment deserves not be overloo ked. 
The s,uggestion has emanated from faarly responsible quarters that the inflow of foreign 
capital intended largely for portfolio investments should beyond a point be discouraged not 
only because this now partakes the Conn or hot money, but also because it discourages some 
of this money from going into direct investment for capacity expansion in the industrial 
sector , including for industrial infrastructures. The deployment of rascal measures, such as 
taxing the yields from portfolio in'·estmeots at rates hillher than prevalent at present and 
more rlgour In the in1posltlon or conditionalities, ror instance, those governing lock-In periods 
IllS* I 

--------=- = -- ---
4 
bas beerJ suggested In this connection. The Committee would urge that the suggestions are 
duly examined In appropriate quarters. 
6.07 The above discussion on the prospects of investment provides the comext for 
referring to the programme of disinvestment of the shares of public undertaking the 
government has undertaken since 1991-92. Eight separate tr~:nches of disinvestment of the 
equity of public sector industrial units, many of them coming under the jurisdiction of the 
Ministry of Industry, have been completed since the inception of the scheme. Even though 
the last issue in 1994-95 has met with a disa.ppointing response, the authorities have by and 
large succeeded in realising substantial sums from these disinvestments. For the current year 
too, and ambitious programme of disinvestment to the extent of Rs. 7,000 crore, almost 
equivalent to one per cent of the grosi domestic product has been announced. 
6.08 Two questions, in the Committee's view, are relevant here . The first relates to the 
procedure and modalities pursued for disinvesting the shares. In the early rounds, the 
Ministry of Finance and the Department of Public Enterprises between them would, it is 
understood, decide upon the choice of the profit -making undertakings the shares of which 
were to be disposed of; they would also decide on the proportion of the shares of each such 
undertaking that were to be placed in the market. The Ministry of Industry, for example, 
would only be informed subsequently about such decisions, even though units under its 
administrative control were involved. The situation has altered somewhat during the 
subsequent trenches, and the operational Ministries are now consulted at the time the 
disinvestment decisions are reached. Unfortunately the consultations, the Committee h~s 
ground for inferring, are still not much more than perfunctory . That apart, it is doubtful 
whether full transparency features the process of disinvestment. Certainly in the initial 
rounds 'recourse was taken exclusively of the expertise available with two financial 
institutions before deciding upon the prices at which the shares were to be disposed of. 
Several of the 'offer' prices were arrived at on the basis of assumptions which turned out to 
be wobbly in the extreme . The justification for fixing 'offer' prices which appeared to be 
abnormally low in the case of some of the equities of a number of units was that the public 
undertakings the shares of which were being unloaded were not previously listed in the share 
markets and no objective criterion was therefor available by which to decide upon a fair 
price. l11is, is the Committee's opinion, is a statement somewhat difficult to defend. The 
undertakings concerned had been operational for decades; they enjoyed a goodwill in the 
market and were making excellent profits; there were whys and ways of forming a judgment 
about a reasonable level of price the equity of such undertakings ought to have fetched in 
the market. According to reports circulating on the eve of the actual disinvestments, non· 
official quotations were not lacking either. The plea of the units not being listed in the share 
markets thus appears to be on the weak side. The Committee would proceed even further. 
The financial institutions the government, in its endeavour to sell the shates. operated 
through a group of brokers who had their nexus with the shate markets. It is altogether 
possible that the advice received {rom these brokers was biased in favour of partie~ to whom 
the shares were unloaded at relatively low prices. In any event, wbile the government has 
meanwhile introduced quite a few changes and emendations in the rules and procedures for 
share disbursement, many grey areas remain and introduction of more transparencies is 
called for. It would be desirable, In lhe view of the Committee, if either a special 
parliamentary body or the comprtoller and Auditor General Is asked to make a full review or 
the disinvestment operations undertaken till now and offer its considered views. 
6.09 There is an additional reason for the Committee to make this suggestion. The 
Indira Gandhi Institute for Development Rese:uch, founded by the Reserve Bank of India at 
RS20St 

• 
--- -
5 
Bombay and the ~edentials of which are impeccable, has completed a study of the 
disinvestments till the end of 1993-94. On the basis of certain assump tions, this study has 
concluded that the disinvestments of the shares of public undertakings during the various 
rounds of 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94 have in the aggregate caused a loss to the national 
exchequer amounting to staggering figure of Rs. 10,000 crore. It is indeed possible that the 
procedures followed In the study are not wholly unexceptionable; there could be SODl£ 
exaggerations in the estimate or the stated Joss to the enhequcr. But since public funds are 
Involved, it is Important that a further scrutiny is undertaken of what actually transpired In 
the course or share dlsinvestments during these rounds . 
6.10 The Committee would like to refer to a further aspect of the disinvestment 
operations. The proceeds from the disposing of the assets of profit-making public 
undertakings have till now been made use in entirety by the Ministry of Finance to narrow 
the government's budgetary gap. lt can be legitimately suggested that a proportion of these 
funds, which eventuated because of the sound foundation on which a number of public 
enterprises were established and which enable them to emerge as excellent market 
performers, should be used to bring back to health such other public undertakings which 
were currently in the red but which held out prospects of revival provided adequate finances 
were set aside for the purpose. The Committee would recommend that, from now on, one­
half or the aggregate yield from each tranche or disinvestment opcrallons should be 
earmarked Cor the rehabilitation and modernisation of sick public sector units the 
rchabilitatlon oC which has been considered to be technically feasible. 1C tbe suggestion is 
found acceptable, then, In the current year, oo the assumption or IU. 7,000 crore being the 
total sum targeted ror reallsstioo from disinvestments, as much as Rs. 3,500 crore ought to be 
made available for the revival and modernisation ol ailing public sector nnils. ManY of the 
problems tbe latter units are currently encountering could then disappear, and units such as 
the Bharat Heavy Elcctricals Limited, the Instrumentation Limited, the Heavy Engineering 
Corporation, the Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation, the Hindustan Machine Tools, 
Jessop and Company, Braithwaite and Company, etc. would have the problem of lack of 
liquid funds largely behind them. 
6.11 The emphasis the Committee is placing on the importance of addltionul funds both 
for new investment proposals as well as for reviving sick and closed units that arc capable of 
restoration has another dimension. Whatever data are available about employment in the 
organised sector suggests that, since the introduction of the economic reforms, the rate of 
absorption of workers in both the public and the private sectors has tapered off, and the 
number of job-seekers registered with the employment exchanges has tended to go up. Some 
of these disturbing trends are discussed in some detail in the Anllual Report of the Ministry 
of Labour for 1994-95. The estimGte of additional employment opportunities created since 
August, 1991, amounting to around 3,90.000 as extracted from !he data on industrial 
investment proposals, c;an hardly be taken to be m consonance with reality, for the estimate 
is based on the number of leiters of intent issued and do not offer any clue about 
investments actually undertaken and the <;orre:sponding increases in employment. Whatever 
extra employment has been taking place in the economy outside agriculture is taking place, 
the Committee believes, mostly in the small scale sector. 
6.12 It is against this background and particularly since schemes under the National 
Renewal Fund for retraining and ~eployment of workers has not taken off in any effective 
manner, that the Committee would be in favour of suggesting that due circumspection is 
exercised before decisions are taken to starve apparently loss-making public sector units of 
working capital funds. The problem or employment generation and employment retention 

- -
-- - -· - ---
6 
cannot be treated 111 a light-hearte d manner tn the prc~c nt ~tate of economy, for each 
additi on t o the army of the unemployed contribute ~ to suci:~l dbcontcnt which in turn 
threotens to assume dire forms affecting law and order. It is not C\cn necc,sary to raise here 
tl1e human aspects o( the p1oblent of aggravated unemployment 
6.13 Weighty reasons exist to be concerned over the slow progress of utilisation from out 
of the Nalional Renewal Fund. In the year 1992-93 a ~urn of Rs. 570 crore was utilised for 
retiring close to 40,000 work ers. The rate of utilisation dropped to Rs. 480 crore in 1993-94 
and involved the retirement of I~ than 32,000 workers. In 1994-95, there was a further 
dro1> m the rat e or utilisation; only an amounl or R s. 250 crore was avai led of to retire a 
little more than five thousand workers. That apart, utilisation from out of 1he NRF for re· 
deployment and retraining has been negligible for eac h of the years. In the circumstances, 
the nomma l allocation of Rs. 300 crore for 1995-96 from out of the NRF is bereft of much 
significance. Of this total alloealion, a sum of Rs. 250 crore i> earmarked for the purpose of 
the Volunwry Retirement Scheme and the residu e is for retrainin g progra mmes propo,ed to 
be underta ken on a pilot scale covering five locations m the coumry . This will not touc h 
even the fringe of the central problef11. 
6.14 A relevant question 10 ask here, in the opmton of the Commil!ce, is whether 
resou rces from the Nutional Renewal Fund could not be used dire ctly to meet the working 
capiwl needs and other requir ements for renewal and modernisation of struggling industrial 
units in instan ces where such modernisation and reha bilitatiOn would ensure the avoidance 
of further lay-off of workers. A part of the Fund is supposed to be used to create 
opportunities for reab sorption of workers who are d cmobili~ed . The fimmcing of working 
capital needs and procurement of equipme nt for revival would , in a manner of speaking , 
serve the '·cry same objective. The Comntillee would urge the government 10 examine the 
~uggestion. 
6.15 llte cornmiuee cannot also but note of the problems faced by loss-making pubhc 
sector unils wh1le their possible re-structuring is under examinatio n in the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction . Of the 49 public undertakings operating under the 
jurisdiction of the Depart ment of !Ieavy lndus1ry, with an overall 1nves1men1 exceeding Rs. 
5.000 crore and a workforce of more than 2,00,000. as many a~ thirty nine have been 
experienci ng a dismal profit nnd loss account Ill recent years. Ou1 of tht:l.e, twenty three 
units have in fuce been referred to the OIF!~. l11e time wkcn by the !31FR 10 offer its 
recommendation is however often protracted, and follow-up action oo the re<:ommendation 
has proved 10 be equally lugubriou s. The Com millee recommends that the Bur eau or Public 
Enterprises mny be assigned to lind out the reasons for the delay before decisions are reucbed 
by the UIFR, nod suggest a mechanism by wllich procedural dela ys could be signilicantly 
reduced. 
6. 16 The commiuee would like 10 raise the issue of the possible impact of the sharp 
downward adjustments in the rate s of import duty on a wide range of industrial products, 
including capital goods, ann ou nced in the course of the present ation of the current year's 
budget. ln so far as prices of imported intermediate goods and semi-fin ished products, 
decline in the domestic market as a result of tile lowering of import duties, the effect would 
be beneficial to a number of domestic indust ries. On the other hand, the fact thut the cap ital 
goods sector has been in the throes of a deep recession since 1990-91 cannot be undernoted . 
It is only in 1994-95 that the declining trend in capital goods output has been reversed . 
Whether the across-the-board and substantial, reductions in import duties on capita l goods 
would not adversely affect the domestic units is therefore an issue which deserves 10 be gone 
into. The disadvantage the lowering of import duties might generally cause would be even 

7 
more 8Qite in the case of a number of public sector units which specialise in the production 
of bo~ers, , turbines, generators, transformers and similar other equipment. The CommiUee 
would lilllllesl that the Ministry of Industry toters Into a dialogue wltb the Ministry of 
Finance IIJJd, ln case necessary with the Ministry or Commerce too, to ensure a periodic 
revle.- or the rates« dulles, so that, whenever necessary, further acijustments could be made 
In the rilles struc&Me. It would at the saate time suggesl that the Ministry or Finance be 
nquesUcl to !!'eke a cooUnuous review of the Impact ll'lso oC direct taxes and the reliefs and 
exempllOdS tb;.it are granted from time w time, such as were announced for the North-East 
lasl year, on the process or industrial growth and Its regional dispersion. 
6.17 The Committee had occasion to refer in its Twelfth Report to the host of problems 
raised by decisions taken at the official level to underwrite a minimum rate of return to 
foreign companies on their risk capital to be invested in the power rector, and which 
conceivably could be extended to foreign investments in other core and infrastructural 
industries as well. The underwriting is proposed to be accorded through government 
guarantees and counter-guarantees. There is little ambiguity in the point of view of those 
who are in favour of offering such an underwriting. The need for substantial investment in 
rt1e core and infrastructural sectors cannot be over-emphasised. The entire framework of 
intennedidate and long range growth of the economy as projected will be in jeopardy if 
investments of a sizeable magnitude do not begin t<1 take place with immediate effect in 
these sectors. Domestic resources are undoubtedly in short supply. In case foreign firms 
which have investible resources to spare, the requisite technology and willingness to invest in 
India were to insist that they be insured against the risk factor , since beggars cannot be 
choosers, the offer of guarantees and counter-guarantees is justified in the circumstances. 
6.18 A question can still be rai.sed-as was raised in the Committee's Twelfth 
Report-whether such guarantees and counter-guarantees could not also be offered to 
Indian parties who are willing to participate in competitve bidding with foreign companies on 
the basis of global tenders. The issue is then reduced to the desirability or otherwise of 
assuring a level playing field to prospective investors without discriminating between 
indigenous and foreign parties. lt has been argued before the Committee that a number of 
public sector units, particularly in the capital goods sector, are Cl!pable of holding their own 
ag;~inst foreign competition as long as they have no difficulty in arranging necessary working 
capital. Many of these units function under the direct auspices of the Ministry of Industry. 
They have posted the claim-and the data vouchsafe for the claim-that they suffer (rom 
huge excess capacity not because of lack of orders, actual or potential, but because no bank 
funds nor budgetary resources are made available to them for operating the plants. In such a 
situation, were guarantees and counter-guarantees equally forthcoming in t.heir case too, 
they, it is argued, would have been able to borrow money from the banks and other 
financial institutions on the basis of these guarantees 'and counter-guarJntees and thereby 
successfully executed the orders. This is a point of view which, in the opinion of the 
Committee, deserves to be examined with some care. The nation's resources were deployed 
in the past to build the assets of the public sector units. Non-utilisation of the capacity built 
into these units is an economic waste, especially where, in case the conditions are uniform 
and symmetrical, they are in a position to compete with foreign parties and even fulfil 
satisfactorily overseas. lt should, In the view of the Committee, be not unfair to request the 
government to arrange that conditions are mode equal for the different entrepreneurial 
entities occupying India's emerging Industrial landscape. The Committee is partkulurly 
anxious that industrial units in the Public Sedor, such as BREL which have bugr: excess 
capacity that can be put to good ust, if only not specincally discriminated against, should 
have their problems examined with due care and sympathy. 
RS:lOSt 

8 
6.19 Since direct foreign investments actually accruing have emerged as a crucial element in 
determining the overall thrust of the nation's industrial advance, precise data on such 
investments should be available on a regular basis. The matter wa~ already alluded in the 
Twelrth Report submitted by the Committee. Unfortunately, while data on foreign investment 
proposals approved by U1e government are published on a regular bus1s in great detail, including 
their industry-wise and State-wise breakdown, the corresponding details on actual direct foreign 
investments have yet to see the light of day. ludustry-wlst and State-wise data or lonigo 
investments actually fructifying are not, it is stated, 'centrally maintained'. To 'centrally 
maintain' such data should not be beyond the Ingenuity and resources of the govemment. The 
Committee hopes thiJ Important task will be expeditiously taken on band. 
6.20 In its earlier reports, the Committee had occasion to express concern at the slow pace of 
progress in the establishment of Growth Centres, which were projected to accelerate the pace of 
indu~trial growth in industrially backward areas. Of the total number of sc:venty Growth 
Centres originally envisaged in the Eighth Plan document, only 39 Centres have received formal 
sanction, but the actual functioning of the Centres is as yet only of a perfunctory nature, and 
budgetary allocations over the pa~t three years have remained largely unspent. lt Is Imperative 
that while the government should explore the feasibility of more locations for establishin~: Growth 
Centres In backward regions, the Centres which have been appraised and appro~ed ~ 
commissioned within 1 foxed lime-frame . The Committee would further recommend thai a 
country-wide survey be undertaken to locate zero-industry areas where Growth Centres could be 
set up and efforts launched to promote to begin with, ogro-based Industries In such areas . 
Separate allocations, the Committee r~els, should be specially earmarked tor the de~elopment of 
Infrastructure for agrG-based Industries. 
6.21 Another area of conltnuous concern is the scheme of transport subsidy to promote 
industrialisation in hilly, remote and inaccessible areas that was mtroduced in 1971 and has for 
the present run its course on March 31, 1995. The scheme has not, the Committee feels, 
received from the Union govemmentlhe attention it deserves, and there is a substantial backlog 
of claims carried from year to year. As in the previous years. the suggested budgetary allocation 
for the purpose for 1995-96 will be unable to cover in entirety the claims current a~ well as 
carried over. A request to the Ministry of Financ-e to add to the allocation would, In the 
Commiltet'l view, be fully justified. While occasional misuse of the transport subsidy scbrote 
have Indeed taken plnce, Its relevance for triggering orr ludustrlul growtb in remote o•·eas cunnot 
be drniPd. The scheme should therefore continue. the Commillee hopts the Minlstry utlndustry 
would be able to initiat10 measures whtreby the pn>eesslng or outstanding claims is substa ntially. 
expedited including, where•er nectSSar), direc. •on-account' payments to individual units. 
6.22 It would, m the Committee'< view, be 'llsn useful to examme whether the transport 
subsidy scheme could be integrated with the scheme for setting up Growth Centres so tha 
utilisation of fund.~ under both schemes get accelerated. The que51lon whether the creation or 
Model Industrial Towns In each state could act as an additional sllmulus to disperse industrial 
activities may also be examined In Ibis comvctlon. 
6.l3 The Committee would reiterate its view that, as far as creation of employment 
opportunities in the industrial sector are concerned, the small-scale industries continue to offer 
by far the largest scope. While the fruits of liberolisation can only fructify over a number of 
years, the demand for gainful employment is both acute and immediate and is bound to 
intensify; it is the small-sc.1lc sector which in large measure will have to accommodate the job­
seekers. Bes.idcs, this sector of economic activity which is currently responsible for as much as 
35 per cent of the country's exporu. The onus resting on the Department of Small-Scale 

9 
Industries and Agro and rural Industries is lllcrcfore heavy The Commillee stress the 
sl&nifieana: or such small scale and agro-based Industries as coir processing, handloom 
operations, diversi fication or jute fabrication etc. both from tbe point of view of employment 
generation and export promotion; concentnted research and development actlvilles to meet 
the cballtnges in these areas would appear to be essential. The recommendations of the 
Commillee in this connection would be as follows: (a) the supply or Inputs at fair price> musf 
be assured for each small-scale acllvlty taking place In the dilferent parts of the country; 
wherever necessary, a selective scheme ol sobsldl,lng lnpuiJ may be Ooated af'ler consultation 
•th the ~spective State governments; and (b) disblll"itment !If funds for stimulating new 
employment opportunities In the III\aU-scale ~ector, such as undtr the Prime Minister's 
Rozgar Yojana, be expedited and as far as po.'>Sible. the administration of these schemes be 
considerably decentral.lsed so that bollltoeeks, such as thOR involving the banks, could be got 
rid or. 
6.24 The main problem without question is the disbursal of funds from the banks after 
completion of the formalities. The Commluee recommends the strengthening or the 
monitorln ~lis at lhe State, district Lid block l~vds 10 speed up dl,hul'S31, and, in adallon, 
tile establishment of a monitoring agency at the centnl k!vd for maintaining proper and 
regular coordination. 
6.25 It is needless to atld that Khadi and village Industries will remnin as 3 major 
component of the effort to augment income and employment opprtumtes across-the-board in 
the country. Continuous monitoring or funds to this sub-sector therefore as.~umlo:; a heightened 
lignificance; the Committee hopes the Ministry ,.ould set up a special lmk force for the 
purpose. And there should be no strl~;nency In the avollabilily of cr~dlt facilities Cor smaD 
scale activities at the most liberal terms lbat ore considered feasible. 
6.26 As the country enters the era of rapid ind~liialisation, problems of environmental 
protection will incrc:asmgly come to the fore True, there is a dr.,artment sn the Union 
government specially entrusted With the rask oC monitonng growth·r •late issues concerning 
the protccll<•n of environment . But contlicts between the: interests of those who clamour Cor 
industnalisation whatever the cost and those concerned ubout the necessity to preserve and 
nurture the nation's bro-diversitics arc likely to prolifernte in future; n would be useful, the 
Committee feels, ll a speciol cell in the Ministry of Industry could devote itself excluslvecy in 
monitoring the issues as they ori.se. 
6.27 finally, the Commlltce would like to append a comment pertaining to the 
pn,grammes of work of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Commiuee in 
generaL One major objective underlying the establishment of the Commillce system as to 
e~<ure rh •t lbe Demands for Grants of individual Ministries are subjected 10 detailed 
suutiny b~ Members of Parliament. II is the a$Sumpuon that COIIJ.menls and suggc~tions 
emanating from lhe SU!nding Committee will be duly considered by the government. Should 
II however happen that the demand for grants of a partrcular Ministry does not come up for 
dJscussaoR an Parliament and as 'guillotined' in a routine mann~r, without the Standing 
oommittee's recommendations being referred to at all, much of the toil undertaken by the 
members of the Committee would appear to be 'in vain. It is to be hoped that this issue 
would be examined and given the attention it deserves 
New Dl!l.HI; 
8th May, 1995. 
ASFIOK MITRA 
CHAIRMAN, 
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDkNG COMMliTEE ON INDUSTRY. 

;r . .. , . .' 
ANNEXURE 
MINUfES OF THJ:: MEETINGS 
xxxm 
TIIIRTY·THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 5th April, 1995 in Committee 
Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitts-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Sanatao Bisi 
3. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
4. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
5. Shri Raj Nath Singh 
6. Shri K.K. Ve,rappao 
7. Shri Ish Dutt Y adav 
8. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
10. Shri Gurud1s Kamal 
11. Shri Balin Kuli 
12. Shri O!iranji Lal Sharma 
13. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri Udaysiograo Gaikwad 
15. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
16. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
17. Shri Man jay Lal 
18. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
19. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal. Committee officer 
WITNESSES 
l. R~prestntatives of F~deration of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
1. Shri A.K. Rungta, President 
2. Shri Y. P. Srivastava, Secretary 
10 
. 

-----~------ ------
II 
II Repuwllatives of Confederation of Indian Industry 
I. Shri Dccpak Singh, Chairman (NR) 
2. Shri Rajive Kaul, Vice-President 
3. Shri Oilip Chenoy , Director 
4. Shrlrnuti M. Roy, Sr. Director 
5. Shri S. S<·n, Sr. Director 
2 . •• •• 
3 . •• .. 
,.. . "'\ 
--
•• • • 
•• • • 
4. The Committee, thereafter. heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses 
on the performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in particular 
and the impact of recent budget proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines 
on indu,trial and economic growth. lltc Committee directed the witnesses to send an 
updated note on the various issues raised during the course of discussion . 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
5. The Commiuee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again at 10.30 a.m. on 6th April. 
1995. 
•• Relates 10 other mailers 

XXXIV 
TffiRTY -FOURTH MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 10.30 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995 in Commattee 
Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Sbri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
4. Sbri Raj Nath Singh 
5. Shri Ish Dutt Yadav 
LOK SAUIIA 
6. Shri G urudas Kama t 
7. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
8. Shri Balin Kuli 
9. Shri Manoranjun Bhakta 
10. Shri Vishveshwur Bhagat 
11. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
12. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
13. Shri Udaysingrao Gnikwad 
14. Sbri Hnrish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
15. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
16. Shri Ramdew Ram 
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
18. Sbri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Sbri Mohan Singh (Dcoria) 
20. Shri Manjay Lal 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Shri P.G Narayanan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Salish Kumar, Join t Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee officer 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of All India Trade Union Congress 
1. Sbri A. B. B ardhan , Genera l Secretary 
2. Shri B.D. Jos hi, Secretary 
2. The Committ ee h eard the oral evidence of the above mentio ned witnessess on the 
12 
-~-------------=~--~ 

13 
performance of industrial sector in general and Steel and Mines sectors in particular and the 
imapct of recent budget proposals relating to Ministries of Industry, Steel and Mines on 
industrial and economi c growth. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 a.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on 7th April, 
1995. 
• 
i 

1 
FIRST MEETING 
The Comminee met at 2.30 p.m. on Monday. the 17th April. 1995 in Room No 139. 
Parliament Hou:.e Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SADHA 
2. Shri R;undus Agarwal 
3. Shri Sanatan Bi~i 
4. Shrimuti Chundrika Abhinandan Jain 
5. Shri Bhubancswar Kalitu 
6. Shri Govind Ram Mirl 
7. Shri V. Rajcshwar Rao 
8. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
9. Shri Ish Dull Yadav 
LOK SAUIIA 
10. Shri Gurudas Kamal 
11. Shri Manoranjan llhakt;l 
12. Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 
l3. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
14. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
15. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
16. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
17. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
18. Shri V. DhananJaya Kumar 
19. Shri Prabhu Dayal Kathcria 
20. Shri Satyanarayan Jati)'U 
21. Shrimati Suscela Gopalan 
22. Shri Naval Kishore Rai 
23. Shri Tcj Narayan Singh 
24. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
25. Shri Manjay Lal 
26. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G.K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jugmohan Sundriyal, Comm ittee Officer 
14 
• 

15 
WITNESSES 
Represenratives of Ministry of Industry, (Department of lndusrrial Development). 
1. Shri M.C. Gupta, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajit Kumar, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser 
3. Shri T.S. Vijayraghavan,. Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Rakesh Mohan, Economic Adviser, 
5. Shrimati Pratibha Karan, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Prabhat C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
8. Shri T.S. Narasimahan, Joint Secretary 
9. Shri A.K . Ahmed, Director 
10. Shri Kush Verma, Director 
11. Shri Lakshman Das, Director 
12. Shri Utpal Ghose, Director 
13. Shri K.M. Shahid, Deputy Secretary 
2. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in 
connection with the Demands for Grants (1995-96) relating to the Ministry of Industry 
(Department of Industrial Development). The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish 
the information on the points raised during the meeting at the earliest for its c~sideration . 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on 18th 
April, 1995. 
• 

II 
SECOND MEETrNG 
The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 18th April, 1995 in Committee Room 
'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ashok Mitra--Chatrm an 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalil~ 
4. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
S. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
6. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
LOK SABRA 
7 Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Manoranjan Bbalaa 
10. Shri Oliranji Lal Sharma 
11. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
12. Shri M. Baga Reddy 
13. Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
14. Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan 
15. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 
16. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
17. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
18. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
19. Shri Purna Chandra Malik 
20. Shri Naval Kishore Rat 
21. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
22. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
23. Shri Manjay Lal 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G. K. Saksena, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Sbri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
16 
• 

(' 
17 
WITNESSES 
R~presentatives or Ministry of Industry, (Department or Heavy Industry and Inpartment or 
Small Scale Industries and Aero and Rural Industries) 
I. Department of Heavy Industry 
1. Shri T.R. Prasad, Secretary 
2. Shri Ajit Kumar, AS&FA 
3. Shri Rakesh Mohan, Economic Adviser 
4. Shri A.K. Mobapatra, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri D.C. Samant, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Aoup Mukherjee, Joint Secretary 
7. Shri V.K. Mutreja, Director 
8. Shri V.D. Va~ani, Deputy Director 
9. Sbri K.M. Shahid, Deputy Secretary 
10. Shri S.C. Srivastava, Deputy Secretary 
II. Department of Small SCJJle Industries and Agro and Rural Industries. 
l. Shri T.R. Prasad, Secretary (Additional Charge) 
2. Shri Brahm Dutta, Joint Secrctay 
3. Shri S.A.T. Rizvi, Development Commissioner (S.S.I.) 
4. Shri C.S. Prasad, Economic Adviser 
5. Shri M. Sahu, Director 
6. Shri K.S. Shelly Adviser (Planning) 
7. Shri K.K. Gupta, Financial Adviser (K. V.l.C .) 
2. The Committee beard the oral evidence of the above mentioned witnesses in connection 
wit:1 the Demands for Grants (1995-96) relating to the Department of Heavy lndustry and 
Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural lndustries. The Committee 
directed the witnesses to furnish the information on the points raised during the course of 
discussion at the earliest for its consideration. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m. to meet again at 2.30 p.m. on 19th April, 
1995. 
• 

b - -
III 
TIDRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Monday, the 19th Apri l, 1995 in Committee Room 
·A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Asholi: Mit:ra-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
3. Maulana Habibur Rahman Nomani 
4. Shri Shivajirao Giridhar Patil 
S. Shri K.K. Veerappan 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri K.H. Muoiyappa 
7. Shrimati Kesharbai Sonajirao Kshirsagar 
8. Shri Rama Krishna Konathala 
9. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
10. Shri RaJendra Agnihotri 
11. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
12. Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria 
13. Shri Puma Chandra Malik 
14. Shri Tej Narayan Singh 
15. Shri Mohan Singh (Deoria) 
16. Shri Manjay Lal 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shrt G.K. Saksena. Deputy Secret ary 
3. Shri S.S. Rana, Under Secretary 
4. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal. Committee Officer 
2. The Committee held a general discussion on the Demands for Grants in respect of 
three Ministries i.e. [ndustty , Steel and Mines for the year 1995-96 and considered the points 
it would like to highlight in itJ; reports. After some discussion, the Committe e. dir,;.;!cd the 
Secretariat to prepare draft reports on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) in the light or the 
views expressed by the Members. 
3. •• •• •• •• 
A summary of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee, then, adjourned at 3.15 p.m. 
••Relates to other mauers. 
18 
t 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 5.00 p.m. on Monday, the Stb May, 1995 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Deihl. .. · 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ashok Mitre-Chairman 
MEttmERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanatan Bisi 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Nyodelc Yonggam 
5 Shri lsh Dutt Yadav 
6. Shri Govind Ram Miri 
LOK SABUA 
7. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
8. Shri Gurudas Kamal 
9. Shri Balin Kuli 
10. Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad 
11. Shri Barish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
U. Smt. Sumitra Mahajan 
13. Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar 
14. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya 
15. Shrimati Suseela Gopalan 
16. Sbri P.G. Narayanan 
17. Shri Bolla Bulli Ramaiah 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri S. S. Rana, Under Secretary 
3. Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered the draft Sixteenth report relating to Demands for Grants 
(1995-96) of the Ministry of Industry and after some discussion adopted the report 
unanimously. 
3. 'Ole Committee decided to present the report on the 15th May, 1995 to Parliament. The 
Committee authorised the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shri Isb Dutt 
Yadav, M.P. to present the report in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan and 
Shri Udaysingrao Gaikwad, M.Ps. to lay a copy of the report on the Table of the Lolc 
Sabha. 
4. The Committee the n adjourned at 5.40 p.m. 
19 