Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON INDUSTRY
REPORT NO. 
240
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2013)  
Action Taken Note on the 235th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2012-13)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INDUSTRY
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT
Action Taken Note on the 235th Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2012-13)
Pertaining to the Ministry of Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on  21 st March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ........................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—19
(i) Chapter–I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the
Ministry ............................................................................................................... 2
(ii) Chapter–II
Recommendations/Observations,
 which the Committee  does not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......................................... 3—5
(iii) Chapter–III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which the Committee has
either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked the
Ministry to review its replies ......................................................................... 6—7
(iv) Chapter–IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect
 of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received .................................................................... 8—19
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st August, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
2. Shri Narendra Budania
3. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
4. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
5. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
6. Shri Basawaraj Patil
7. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vivek Gupta
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Shri M. P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala
12. Shri Khiladi Lal Bairwa
13. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
14. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
15. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
16. Shri Hassan Khan
17. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
18. Shrimati Ingrid Mcleod
19. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
20. Shri Somen Mitra
21. Shri P. R. Natarajan
22. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
23. Shri Jayaram Pangi
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
25. Shri B. Y . Raghavendra
26. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
27. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
28. Ch. Lal Singh
29. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
30. Shri E. G . Sugavanam
31. Shri Ramsinh Rathwa
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry,
having been authorized by the Committee, hereby present this Two Hundred and Fortieth Report
on Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the
recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Thirty-Fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2012-13).
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the Action
Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two Hundred and Thirty-Fifth
Report.
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the 19
th March, 2013 considered and adopted the
report.
TIRUCHI SIV A
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
19th March, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Industry.

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee’s Two
Hundred and Thirty-Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) pertaining to Ministry of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. These have been
categorized as follows:
Chapter-I –  The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.
The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in the Chapter–I of the Report.
Chapter-II –  The recommendations/observations, which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies.
In respect of these recommendations the Committee is convinced with the logic and
explanations advanced by the Ministry and therefore do not want to pursue them for the present.
Chapter-III –  The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply.
The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations
contained in Chapter–III and desires that the Ministry should furnish logical explanations therefore.
Chapter-IV –  The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Ministry have not been received.
In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter–IV , the Ministry has either furnished the
interim replies or couched its language in vague terms like noted for compliance/guidance,
therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish Action Taken Notes in respects
of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and
spirit of the recommendations of the Committee.
3. The details of the ATR are being discussed in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee therefore recommends the Government to consider enhancing the allocation
for providing assistance for setting up of marketing complexes, exclusively for KVIC products not
only in metro cities but also in state capitals. (Para No. 40)
Action Taken/Comments
An umbrella scheme for marketing and publicity named ‘Market Promotion (including export
promotion) & Publicity’ has been proposed in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, in which a new
component for developing ‘Marketing Complexes/Plazas’ has also been proposed.
2

3
CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee strongly recommends that policies must be adopted whereby the MSMEs
showing good performance would get enhanced credit automatically. (Para No. 27)
Action Taken/Comments
The recommendation of the Committee was taken up with the RBI, Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) & Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI). The RBI has informed
that Bank Boards have been given freedom to frame their own policies based on their commercial
judgment. Further, IBA has informed that hassle free credit enhancement can be made available to
MSME units showing good performance consistently. However, it would not be possible for banks
to sanction higher limits without going through a review/renewal process. The limits are fixed
based on the projected turnover.
As per SIDBI’s Loan Policy, no deserving and bankable proposal is denied assistance.
Accordingly, SIDBI provides enhanced credit to viable projects/good performing MSMEs.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee appreciated this suggestion which would promote the synergy between the
large and small industries and feels that such synergy would actually promote research and
development capabilities of the MSMEs and encourage innovation. The Committee strongly
recommends for measures for establishing synergy between the large industries and MSME sector.
(Para No. 28)
Action Taken/Comments
It pertains to the proposal/idea of association for providing tax benefits of certain
percentage to the large industries if they buy minimum percentage of goods and services from
MSMEs sector.
The proposal needs to be examined by Ministry of Finance. This Ministry proposes to send
this as part of budget proposals annually sent to Ministry of Finance.
Regarding other measure for establishing synergy, the procurement policy has been
formulated whereby Government and Public Sector body are required to procure 20% of their
procurement requirement from the SME sector.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is of the opinion that the MSME Ministry has fallen short of the target
(under KVI). At a time when skill development is being emphasized by the Government and the
Ministry is one of the key nodal Ministries for developing the skill of the youth, it is sad to note
3

4
that it has not been able to meet the target. The Committee strongly recommends for measures to
achieve the target in this respect. (Para No. 36)
Action Taken/Comments
Against the target of 90,000 persons, KVIC had imparted training to 1,07,490 (provisional)
persons in 2011-12 under its programmes for skill development [including Entrepreneurship
Development Programme (EDP) training under Prime Minister’s Employment Generation
Programme (PMEGP)]. An ambitious target of training 1,40,000 persons has been fixed for the
year 2012-13.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee feels that the establishment of six Central Sliver Plants are not adequate. It
recommends that the Government should consider for opening of new godowns in each State for
ensuring uninterrupted supply of raw material. (Para No. 37)
Action Taken/Comments
KVIC is arranging, under Khadi Reform and Development Programme (KRDP), introduction
of Public Private Partnership (PPP) in the existing Central Sliver Plants (CSPs) whereby major
khadi institutions/federations will be initiated to run the CSPs to increase production as well as
bring down raw material conversion cost. Additional CSPs will be duly considered on the basis of
need and availability of resources.
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee feels that to increase the sale of the coir products, it is important to expand
the sales network all over India. (Para No. 47)
Action Taken/Comments
The total sales of coir and coir products through Coir Board Showrooms and Sales Depots
during the year 2011-12 was Rs.13.87 crore. For the expansion in the sales network of coir and
coir products all over India, concerted efforts in aggressive marketing are being made. Exclusive
coir expos are proposed in major cities of the country. The Showrooms of the Coir Board are also
proposed to have a uniform, modern look, showcasing the entire range of coir products. Eco Mark
for coir products is being actively pursued with Ministry of Environment and Forests. Coir Mark
Scheme is also being strengthened to cover the entire coir products sold in the domestic market
so as to ensure the quality of coir products.
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee appreciates the overall working of the Coir Board in export promotion and
recommends timely and hassle free approval of the Government to the participants in Trade Fair/
Exhibitions. (Para No. 48)
Action Taken/Comments
To ensure timely and hassle-free approvals on the participation of the Coir Board in trade
fairs/exhibitions, in-principle selection of fairs in established markets as well as in the niche

5
markets, both, is made in the beginning of the financial year itself so that necessary action for the
booking of space, etc. could be taken by the Coir Board in time.
Efforts are being made for increasing the number of entrepreneurs participating in each
international fair so that, on the one hand, the participation in each fair is more cost-effective and,
on the other hand, the targets are fully achieved.

6
CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee
has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry or has asked
the Ministry to review its replies
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind non-utilization of funds. It is
important that the Ministry must use the money allocated to it for meeting its targets. The
Committee would like to get an explanation from the Ministry in this regard. (Para No. 14)
Action Taken/Comments
Most of the schemes of this Ministry are demand driven and hence, target for the scheme
for the forthcoming years are based on projected demands. Every MSME-DIs were assigned target
annually i.e. number of MSEs to be given benefits in their areas. Funds allocated under marketing
support scheme could not be utilized by field offices as no more MSEs having bar code
certification came forward for claiming reimbursement.
Further Recommendation/Observation
Considering the scope and role of MSME sector in national economy, such reasons
for underutilization of scarce funds betray the lack of scope and preparation before
launching such Schemes. The structure of Scheme is complex incomplete and the
implementing agencies are unable to use the resources and opportunities. Not enough effort
have been made to generate awareness about this scheme by local agencies. The Committee
is also of the view that such Schemes should have component for cost of manpower to
enable the implementing agency to high adequate and skilled manpower.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee feels that the schemes discontinued could have been implemented initially on
a pilot basis. It is rather deplorable that adequate planning was not made to start such schemes
which sounded quite good. The committee feels that the plans must be devised by the Ministry by
taking into account its Vision and Mission which have been so eloquently outlined by the Ministry.
(Para No. 16)
Action Taken/Comments
This Ministry has discontinued various schemes viz. Vertical Shaft Brick Klin (VSBK),
WTO, Bio-Tech, Scheme for Tailor made courses for new entrepreneurs through select business
schools/Technical Institutes, to support 5 select universities/colleges to run 1200 Entrepreneurship
Clubs, Training cum Product Development Centres, Scheme for Capacity Building during 2012-13.
Since these schemes were having limited scope and could not achieve the desired targets, these
have been discontinued. However, by taking into the broader vision in mind, these schemes have
been subsumed into various schemes proposed in the Twelfth plan with exploring the widen
objectives and scope taking into account the vision and mission of the Ministry.
6

7
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Committee finds such replies as an attempt to discover and discard the Schemes
designed by the Ministry itself. The committee would like to be apprised as to how these
schemes have been subsumed in Twelfth Plan.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee has taken note of the fact that the MSMEs do not have a level playing
field with the other large corporate sectors. Even the common complaint is that the tax rates are
skewed in favour of the imported items. As a result, they find it difficult to compete with the
industries which import goods from the foreign countries. This is a suggestion which deserves
serious and focused attention. The Committee would like to get a detailed explanation on this
issue. (Para No. 43)
Action Taken/Comments
The tax incidence on inputs sourced by MSMEs from domestic supplies, as compared to
the tax incidences on inputs imported by large corporate needs to be studied in order to establish
whether large corporate indeed have a cost advantage of paying lower taxes. However, it may be
noted that low tax rates on import of inputs puts pressure on domestic suppliers of inputs to
reduce prices, which in turn benefits MSMEs. The bottom line, however, is that MSMEs must
increase their competitiveness.
Government has taken several steps to increase the competitiveness of MSMEs. These
includes launching of National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme (NMCP), enactment of
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006, credit and
infrastructure support, technology up-gradation, skill development, cluster development, marketing
support and public procurement policy for micro and small enterprises.
Further Recommendation/Observation
The Ministry in its reply has not addressed the issue comprehensively. The MSME
also require level playing field to remain competitive vis-à-vis low duty imports.

8
CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Ministry have not been received
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee strongly feels that a critical and strategic sector like the MSME deserves
higher allocations of funds from the Planning Commission. The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
while presenting the National Awards to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on 28th August, 2009,
reiterated Governments’ commitment to “support, nurse and encourage this very important segment
and sector of our economy”. The sharp curtailment of the proposals of the MSME Ministry by the
Planning Commission is not in consonance with the vision of the Prime Minister to “support, nurse
and encourage this very important segment and sector of our economy”. When the country glowingly
acknowledge the vital role of MSME sector to increase productivity, enhance exports, create
employment opportunities, develop skills of our youth and promote inclusive growth, it is important
to give substantially higher allocation to the MSME Ministry. (Para No. 9)
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee feels that allocation of inadequate funds for the MSME Ministry is an
indication of the mind set of the concerned organization of the Government which is more aligned
to the corporate sector than the MSME sector. Given the importance of the MSME sector for our
economy, the Committee strongly recommends for the change of such mind set on the part of the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for strengthening the MSME Ministry and the
MSME sector. (Para No. 10)
Action Taken/Comments on Para No. 9 and 10
Ministry of MSME proposed an outlay of Rs. 6770.40 crore for 2012-13 in its action plan
to Planning Commission. Planning Commission has assessed the requirement of funds for the year
2012-13 based on the expenditure incurred for the 2011-12 in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. As per
the record, the expenditure of M/o MSME for the year 2011-12 is Rs.1934.42 crore. M/o MSME
has been allocated a budget of Rs. 2835.00 crore for the on-going schemes including Rs. 100.00
crore for National Innovation Fund, which is 46.5% higher than expenditure done by the Ministry
during 2011-12. Thus the adequate budgetary outlay has been provided to the Ministry. This
Ministry has proposed an outlay of Rs. 64,790.00 crore for the Twelfth Plan.
Further Observation
The Committee would like to know if Ministry would require additional funds in
Supplementary Demand or has made savings. The Committee may also be informed of
quarter-wise release of Plan and Non-Plan funds.
Recommendation/observation
3. The Committee demands an explanation from the Ministry to enable it to understand the real
reasons behind such shortfall. (Para No. 12)
8

9
Action Taken/Comments
The under utilization of budgetary funds was attributed to the fact that many schemes are
demand driven. Budgetary funds could not be disbursed to beneficiaries as some of them did not
come forward to avail the benefits of some of the schemes viz.  Implementation of Lean
Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme; Promotion of ICT Tools in MSME Sector; Setting up
of Mini Tool Rooms under PPP Mode Technology; Upgradation and Quality Certification Support
to MSMEs; Support for Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of SMEs through Incubators;
Enabling manufacturing Sector to be competitive through Quality Management Standards and
Quality Technology Tools; Marketing Assistance and Technology Upgradation and MSME cluster
development programme.
International Cooperation Scheme and Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana also had their
funds underutilized for the reason of being demand driven schemes. Moreover, under the
International Cooperation Scheme, many applications could not be processed due to non-receipt of
requisite documents from the applicant organization. Under utilization of budgetary funds was also
on account of inadequate support from partner agencies. Thus funds under ‘Upgradation of data
base’, was under utilized as Census Survey could not be conducted for want of necessary inputs
from the State Governments. Funds under ‘Capital Outlay on Public Works’ could not be utilized
owing to the inability of CPWD to complete the works on time.
Underutilization of funds under Khadi Reforms and Development Programme was due to
non-fulfillment of the conditions given in the Policy Matrix for release of funds. Funds earmarked
for erstwhile Prime Minister Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) and Rural Employment Generation Programme
(REGP) remained largely unspent due to non-receipt of the requisite certificates from RBI and
KVIC as per the conditions laid down by the Expenditure Finance Committee and as approved by
the CCEA. The Ministry is emphasizing on RBI and KVIC that the requisite certification may be
furnished on timebound priority.
Under the Coir Sector’s ‘Rejuvenation, Modernization and Technology Upgaradation of Coir
Industry (REMOT) scheme, the funds could be only partly released as certain pre-requisites under
the scheme such as empanelment of machinery manufacturers and endline physical verification (as
per the operational guidelines), took longer time to complete than anticipated. The implementation
of the scheme subsequently has picked up.
Evaluation of all the above schemes is being done by an independent third party agency and
the schemes would be modified, if required, based on the results of the evaluation.
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised of outcome of such evaluation by third party agency.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The committee strongly recommends that more money must be allocated for establishment
of tool rooms across the country. It is understood that the MSME Ministry is also approaching
the concerned organizations within the Government to get loans from the International Financial
Institutions. If the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry cannot allocate more funds for
this purpose, then necessary permission to the MSME Ministry to get access to borrowings from
other International Banks may be given without any delay. However, it is strongly recommended
that we must use our own resources for this cause which is good for the youth of our country
and the MSME sector. (Para No. 19)

10
Action Taken/Comments
Under Tool Room scheme, an allocation of Rs. 55.00 crore (BE) was made during
2011-12 and with the enhancement of Rs. 3.00 crore an amount of Rs. 58.00 crore (BE) has
been allocated during 2012-13. Considering the need of establishing more mini Tool Rooms in the
country and non-availability of enough budgetary resources, M/o MSME have approached
M/o Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) and Planning Commission seeking their approval for
having access to multilateral funding from World bank/ADB to the tune of US $350 million for
XII Plan.
Further Observation
The Committee would like to be apprised on the utilization of the allocation. Given
the possibility that the Ministry underutilizes its allocation in other schemes, a possibility
could be explored to use the saving to bridge the resource gap for Tool Room Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
5. People are queuing up to get facilities under PMEGP, but the Committee finds that the
money allocated to subsidized the margin money has not been fully utilized. The Ministry of MSME
must explain the reasons behind non-utilization of the money. (Para No. 22)
Action Taken/Comments
As per the latest available figures, the RE for margin money subsidy in 2011-12 was fully
utilized as follows:
During the year 2011-12, the Budget Estimates under Prime Minister’s Employment
Generation Programme (PMEGP) were Rs. 1037 crore [Rs.800 crore for Margin Money Subsidy
+ Rs.237 crore for Backward and Forward linkages (including Rs. 205.71 crore for residual
liabilities of erstwhile PMRY and REGP)] and the same were enhanced at Revised Estimates (RE)
stage to Rs. 1215.95 crore [Rs. 978.95 crore for Margin Money Subsidy + Rs. 237 crore for
Backward and Forward linkages (including Rs. 205.71 crore for residual liabilities of erstwhile
PMRY and REGP)]. A total of Rs. 1057.06 crore (Rs. 978.95 crore + Rs. 31.29 crore =
Rs. 1010.24 crore for Margin Money Subsidy + Rs. 46.82 crore for residual liabilities) were
released to KVIC. Rs. 31.29 crore was utilized for Margin Money Subsidy from the amount
earlier earmarked for Backward and Forward linkages. Rs. 205.71 crore – Rs. 46.82 crore =
Rs. 158.89 crore of the amount earmarked for residual liabilities of erstwhile PMRY and REGP
could not be released because of lack of requisite certification from KVIC and RBI. The total
Margin Money utilized in 2011-12 was Rs. 1058.51 crore (including un-utilized balance funds of
previous year). Hence, not only the allocation of Rs. 978.95 crore for Margin Money Subsidy
in 2011-12 was released fully but additional allocation of Rs. 31.29 crore was also made from
the unutilized funds originally earmarked for Backward and Forward linkages.
Further Observation
The Committee notes that the annual targets for number of projects to be financed
under the Scheme have consistently been missed. What is more disconcerting is the fact
that the targets have been reduced every successive year. In year 2010-11, against a target
of setting up 66,000 micro enterprises, only 49,000 enterprises were assisted, this target was
further reduced to 43,000 units for 2011-12 but achievement upto 31.12.11 was even lower
at 28,000 units.

11
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee is happy to note that the allocation for this programme is increasing on a
year to year basis. However, it notes that this increase is not in proportion to the demand from
the youth of our country for setting up of projects under PMEGP. Taking into account the increase
in budgetary allocation, the Committee strongly recommends that he ceiling limits for the projects
which are being set up under this programme must be enhanced. In this context, it recommends
that while ceiling limit for the manufacturing sector must be increased from Rs. 25 to Rs. 50 lakhs,
such limits in case of service sector may be increase from Rs. 10 to Rs. 15 lakhs. The Committee
is satisfied to note that projects under the PMEGP are being electronically monitored right from
the application stage to the establishment of the unit. This online tracking system has enabled the
implementing agency to ensure transparency and accountability. The Committee also observe with
satisfaction that those beneficiaries under the PMEGP who have been trained and passed out from
National Small Industries Corporation, National Institute for Entrepreneurs and Small Business
Development and MSME Development Institute would be exempted from undergoing entrepreneur
development programme under PMEGP. (Para No. 25)
Action Taken/Comments
Enhancement in ceiling of project cost will be duly examined for competent decision when
the scheme is appraised for continued implementation in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Further Observation
The Committee also notes that against a stated target of creating 38 lakh additional
employment opportunities during Eleventh Plan, till end of February, 2012, only 15 lakh job
opportunities were created. In view of above were utilization of allocation should not a relevant
standard is measuring the implementation of Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee regrets that even the public sector banks have failed to reach out to the
micro sector by providing adequate credit to it. This is an alarming phenomenon which would
lead to stunted and arrested growth of the micro enterprises. The Committee strongly
recommends that the Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of MSME must monitor the credit
being issued to the micro sector and take measures to increase the volume of credit to this
sector. (Para No. 26)
Action Taken/Comments
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs,
scheduled commercial banks have been advised by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to achieve the
share of Micro enterprises in MSE lending of 60% in stages viz., 50% in the year 2010-11, 55%
in the year 2011-12 and 60% in the year 2012-13 with 10% annual growth in the number of
micro enterprise accounts and also 20% year-on-year growth in MSE lending. The Reserve
Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on quarterly basis. RBI has
taken up the matter with the banks that have failed to achieve the targets prescribed by the Task
Force.
Further Observation
The Committee would like the Ministry to obtain the status report in this respect
from the RBI.

12
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee has noticed that during the year 2005-06 KVIC was allocated total plan
budget of Rs. 400-500 crores. Now keeping in view the need as well requirement and potential the
KVIC the plan budget allocation has been increased by the Government to the tune of 1565.54
crores in the year 2012-13. The Committee feels that sufficient and skilled manpower is key to
successful implementation of the Schemes and Programmes. KVIC has accepted the challenge with
its present manpower but the work has also increased manifold and KVIC has to come to the
expectation of the Government. In view of this it seems difficult to cope up the work pressure
with existing staff strength. It therefore, recommends that the number of officers and staff should
also be increased in KVIC in proportion to the budget allocated to achieve the targets and utilize
the budget to the full extent. (Para No. 30)
Action Taken/Comments
A study on manpower (staff and officers) in KVIC was concluded by the Staff Inspection
Unit (SIU) of Ministry of Finance in January, 2012. The Ministry has forwarded its
recommendations to KVIC with the approval of competent authority for implementation. SIU has
recommended creation of certain additional posts and reduction in the existing strength of certain
other posts; overall the existing strength is recommended to be reduced from 2410 to 2168,
inclusive of 85 leave reserve posts.
KVIC has taken up the matter with Department of Expenditure for reconsideration of the
assessment made by SIU and for approving a staff strength of 2435 under various categories as
proposed by KVIC for smooth functioning and effective implementation of the KVI programmes.
Further Observation
The Committee has always apprehended that with its existing manpower and
network, whether KVIC could effectively implement ambitious schemes like PMEGP at all
India level. The Committee is of the opinion that such Schemes should have a built in
component for the provision of human resources required to implement and monitor the
performance. Ignoring human resource is the biggest folly which led to underachievement
of Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee is of the view that in changing Indian scenario of high growth of the
economy and stiff competition from the corporate giants, training system in KVIC needs
improvement through development of appropriate courses, introduction of new courses,
improvement in infrastructure equipment and adoption of improved technology and training of
trainers. (Para No. 31)
Action Taken/Comments
KVIC had imparted training to 107,490 (provisional) persons in 2011-12 under its
programmes for skill development [including Entrepreneurship Development Programme(EDP)
training under Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme(PMEGP)]. An ambitious target
of training 1,40,000 persons has been fixed for the year 2012-13 in pursuance of target fixed by
the Prime Minister’s National Council on Skill Development. Standardization of existing courses,
introduction of new and potential courses, training of trainers, adoption of improved technology and
system of feed-back from, and tracking of, the trainees, etc., are proposed to be duly addressed
in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.

13
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised as to how the vocations and centres for skill
development chosen and what is the cost of training per candidate.
Recommendation/Observation
10. The Committee notes that the reduction of the funds for the Khadi sector is a matter of
serious concern. In the aforementioned paras, the Committee has taken note of the fact that the
banks have not been issuing adequate credit to the micro sector. As per the above table, the funds
coming from the Government to the Khadi sector which is part of the small and micro enterprises
are also declining. The Committee demands an explanation from the Ministry in this regard. It is
well known that some of the poorest of the poor weavers and artisans are associated with this
sector. The Khadi and Village Industries embody the vision of the Father of our Nation Mahatma
Gandhi. Any neglect shown to this sector is a neglect of that lofty vision. The Committee finds
it unacceptable that the Khadi sector is getting such treatment from both the Ministry of Finance
and the Planning Commission. The Committee strongly recommends that remedial measures must
be taken to ensure fair allocation of funds to the Khadi component of the Khadi and Village
Industries. (Para No. 33)
Action Taken/Comments
In the Eleventh Five Year Plan, total allocation at RE stage for Khadi and Village Industries
(KVI) sector was Rs. 5754.93 crore, of which Rs. 5297.87 crore was released. The Working
Group for MSME for the Twelfth Five Year Plan has recommended total outlay of Rs. 14,800 crore
for the KVI sector. The Working Group Report is yet to be considered by the Planning
Commission. In the Annual Plan for 2012-13, total outlay of Rs. 2788.50 crore was proposed for
KVI sector. An allocation of Rs. 1629.79 crore was made for the KVI sector (including SFURTI
for KVI and Coir) out of the total budget of Rs. 2835 crore approved for the Ministry as a whole
for 2012-13.
Further Observation
The Committee has observed that in BE 2011-12 the total allocation of KVI sector
was 1619.57 crores which was reduced in RE 2011-12 to 1537.67 crores. Currently though
only Planned allocation was reduced to Rs. 1351.95 crores whereas Non-Planned allocation
was actually enhanced to Rs. 185.72 crores. Even against the reduced RE, the actual
expenditure till 31.12.2011 was only Rs. 1159.95 crores. The Committee will take note of the
actual expenditure during 2011-12.
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee in its Report on Credit Facility to MSME Sector had recommended that
SIDBI should function under the jurisdiction of the MSME Ministry. The Committee reiterates this
recommendation for better flow of credit to the MSME sector. Accordingly steps must be taken
by the Government (Ministry of Finance) to bring the SIDBI within the jurisdiction of the MSME
Ministry. (Para No. 38)
Action Taken/Comments
The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with Ministry of Finance,
Department of Financial Services.

14
Further Observation
The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up on its recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee takes into account the suggestion of some of the representatives of the
MSME association for opening up a window or a cell for MSME to avail of the External
Commercial Borrowing. It recommends that this suggestion may be actively considered for its final
implementation. (Para No. 39)
Action Taken/Comments
As informed by RBI, MSMEs registered only as companies under the Companies Act, 1956
are eligible for External Commercial Borrowings (ECB). The ECB benefits for registered eligible
companies are as follows:
(i) In manufacturing/industrial sector, registered companies are eligible to avail of External
Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) up to USD 750 million per financial year under the
automatic route subject to compliance with the extant guidelines on ECB;
(ii) In hotel, hospital and software, registered companies are eligible to avail of ECBs up
to USD 200 million per financial year under the automatic route subject to compliance
with the extant guidelines on ECB; and
(iii) In other service sector other than (ii) above, they can avail of ECBs from their foreign
equity holders under the approval route.
Further, it has been informed that considering the deteriorating external debt indicators, the
issue of further relaxation in ECB norms to MSMEs will be examined.
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised of the current status in respect of ECB.
Recommendation/Observation
13. As far as the North Eastern part of our country is concerned, there is a persistent feeling
that implementation of the programmes as per the industrial policy formulated for that area are not
at all satisfactory. Even the incentive in terms of income tax exemption, excise exemption, etc.,
have been greatly diluted. The Committee urges the Ministry of MSME to take stock of the
situation and chalk out a programme to address the problem. (Para No. 41)
Action Taken/Comments
In NER region, sufficient number of applications for claiming reimbursement/subsidies/
Grant-in-aid are not received under various schemes of MSME. Receipt of fewer number of
proposals under various schemes is also one of the reasons. Apart from this, difficult local
condition, shortage of staff and procedural difficulties are major cause for under performance of
the programme. However, concerted efforts are being made in the region to train the people to
acquire necessary skills for increasing industrial growth.
Further Observation
The Committee is of the view that it is worth the extra effort to promote programme

15
in NER, a region traditionally endeavored with skills and has vast market for products.
Several Central and centrally sponsored Schemes are benefitted for NER which make a
certain percentage of procurement from MSME sector mandatory. Apart from imparting
skills, efforts should be made for simply procedurals difficulties.
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee agrees with idea of the some representation of the MSME association that
those special economic zones which are not being utilized may be declared a MSME zone and
MSME units may be established on a PPP mode. (Para No. 42)
Action Taken/Comments
As the above matter relates to Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the matter has been
taken up with them. The requisite information in the matter will be provided as soon as it is
received from Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised of the inputs given by Ministry of Commerce and
Industry in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Coir Board has been allocated Rs. 7.00 crore
under Plan (Science and Technology). It feels that the amount is insufficient in the context of the
vast area of operation of the Board covering the coastal belt of the Country which includes
Lakshadweep and A&N Islands. The Committee feels that appropriate technology needs to be
transferred to the Coir Industry. It entails incubator training programmes and provision of one time
assistance upto 50% of the funds needed to establish pilot units. (Para No. 44)
Action Taken/Comments
For the Twelfth Five Year Plan, an amount of Rs.124 crore has been recommended by the
Working Group for MSME for the implementation of various programmes under the Plan (Science
and Technology) Scheme of Coir Board. The Working Group Report is yet to be considered by
the Planning Commission. An amount of Rs. 7 crore has been allocated for the implementation of
Science and Technology Scheme for the year 2012-13, which will be used in broadly the following:
1. Modernization of Production process.
2. Development of Machinery and Equipments.
3. Product Development and Diversification.
4. Development of Environment Friendly Technologies.
5. Technology Transfer, Incubation, Testing and Service Facilities.
This shall take care of the transfer of appropriate technology to the coir industry.
Further Observation
The Committee considers the allocation too meager to make any significant
difference. The Committee is also concerned about low utilization of allocation. In year

16
2011-12, for Rejuvenation, Modernization and Technology Up-gradation of Coir industry
against BE of Rs. 18.90 crores, the revised estimate was reduced to Rs. 10.53 crores. The
Committee therefore recommends that steps should be taken to explore the scope of
technology up-gradation so that allocations are fully justified.
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee therefore recommends that it should be modified to provide better financial
assistance keeping in view the cost of Plant and Machinery. It also recommends that the limit may
be extended to Rs. 10 lakh from Rs. 6 lakhs to benefit the coir industry. (Para No. 46)
Action Taken/Comments
Enhancement in project cost will be duly considered by competent authority at the time of
appraisal of the scheme for continued implementation in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised of latest status.
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee has noted that the Coir Board is running a beneficial scheme Mahila Coir
Yojna for self employment of women. The Committee during its study visit at Lakshadweep visited
one of the centres under this Scheme and interacted with few spinners and was dismayed over
the stipend given to the women spinners which was very insufficient and recommends that the
present limit of stipend should be raised in view of the increased cost of living and inflation.
(Para No. 49)
Action Taken/Comments
Enhancement in stipend will be duly considered for approval by competent authority at the
time of appraisal of the scheme for continued implementation in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Further Observation
The Committee may be apprised of latest status in respect of the recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
18. The Committee draws the attention of the MSME Ministry to the aforementioned
suggestions and recommends appropriate measures to take up these points. The Committee also
would like to get a detailed note in this regard. (Para No. 50)
Action Taken/Comments
The point-wise comments on the issues raised by the representatives of the MSME
association are given below:–
(i) Provision for the rehabilitation of sick units as large number of units are
becoming sick;
A mechanism for rehabilitation of potentially viable sick MSEs already exists as per the
extant guidelines of RBI to Scheduled Commercial Banks. The State Level Inter Institutional

17
Committee (SLIIC) has been set up in each State under the Convenorship of RBI to deal with the
problems of co-ordination for rehabilitation of sick small enterprises. The Committee is presided by
Secretary, Industry of the State Government concerned. It provides a useful forum for interaction
between State Government officials and State level institutions on the one hand and term lending
institutions and banks on the other hand. Further, at the Regional Offices of RBI, Empowered
Committees (EC) have been constituted with the Regional Director of Reserve Bank as the
Chairman to review various issues relating to MSE sector particularly, the progress in MSE
financing and rehabilitation of sick MSE units and to co-ordinate with other banks/financial
institutions and the State Government in removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of
credit to the sector. These Regional level Committees also decide on the need to have similar
Committees at cluster/district levels. However, since it was found that there was duplication of
deliberations at the meetings of SLIIC and Empowered Committee (EC), it was decided that the
matter of continuation or otherwise of the SLIIC forum may be left to the individual State/Union
Territory.
Further, in order to help the sick MSMEs, SIDBI has been extending rehabilitation package
to its assisted and potentially viable MSME sick units which provides for relief and concessions
(in the form of reschedulement, reduction in interest rate, funding of overdue/future interest,
waiver, etc.) as well as need based additional financial assistance for their revival on viable lines.
SIDBI also operates a Refinance Scheme for Rehabilitation of sick small scale industrial units
assisted through primary lending institutions, viz., SFCs/SIDCs and Banks.
(ii) Appellate Authority where the problems of individual sick industry may be
heard or targets should be fixed for banks that they will have to rehabilitate
about 20% sick industries;
The modification in definition of sickness and procedure for assessing the viability is under
consideration. It is proposed to give a hearing to the MSE borrower before deciding the viability
of a unit. It is expected that once the new system is in place, the process of timely rehabilitation
of sick units would take place.
The RBI is of the view that strengthening the rehabilitation process and making it more
inclusive and effective would be in the interest of the MSE sector rather than prescribing targets,
which would lead to banks complying to achieve the target rather than putting in place an effective
monitoring and rehabilitation process of sick MSEs.
(iii) Discrimination between Small and large industries as the large industries get
protection from the Government under BIFR after erosion of 50% or more of
their net-worth but such protection is not available to sick MSEs;
As mentioned above, modification in definition of sickness and procedure for assessing the
viability is under consideration. Once the new system is in place, the process of timely
rehabilitation of sick MSE units would take place.
(iv) V enture Fund of Rs. 5000 crore should also be available to Micro Enterprises
and not only to Medium and Small Enterprises;
In order to channalise more equity funding to the MSME sector, the Union Budget
2012-13 announced setting up of a Rs. 5,000 crore India Opportunities Venture Fund (IOVF) with
SIDBI. As informed by SIDBI, the fund would be sector agnostic and utilized for providing equity
assistance to MSMEs. SIDBI would act as the Fund of Funds to help create sufficient number of
venture equity funds in the country, as also tap various channel partners like Banks, NBFCs, etc.,
apart from providing such equity/quasi-equity support directly to MSMEs.

18
(v) Enhancement of limit for MSMEs for Plan and machinery from Rs. 10 crore to
Rs. 25 crore so as to enable the MSMEs to modernize themselves;
The enhancement in the limit of small manufacturing enterprises had been made from
Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crore in the year 2006. Similarly, a limit of Rs.10 crore was fixed for medium
manufacturing enterprises in the same year.
(vi) Limit of tax audit should be increased from Rs. 60 lakh to Rs. 1 crore;
In the Pre-Budget proposals 2012-13 of MoMSME it was recommended that the Tax Audit
limit may be enhanced from Rs. 60 lakh to Rs. 2 crore due to sharp increase in various input
prices resulting in inflated turnover. However, in the Union Budget 2012-13, the turnover limit for
compulsory tax audit of accounts as well as for presumptivetaxation has been raised from Rs. 60
lakh to Rs. 1 crore for SMEs.
(vii) Increasing the limit of excise duty and service tax;
The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue. A reminder has been issued on 5.7.2012 and the reply is still awaited.
(viii) Enhancement of Marketing support under Marketing Development
Assistance Programme and creation of Export Development Fund;
Under MDA scheme, MSEs are encouraged to participate in International Trade fairs to
explore the export potential of their products. During the last three years (including current year)
i.e. 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13, the budget allocation under this scheme was Rs. 2.40 crore,
Rs. 3.45 crore and Rs. 8.85 crore respectively.
(ix) Common Application Form for credit/loan;
As informed by RBI, IBA has designed a Uniform loan application for loans up to Rs. 25
lakh and all banks have been advised to make use of the same.
(x) Requirement of collateral security;
Banks have been mandated by RBI not to accept collateral security in the case of loans upto
Rs. 10 lakh extended to units in the MSE sector. Banks have been also advised to extend collateral-
free loans upto Rs. 10 lakh to all units financed under the Prime Minister Employment Generation
Programme of KVIC. Further, banks may, on the basis of good track record and financial position
of the MSE units, increase the limit of dispensation of collateral requirement for loans up to
Rs. 25 lakh (with the approval of the appropriate authority).
In order to encourage banks to lend more to this sector, Government of India and SIDBI
have set up the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) in July
2000, to provide credit guarantee support to collateral free/third-party guarantee free loans upto
Rs. 100 lakh extended by banks and lending institutions for micro and small enterprises (MSEs).
Cumulatively, as on March 31, 2012, 7,92,229 lakh guarantees (97% for loans below Rs. 25 lakh)
for an amount of Rs. 37,139 crore have been approved under CGS.
(xi) T ax exemption to SMEs which have separate funds for R&D;
The recommendation of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue.

19
(xii) Enhancement of the limit from 90 days to 6 months for NPA;
The RBI has informed that the ninety day delinquency norm has been fixed keeping in view
the international best practices and standards. All prudential norms have been prescribed with a
view to ensuring financial soundness of banks and any deviation would not be desirable.
(xiii) Enhancement of term loan from 7 years to 15 years at par with housing  sector;
The recommendation was taken up with the RBI. It has been informed that RBI has not
issued any specific instructions in this regard since the management of loan sanctioning/recovery
activity, in a bank is essentially an internal management function and each bank’s Board is
authorized to frame suitable policies. Banks have been advised to prepare a well-defined loan policy
approved by their Board of Directors which should lay down exposure limits to individual/group
borrowers, documentation standards, margin, security, sectoral exposure limits, delegation of
powers, maturity and pricing policies, factors taken into consideration for deciding interest rates
etc. Banks consider different loan proposals based on their commercial judgment and merits of
each case keeping in view the loan policies approved by their Board of Directors.
Further Observation
The Committee shall continue to study these relevant issues in its future meetings.

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 03.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19 th March, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Tiruchi Siva — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Ashk Ali Tak
2. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu
3. Shri Natuji Halaji Thakor
4. Shri Basawaraj Patil
5. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel
6. Shri Vivek Gupta
7. Shri M. P. Achuthan
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat
9. Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Gorakhnath Pandey
11. Shri Jayaram Pangi
12. Shri Gopal Singh Shekhawat
13. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
14. Shri E. G. Sugavanam
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. N. Sahu, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Roshan Lal, Deputy Director
Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members and briefed them that
the agenda for the meeting, was to consider and adopt the 236
th ATR pertaining to the Department
of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit Facilities to MSME sector
pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th, 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining to the Department of
Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises, respectively, on their
respective Demands for Grants (2012-13).
23

24
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Reports for consideration. After some deliberation,
the Committee unanimously adopted all the Draft Reports.
3. Afterwards, the Committee decided to present/lay five of its reports i.e., the 236 th ATR
pertaining to the Department of Public Enterprises on MoU performance, 239 th ATR on the Credit
Facilities to MSME sector pertaining to Ministry of MS&ME, 238 th 240 th and 241 st ATRs pertaining
to the Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of MS&ME and Department of Public Enterprises,
respectively on 21
st March, 2013 in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its
Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu, Member, Rajya Sabha, and in absence
of both Shri M.P. Achuthan, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the 236
th, 238 th, 239 th, 240 th and 241 st
Reports in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shri Ijyaraj Singh Member, Lok Sabha
and in his absence Shrimati Poonamben Veljibhai Jat, Member, Lok Sabha to lay copies of the same
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
The meeting adjourned at 03.58 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.