93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY
NINETY-THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE 75TH REPORT OF
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2002-03) PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2002)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DECEMBER, 2002/AGRAHAYANA, 1924 (SAKA)
E-mail : rsc-ind@sansad.nic.in
Website : http:/parliamentofindia.nic.in
CONTENTS              
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTI ON
3. REPORT
(i) CHAPTER-I
Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government
(ii) CHAPTER-II
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies of the Government have not been accepted
by
the Committee
(iii) CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Covernment's replies
(iv) CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been
received
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A
GLANCE
5. MINUTES

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Date of Constitution - 1st January, 2002)
@1.   Dr. P. C. Alexander ----  Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
     2.   Prof. M.M. Agarwal
     3.   Dr. Abrar Ahmed
     4.   Shri Jayantilal Barot
     5.   Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
     6.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
     7.   Dr. Faguni Ram
     8.   Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
     9.   Shri P.K. Maheshwari
   10.   Shri M.J. Varkey Mattathil
   11.   Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
   12.   Shri S. Sivasubramanian
   13.   Shrimati Sushree Devi
   14.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi
   15.   Vacant
           LOK SABHA
   16.   Shrimati Jayashree Banerjee
   17.   Kumari Mamata Banerjee
   18.   Shri Ajoy Chakraborty
   19.   Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary
   20.   Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   21.   Shri Deepak Kumar
   22.   Shri Thomas Hansda
   23.   Dr. S. Jagathrakshakan
   24.   Shri A.C. Jose
   25.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   26.   Shri Brijlal Khabri
   27.   Shri Sunil Khan
   28.   Shri Manjay Lal
   29.   Dr. K. Malaisamy
   30.   Shri A. Narendra
   31.   Shri Ananta Nayak
   32.   Shri Dayabhai V. Patel
   33.   Shri Dharam Raj Singh Patel
   34.   Shri Uttamrao Patil
   35.   Shri Malyala Rajaiah
   36.   Shri P. Rajendran
   37.   Dr. Bolla Bulli Ramaiah
   38.   Shri Tarachand Sahu
   39.   Shri Ramanand Singh
   40.   Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
 
@ Appointed Chairman and Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th November, 2002 vice Shri T.N. Chaturvedi who
ceased to be the Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 20th August, 2002.
 
   41.   Chowdhary Talib Hussain
   42.   Shri Chunni Lal Bhau Thakur
   43.   Shrimati D.M. Vijaya Kumari
   44.   Shri Beni Prasad Verma
   45.   Vacant
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
           Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
           Shri A.K. Singh, Deputy Secretary
           Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary


93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
           Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, having been authorised
by the Committee, hereby present this Ninety-Third Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the 75th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry on Demends for Grants (2002-2003) pertaining to Ministry of Small Scale Industries.
2.      The 75th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry was presented to Rajya
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 14th May, 2002.
3.      The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry considered and adopted the report at its
meeting held on the 11th December, 2002.
NEW DELHI ,
11 December, 2002;
         
DR. P.C. ALEXANDER 
Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry.
REPORT
        The Ninety-Third Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the 75 th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Industry on the Demands For Grants (2002-2003) pertaining to the Ministry of Small Scale Industries which was
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 14th May, 2002.
2.     Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the
Report. They have been categorized as follows:
        (i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government:- Para 3.8, 4.5, 4.6, 5.3, 6.7, 7.5,
8.1, 8.2, 11.5, 11.6, 14.3, 15.1 (Chapter –I).
        (ii)    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:- Para 6.5, 10.2, 11.6, 11.7, 11.8, 17.1, 17.2, 13.3, 21.2 (Chapter–II).
        (iii)    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee has not accepted replies of the
Government:- Para 3.6, 3.7, 6.3, 6.4, 9.7, 11.2, 12.4, 12.5, 18.4, 19.3 (Chapter–III).
        (iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government have not been received:-
Para 10.3, 10.4, 14.4, 16.2, 16.3, 20.3, 22.2, 23.2 (Chapter–IV).
        (v)   Observations/Recommendations at a Glance. (Chapter–V).
3.     The Committee is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has accepted its recommendations
as mentioned in Chapter – I of the Report.
4.     In respect of the recommendations made in Chapter-II the Committee is convinced with the logic and explanation
advocated by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and therefore does not want to pursue further.
5.     The Committee expresses its concern over the non-implementation of recommendations contained in Chapter-III
and therefore the Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries would furnish logical explanation in
respect of these recommendations.
6.     In respect of recommendations placed in Chapter-IV, the Ministry of Small Scale Industries has either furnished
the interim replies of couched its language in vague terms like the Ministries views have been conveyed to concerned
agencies therefore, the Committee desires that the Ministry of Small Scale Industries should furnish Action Taken Note
in respects of recommendations categorized in Chapter-IV in detail and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the
recommendations of the Committee.
7.     The details of the ATR is being discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
CHAPTER-I

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
WTO OBLIGATIONS
Para 3.8
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee further observes that it is essential to create greater awareness about the obligations India has to
fulfil under the WTO regime and their impact on various sectors. There is a need to have adequate preparedness for
WTO compliance. The Committee recommends that regular interactions between the Government and SSIs should take
place for this purpose. Special cells with legal backup may be created and strengthened to deal with WTO related
problems of SSIs in concerned Government Department and industry associations.
Action Taken/Comments
        With a view to create awareness among the SSI units/Associations, etc. on WTO Agreements and their
implications, Ministry of SSI & ARI organized 28 one-day Sensitization Workshops all over the country. The
Ministry also organized 16 one-day workshops on Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) during 2001-2002 with
the assistance of WIPO and 16 Seminars all over the country to disseminate information to the SSI
Associations on Anti Dumping Procedures.
        A WTO cell in the office of DC (SSI) was set up on 15 th November, 1999 with the objective to keep abreast with
the recent developments in WTO, disseminate information to SSI units and their Associations, coordinate with other
Ministries and Departments, prepare the policy for SSIs in line with the WTO agreements, organize WTO Workshops
especially for SSI units at macro & micro level in the Small Scale Sector to enable the small/tiny sector to understand
the WTO agreements. With a view to assist the SSI Sector on legal matters a panel of legal experts on WTO matters has
been created at the Office of the DCSSI to assist the entrepreneurs in filing anti-dumping and IPR related cases.
RESTRUCTURING OF NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORPORATION FOR DEVELOPMENT OF
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
Para 4.5
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that in response to challenges and opportunities arising out of globalisation, new
responsibilities envisaged for SIDO like gathering latest information regarding WTO Agreement, WTO sensitization
and strategy building programmes, anti-dumping proceedings, etc. need to receive priority consideration. In this context,
action for upgrading sub—sector specific schemes for technology transfer and exports need to be taken care of.
Appropriate HRD strategies need also to be paid attention. Government should work out restructuring of NSIC in the
light of suggestion made by M/s Ferguson and Co. (Consultant) to achieve the above objectives.
Action Taken/Comments
        This Ministry is getting sectoral studies conducted in areas having a strong SSI presence to formulate a pro-active
strategy and to fine-tune the existing policies and programmes. Five sectoral studies have already been undertaken with
UNDP assistance of US $ 20,000 on Hand tools, Medicinal Biotechnology, Glass and Ceramics, Bicycle parts and
Flavour and Fragrance. The Ministry also financially supports Industry Associations to develop monitoring mechanisms
on the performance of four selected product clusters in terms of growth, removal of QRs, surge in imports, etc. These
Associations/Clusters are CII-Food Processing and Machine tools; FISME – Shaneel; and Kishangarh Marble
Association – Marble respectively. The work on these projects has since been started.
        The Ministry has also formulated a “market Development Assistance for SSI Exporters” SSI-MDA Scheme to
enhance exports by the SSIs. Under the scheme financial assistance upto Rs. 1 lakh is given to SSI Associations for
initiating anti-dumping investigations.
        M/s A F. Ferguson & Co. were asked to prepare an operational plan keeping in mind the various activities of NSIC
as approved by the Ministry after discussion with the share holders. M/s A.F. Ferguson & Co. has since finalized the
operational plan which was submitted to this Ministry in July, 2002. The operational plan was put up to the Board of
Directors in their meeting held on August 2, 2002. After approval of Plan by the NSIC Board and Government, it will
be put in operation.
DEVELOPMENT OF CLUSTERS
Para 4.6

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee feels that more attention needs to be given to the development of clusters for facilitating sustenance
and growth of existing enterprises. Pooling the strengths of several enterprises in a similar line of activity produces
synergetic effects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that consortia of SSIs for common purchase of raw materials,
common branding and access to large complex markets should be set up for promotion of small scale sector.
Action Taken/Comments
        Under the Integrated Technology Upgradation and Management Programme (UPTECH) for technology
upgradation of small scale industries, 9 clusters were taken up for development in the Ninth Plan. Development of 5
clusters based on Herbal/Aromatics Plants at 5 different places in the country is also being taken up.
        In addition, 4 National Programmes for the Development of Toy, Stone, Lock and Machine Tool Industries have
been taken up under UPTECH scheme during Ninth Plan for technology upgradation, in collaboration with UNIDO.
        Further, UNIDO, under the cluster development programme, has identified 7 more clusters. A Steering Committee
has been set up under the Chairmanship of AS & DC (SSI) for implementation and guidance. Apart from this, a project
– ‘Support to the Country Effort to promote SME Cluster Development’ for technology upgradation clusters has also
been taken up in collaboration with UNIDO.
        Sub Group on Marketing, Export and Partnership of the Working Group on Small Scale Industries (SSI Sector) for
Tenth Plan (2002---2007) suggested adoption of consortium approach in which the NSIC could play a significant role.
Consortia formed by small units should have the facility of guidance by way of availability of information in time etc.
and these consortia be encouraged to develop brands of their own. Since, the initiative to form these consortia is to be
taken by SSI units, the Government would provide due support and encouragement to such efforts.
PROMOTION OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES SCHEMES
Para 5.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee feels that in order to enhance the competitiveness of the SSIs, it is essential to provide to it
technical assistance alongwith other basic inputs for production such as power, fuel, raw materials and credit at
reasonable prices. The Committee has been apprised that various Tool Rooms like Central Tool Room and Training
Centre (CTR & TC), Kolkata, Central tool Room, Ludhiana, Central Institute of Hand Tools (CIHT), Jalandhar, Central
Institute of Tool Design (CITO), Hyderabad, etc. have been contributing to upgradation of technology of SSIs. Indo
Danish Tool; Room (IDTR), Jamshedpur has associated itself with the Small Scale Industries Association and joined
hands for the development of SSI units. This tool room has developed a strategy to adopt two SSI Units every year and
provide them with free consultancies and expertise in increasing their productivity to help SSIs units. The Committee
recommends that Cluster-wise tool rooms and CAD-CAM rooms should be set up.
Action Taken/Comments
        In March, 2001, Ministry of SSI introduced Mini Tool Room Scheme (a Centrally sponsored scheme) under which
Central assistance equal to 90% of the cost of machinery (restricted to Rs. 900 lakh) in the case of a new project, and
75% of the cost of machinery (restricted to Rs. 750 lakh) in case of an existing project to be upgraded/modernized, is
sanctioned to States/State Agencies for setting up Mini Tool Room & Training Centres. The balance capital cost and
also the recurring costs are to be borne by State/State Agencies.
        All the tool rooms set up by SIDO, render CAD/CAM training facilities also. Central Institute of Tool Design,
Hyderabad has entered into an agreement with the Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL), Hyderbad to conduct
CAD/CAM training programmes jointly throughout the country. Indo-German Tool Room, Aurangabad has also entered
into an agreement with Small Industries Service Institute, Mumbai to set up a CAD/CAM training center at Pune.
        The locations of the Mini Tool Rooms are to be decided by the State Government based on the demand surveys
and it is expected that States give preference to the areas having clusters of industries.
LAGHU UDYAMI CREDIT CARD
Para 6.7
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee hopes that this scheme is successful and that the small and tiny sector are able to derive substantial
advantage from it.

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Action Taken/Comments
        The Hon’ble FM launched the Laghu Udyami Credit Card (LUCC)Scheme in the meeting with Chief Executives of
Public Sector Banks on 12 th November, 2001. The Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) has circulated the Scheme among
member banks for implementation and it is reported that all Public Sector Banks have confirmed having launched the
scheme.
CREDIT GUARANTEE FUND SCHEME FOR SMALL INDUSTIRES
Para 7.5
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that credit facility is one of the basic inputs that have to be provided to SSIs if they have
to enhance their competitiveness in the era of globalisation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that banks should
come forwarded in extending a helping hand to the small and tiny sector in sanctioning collateral free loans to SSIs.
Income Tax exemption may be provided to the Credit Guarantee fund Trust of the Small Industries to make it self-
sustainable.
Action Taken/Comments
        The observation of the Committee is regarding sanction of collateral free loans under the Credit Guarantee Scheme.
The Scheme introduced by SIDBI in collaboration with Government of India is implemented and monitored by the
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI). So far, 32 eligible institutions including 23 Public Sector
Banks, 4 Private Sector Banks, 3 Regional Rural Banks and 2 institutions, namely, NSIC and NEDFI, have been
registered as Member Lending Institutions. Efforts are being made by the Trust to popularize the scheme with the active
participation of the banks.
        Income tax exemption has since been granted to the Trust by the finance Act, 2002 for a period of five years
ending FY 2006 (assessment year 2006-07) with retrospective effect.
VENTURE CAPITAL FUND
Paras 8.1 & 8.2
Observation/Recommendation
Para 8.1
        The Committee observes that in other to encourage new entrepreneurs to set up small scale units, it is very
important to create venture capital facilities. With a view to meeting the needs of emerging areas and to help the small-
scale units in Software / Information Technology sector, SIDBI has taken an initiative in the launching of the State /
Regional Level Venture Capital Fund with participation from State Governments. However, venture capital is not easily
available to very small and tiny units. EXIM Bank has also made an entry into venture capital finance by investing in a
Venture Capital Fund – India Technology Venture Unit Scheme – promoted by Unit Trust of India.
Para 8.2
        The Committee recommends that more venture funds in high-growth sectors such as Information Technology,
biotechnology and food processing should be set up. A suitable policy framework may be designed expeditiously to
promote setting up of such funds in the public as well as the private sector. Banks should be encouraged to entertain
Venture Capital funding to SSI units. India can learn from the Korean experience which as a very well developed
system of Venture Capital financing. The Korean Government has also made every effort to provide and atmosphere in
which a new concept company, the venture business, could take root during a short period of time. As a result, the
number of Venture Capital firms has increased tremendously in Korea during the last three to four years.
Action Taken/Comments
        To encourage venture capital funding to SSI units, banks have been advised that investment in venture capital will
be eligible for inclusion in priority sector lending. This is subject to the condition that the venture capital
funds/companies are registered with SEBI.
        SIDBI has been providing assistance by way of corpus of other funds dedicated to SSI sector. It has assisted 10
State Level funds, 5 all India funds and a National Fund for Software and Information Technology Industry (NFSIT). In
addition, it has also set up SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd. To act as an asset management company for NFSIT. SIDBI also
provides Direct Venture Capital assistance to SSI sector. Need based funds are also being planned for high growth
sectors. It was also announced in the Union Budget for 2000–03 that Micro Venture Capital Fund for small innovation
would be set up by the SIDBI.
IMPORTS FROM CHINA & NEPAL
Para 11.5

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee therefore, recommends that Government should closely monitor the dumping of goods from China
via Nepal and take steps to curb unfair practices leading to imports of under priced goods from China.
Action Taken/Comments
        Attention of the Government has been drawn to the imports from China and their impact on Indian industry and it
is closely monitoring this situation and has taken steps to curb unfair trade practices leading to imports of under priced
consumer goods from China. The DGAD had recommended final duty in thirty nine (39) cases against Chinese goods
and provisional duty in ten (10) cases. Further one (1) case initiated against Chinese goods is under investigation for
preliminary finding.
        Imports from Nepal are governed by the Indo-Nepal Treaty on Trade and Transit the industry pointed out that the
imports from Nepal are basically re-exports without any significant value addition to take advantage of the facility of
0% customs duty. In the best interest of Indian Trade and Industry it became essential to review the Indo-Nepal Treaty,
making it mandatory for goods manufacture in Nepal to be accompanied by the certificate of origin and prescribing
value addition norms.
        Indo-Nepal Treaty has since been renewed for a period of 5 years w.e.f. 6 th March 2002, the provisions relating to
value addition and certificate of origin etc. have been incorporated in the renewed treaty so as to protect the interest of
Indian industry. Hopefully, the renewed Indo-Nepal Treaty will solve these problems of Indian Industry including
small-scale industries.
PROTECTION TO DOMESTIC SSIs
Para 11.6
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that the major option for limiting imports that remains for use by policy-makers in QRs
free regime is that of higher tariffs. The Committee recommends that QRs may be converted into tariff and non tariff
equivalents to give an adequate protection to domestic SSIs. While this measure would be a discouraging factor for
foreign producers to export their cheap goods to India, it would also mean increasing revenue for Government of India.
Action Taken/Comments
        Government is constantly monitoring the impact of the removal of Quantitative Restrictions (QR) and WTO
Agreements on the economy. While the removal of QRs have exposed the SSIs to greater competition, there has not
been any surge in imports as a consequence of this step. The SSI sector has enough competitive strength to withstand
the impact of dismantling of quantitative import controls. Even after the removal of QRs, protection to the industries is
available in the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking
safeguard/measures in case of surge in imports, etc.
MARKETING AND EXPORTS
Para 14.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that banks and other financial institutions provide marketing oriented financial
assistance to small-scale sector, particularly for advertising, product promotion and setting up of regional marketing
offices. Factoring services by the banks may also be given greater priority.
Action Taken/Comments
        Advertising Agencies and Marketing Consultancies are considered as Small Scale Service and Business (Industry
Related) Enterprises for financing under the SSI. Financial assistance provided by the banks to the SSIs in the form of
working capital includes the requirements of the units for marketing of their products also. They also provide export
credit. The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) assists SSIs in marketing their products by participating in
bulk/global tender on behalf of SSIs/Enterprises. It also operates an Integrated Marketing Support programme in which
bills pertaining to supplies made by SSIs to eligible purchasers are discounted.
        To address the needs of SSI sector in the marketing related areas, SIDBI had set up a Marketing Finance and
Development Department in 1995-96, providing finance for activities relating to marketing of SSI products as also for
marketing related resource support and development of marketing infrastructure for SSIs. SIDBI provides assistance,
inter alia, for undertaking various marketing related activities such as marketing research, R&D, product upgrdation and
standardization, advertising, branding, catalogue preparation, production of audio visual aids, participation in trade fairs
and exhibitions, undertaking sales promotion tools, establishing distribution networks including showrooms/retail

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
outlet/warehousing facilities, training of personnel in activities relevant to marketing etc.
        In addition to co-promoting two factoring companies with SBI and Canara Bank viz., SBI Factors and Commercial
Service Pvt. Ltd. And Canbank Factors Ltd., SIDBI has also introduced factoring serves. In order to popularize the bill
culture it has been felt that it should be without recourse. It is also felt that legislation on introduction of Factoring
Services without recourse is needed. Ministry of Finance has been requested to bring out legislation on this issue.
TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION
Para 15.1
Observation/Recommendation
        (a)   For effective technology upgradation in Indian SSI units, the Committee recommends that the partnership
approach to develop linkages between large and small enterprises be strengthened.
        (b)   Technology Bureau for International Industrial Partnerships and Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises,
Delhi have been providing useful services for technology upgradation in the small scale units. These
organizations need to be strengthened further and their activities need to be marketed / advertised in an
effective manner. The small-scale industries in India have added strength to the industrial infrastructure and
have been the engine of growth for industrialization. However, they are known for producing poor quality
products. This makes the Indian goods less competitive in the international markets.
        (c)   The Committee observes that Government has set up a number of organization for the purpose of
technological upgradation and quality improvement in the SSI units. However, most of these facilities are
either non-functional or grossly under-utilised. There is an urgent need to revamp the whole system and make
it effective and beneficial to the small industries.
        (d)   The Committee further recommends that quality training to significantly improve quality by creating
awareness among personnel about meeting customer requirements, standardizing process, training operatives
and enforcing technical discipline should be institutionalized. There is a need to conduct a compressive
research study in a sample of SSI units to determine areas of waste and non-value adding activities and develop
methodology for quality improvement and cost reduction programmes. Further ISO 9000 Certification may be
made more attractive to introduce quality-consciousness among small entrepreneurs. BIS standards may also
be upgraded from time to time in tune with the developments in quality worldwide.
Action Taken/Comments
        (a)   Field Institutions of SIDO in association with State/ Regional Level SSI Associations, State Industries
Department and others are organizing Vendor Development Programme-cum-Buyer-Seller Meets and
Exhibitions to promote development of business linkages between Buyers (large enterprises), Central
Government / State Government Departments, Public Sector Undertakings, Defence establishment, Railways,
etc. and Sellers who are mainly small-scale units.
                        These events also help the Small-Scale Entrepreneurs to really see the quality standard required by buyer
organizations. This helps them in upgrading their quality by way of modernization of their plant and
machinery, process, inspection and quality assurance measures.
        (b)   Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises was set up by SIDBI in 1995 in collaboration with Asian and Pacific
Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT). It has been rendering value added services to SSI sector by
facilitating two way technology transfer and joint ventures. Pursuant to the announcement made by the Hon’ble
Prime Minister on 30th August 2000, it has been decided to convert TBSE into full-fledged Technology Bank
for SSIs. SIDBI is in the process of engaging an appropriate consultant who would provide a detailed plan for
converting TBSE into a Technology Bank.
        (c)   Besides RTCs, common test and calibration facilities to SSI in Electrical and Electronics Sectors are being
provided through IDEMI, Mumbai & ESTC, Ramnagar. Most of the test and calibration facilities at IDEMI,
Mumbai are NABL accredited and the utilization is to the extent of 7
0%-80% and the revenue earning from these facilities were Rs. 73 lakhs and Rs. 74 lakhs in 1999-2000 and
2000-2001 respectively. The test facilities are being augmented to meet the Industry’s requirements. The
common test and calibration facilities at ESTC are in the process of augmentation and obtain NABL
accreditation. The utilization of the facilities is expected to improve after NABL accreditation.
        (d)   In order to sensitise small scale sector for quality upgradation and imparting training in Quality Management
system, awareness-cum-Motivational & Educational Training Programmes are being organized through
SISIs/RTCs, to educate the SSI units on various aspects & practices involved in standardizing process, cost
reduction programmes and wastage etc.

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
                       As a result, the number of small scale/ancillary units availing the benefits of reimbursement under ISO
9000 certification incentive scheme, has increased from 122 cases reimbursed up to the end of 8th Plan to 2376
cases by the end of the Ninth Plan i.e. on 31.03.2002. During the year 2002-03 about 1200 SISI / Ancillary
units are expected to be benefited through the incentive scheme. The Scheme will continue in the Tenth Five-
Year Plan also (2002-07).
        Programmes on Pollution Control & Waste Minimization are also being organized to educate & motivate SSI units.
The Officers of DC (SSI) office are also actively involved in formulating/upgrading various BIS standards related to
Electrical & Electronic Industry. They are members of the panel of various technical committees of Bureau of Indian
Standards.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
HOLIDAYS IN BANKS
Para 6.5
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee was apprised by the SSI Association that too many holidays especially in the month of March in
public sector banks, prove to be bottlenecks for the working of SSI units which remain at the mercy of the banks for
their cash transaction. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Banking Division, Ministry of Finance should
reschedule holidays of the public sector banks in such a manner that public in general and SSI sector in particular do not
suffer any more.
Action Taken/Comments
        Holidays under the Negotiable Instruments Act are declared by the Central/respective State Governments which
are required to be observed by the banks.
SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA (SIDBI)
Para 10.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that the Ministry of SSI’s contribution in the corpus fund for CGTSI is through budgetary
support and SIDBI’s contribution is made out of its normal business income. In view of the Bank’s income tax exempt
status having been withdrawn in the Union Budget 2001-02, the committee recommends that a Plan allocation of
matching funds to SIDBI equivalent to its contribution to corpus of CGTSI may be made retrospectively and
prospectively.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Credit Guarantee Scheme as formulated, envisaged creation of a corpus fund with SIDBI’s contribution to the
extent of 20% and 80% contribution from Government of India. Sharing of corpus with SIDBI was stipulated in order
that it would have a stake in the scheme’s implementation. The scheme was launched in 2000-01 with an initial corpus
of Rs. 125 crores which was enhanced to 
Rs. 250 crores in FY 2001-02. The corpus has been contributed by Government of India and SIDBI in the ration of 4:1.
Further, this Ministry has budgeted Rs. 200 crores in FY 2002-03 towards contribution to the corpus of CGTSI
envisaging SIDBI’s contribution of Rs. 50 crore. If contribution from SIDBI is replaced by budgetary support from the
Government, SIDBI will have no stake in the scheme, which will adversely affect its implementation.
QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS
Para 11.6
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that the major option for limiting imports that remains for use by policy-makers in a QR-
free regime is that of higher tariffs. The Committee recommends that QRs may be converted into tariff and non-tariff
equivalents to give an adequate protection to the domestic SSIs. While this measure would be a discouraging factor for
foreign producers to export their cheap goods to India, it would also mean increasing revenue for Government of India.
Action Taken/Comments

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
        Government is constantly monitoring the impact of the removal of Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) and WTO
Agreements on the economy. While the removal of QRs have exposed the SSIs to greater competition, there has not
been any surge in imports as a consequence of this step. The SSI sector has enough competitive strengths to withstand
the impact of dismantling of quantitative import controls. Even after the removal of QRs, protection to the industries is
available in the form of raising custom duties upto the bound levels, imposing anti-dumping duties, taking safeguard
measures in case of surge in imports, etc.
TARIFF AND NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
Para 11.7
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee, therefore, recommends tariff and non-tariff barriers may be imposed in the form of higher safety
standards, and sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures as are permissible within the WTO framework.
Action Taken/Comments
        In the Union Budget 2001-2002, the tariff was increased in case of certain products and our tariffs have been bound
at fairly high levels enabling us to intervene effectively wherever any unusual increase in imports are noticed. Even
these bound rates which were initially set at certain levels can be renegotiated, if considered necessary.
        With a view to ensure level playing field to domestic producers viz-a-viz imports, imports have also been made
subject to the following domestic regulations, which are in conformity with the "National Treatment Principle" of
GATT:
        (i)    Import of all food products will be subject to compliance of all the provisions of prevention of Food
Adulteration Act (PFA) and rules hereunder;
        (ii)    Import of meat and poultry products will be subject to compliance of all the provisions of Mean food
Products Order, 1973;
        (iii)   No import of textile material using the prohibited dyes like Azo dye shall be allowed. For this purpose a pre-
shipment inspection certificate has been made mandatory.
        (iv)   Import of all primary agricultural products will be subject to a Bio Security and Sanitary – Phyto Sanitary
Import Permit to be issued by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, as per conditions of Plants, Fruits
and Seeds (Regulation of Import in India) Order, 1989.
        (v)   In view of various safety, environment and consumer interest considerations, import of second hand
automobiles will be subject to certain conditions. Similarly, import of new automobiles has also been allowed
subject to certain conditions.
 
WTO COMPLIANCE BY FOREIGN PRODUCTS
Para 11.8
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee further recommends that compulsory printing of manufacturing date; maximum retail price (in
Indian rupees) and composition of the products, by foreign exporters should be introduced. This would, of course, be
compatible with the national obligation under WTO, as domestic manufacturers are already required to comply with
these requirements.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Government is closely monitoring the imports and all necessary step to safeguard the interest of the domestic
industry are being taken. Accordingly, a Notification has been issued by the Ministry of commerce and Industry on 24 th
November 2000, regarding compliance of all the conditions of the Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged
Commodity) order, 1977, on imports as applicable to domestic producers. In addition, the importers of packaged
commodities have to comply with the following conditions:
        (a)   Name and address of the importer;
        (b)   Generic or common name of the commodity packed;
        (c)   Net quantity in terms of standard units of weights and measures;
        (d)   Month and year of packing in which the commodity is manufactured or packed or imported;
        (e)   Maximum Retail Sale Price (MRP) at which the commodity in packaged form may be sold to the ultimate

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
consumer. This price shall include all taxes, local or otherwise, freight transport charges, commission payable
to dealers and all charges towards advertising, delivery, packing, forwarding and the like as the case may be.
EXCISE DUTY EXEMPTION
Para 13.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee feels that there is need for ensuring harmonization of tax structure by providing the following:
        (a)   Rationalisation of duty may be ensured on finished goods vis-à-vis their raw materials or intermediate goods.
        (b)   Capital Gains Exemption may be given to stick SSI units selling of their fixed assets to repay bank loans.
        (c)   The coverage of Excise Duty Excise Duty Exemption Scheme may be made available to all the items
produced by the small-scale units.
        (d)   Under MRP based assessment an additional 10% rebate may be allowed to SSI units. Rationalization of
customs duty on raw materials/intermediate goods and finished goods for Uninterrupted Power Supplies (UPS)
components/parts of domestic electrical appliances components/parts of auto bulbs, umbrella components,
plastic raw materials, lead ingots, electric copper wires, parts and components of RF and IF coils and reduction
of custom duty on low carbon Ferro chrome and liner alkyl benzene (LAB) may also be done.
Action Taken/Comments
        (a)   Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) has informed that with the progressive reduction and
rationalization of duties, there will not be any substantial anomalies in the customs duty structure. The Finance
Minister, in his Budget Speech 2002-03 stated that there would be only two basic rates of customs duties,
namely, 10% covering generally raw materials, intermediates and components and 20% covering final
products. The existing rates would be adjusted and subsumed into these two basic rates.
        (b)   Ministry of SSI proposed Capital Gains Exemption to sick SSI units through Pre-Budget Proposal 2002-03.
But the proposal did not find favour of Ministry of Finance. Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) have
informed that presently there is no provision in the Income Tax Act, 1961, for granting exemption to sick SSI
units from Capital Gains on transfer of their fixed assets to repay bank loans. Hence, the acceptance of the
recommendation would require amendment in the Income Tax Act.
        (c)   CBEC has informed that as a conscious policy, certain commodities have been kept out of the excise duty
exemption scheme for SSI units on revenue consideration. It has not been found feasible to extend the scheme
across the board to all items.
        (d)   The issue was taken up with CBEC. They informed that as per Notification No. 9/2002-CE, CE, SSI units pay
a lower excise duty upto  turnover of Rs. 1 crore (60% of the normal duty), whereas they are entitled to
abetment with respect to MRP at the normal rate for valuation purposes There is thus already an inbuilt
advantage for SSI units under the MRP based assessment.
MULTIPLICITY OF AGENCIES
Paras 17.1 & 17.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The committee observes that at present, there are several Government agencies to deal with small scale industries
in India. These include Ministry of SSI & ARI, Office of the Development Commissioner (SSI), Small Industries
Development Organisation, Small Industries Service Institutes, National Small Industries Corporation, Small Industries
Development Bank of India, Product-cum-Process Development Centres, Regional Testing Centres, District Industries
Centres, State Financial Corporations, State Industrial Development Corporations, State Small Industrial Development
Corporations, etc.
Para 17.2
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that roles of all these organizations be re-evaluated and clearly defined. It
needs to be ensured that their activities do not overlap each other. There should also be co-ordination in the activities of
these agencies. Most importantly, all of these should be able to provide effective services to the small scale sector.
Action Taken/Comments
        Roles of various agencies are defined. Further, the presence of Joint Secretary (SSI) on the Board of NSIC and that
of the DC(SSI) on the Board of SIDBI as well as regular interaction with SFCs through SIDBI ensures
elimination of overlapping. Product-cum-Process Development Centres are like R & D Institutes for the
promotion of specific industries like glass, electronics, electrical measures, footwear, sports goods, etc., the

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Regional Testing Centres provide the needed testing facilities which individual SSI units cannot afford. DCSSI
provides the needed co-ordination. Similarly, the State level institutes like District Industries Centres, State
Financial Corporations, Small Industries Development Corporations, etc., are performing in those areas which
are not covered by other Institutes.
NON-PERFORMING ASSETS (NPA)
Para 21.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee therefore, recommends that RBI should review the guidelines issued in respect of NPA to banks
and should prescribe that no loan asset would become NPA even if the loan instalments or interest remains overdue for
a period of one year.
Action Taken/Comments
        The prudential norms on income recognition, asset classification and provisioning are objective and are based on
the record of recovery in each bank. In terms of extant instructions, a non-performing asset (NPA) is defined as credit
facility in respect of which the interest/or instalments of principal has remained overdue for a period more that 180 days.
With a view to moving closer to international best practices and to ensure greater transparency, it has been decided to
adopt the 90 days overdue norm for identification of NPAs w.e.f. 31st March, 2004. According to the RBI, as a matter of
policy, Relaxation is not granted in the NPA norm on the basis of sector, scale of operation and industry.
        The norm for recognition of loan impairment has been introduced by the RBI after due consideration and is in
keeping with international best practices. The RBI is of the view that since our financial system is also under scrutiny
from various international agencies it would not be feasible to depart from these norms without affecting the confidence
of the international financial and capital markets. Besides, 90 days norm will come into effect only after a considerable
lapse of time i.e. 31st March, 2004. Hence, both banks and the industry will have sufficient time to adjust to the new
requirements.
        In case of sick SSI units fresh/additional credit facilities granted in these accounts as per rehabilitation package
shall be eligible for exemption from provisioning requirements. The has been introduced to ensure that banks do not
hesitate in granting additional facilities to sick SSI units.
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
COMMITTEE HAS NOT ACCEPTED REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
Para 3.6
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that in the context of liberalization and globalisation of the economy, the competitive
strengths of the small-scale industries will need to be enhanced through suitable policy measures by which they can be
made operational and more efficient. In order to formulate a sustainable policy framework, operational strategies and
action plan for this purpose, it is necessary to obtain relevant data through surveys, studies and investigations including
producer’s and customer’s feedback on the problem areas of various units.
Action Taken/Comments
        Government has been conducting various studies from time to time on different issues concerning the SSI sector so
as to assess the prevailing situation and Obtain feedback. Some of the specific studies conducted in the recent
past as well as ongoing studies are:----
        (i)    Dalal Consultants Report on Impact of Dereservation.
        (ii)    Sector Specific Studies on Impact of WTO, on Machine Tools, Marble, Shaneel and Food Processing.
        (iii)   UNIDO assisted Sector Specific Studies on Hand Tools, Medicinal Biotechnology/Glass and
Ceramics/Bicycle Parts/flower and Fragrance.
        In addition, the Administrative Staff College of India was commissioned to suggest a single law for the SSI sector
and as part of this process, detailed consultations have been held with SSI associations across the country. The Ministry
has also been consulting stakeholders as part of an exercise to identify sectors/products for enhancement in investment
ceiling and dereservation

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
        To further strengthen the information base about SSI activity in the country, the Ministry of SSI has launched the
3rd Census of SSI units, which will cover registered as well as unregistered units. The Census shall also identify causes
of sickness. The results of the Census are expected to be available by March 2003.
Further Recommendations
        The Committee notes that Government have conducted studies in various areas of Small Scale Industries Sector.
The Committee recommends that Government should provide an Action-Plan on basis of the studies made.
SETTING UP OF INCUBATORS
Para 3.7
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committees notes that measures such as setting up of incubators to assist the growth of small scale industry are
very much required. The Committee recommends that the concept of incubator facility may be strengthened for the
small scale sector in collaboration with the Department of Science and Technology, IITs and other laboratories. The
Ministry should take steps to provide such measures so as to enable the small entrepreneurs to use the facilities provided
by the incubators as they compete against importers as well as other domestic producers.
Action Taken/Comments
        Financing and promotion of knowledge-based enterprises which are primarily small and medium enterprises have
already emerged as the focus area for financial institutions. Projects which are at a seed stage with high research and
development content and are technology focused require an incubator to reach a pre-commercial stage. Alongwith
finance, these units require critical inputs in various functional areas like management support, strategic planning, seed /
test marketing. Keeping these factors in mind, the Finance Minister announced the launching of SIDBI National
Programme on Innovation and Incubation for Small Industries on March 11, 2000.
        During the year 2000-01, SIDBI took the initiative for setting up two innovation and incubation centers in
collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur and Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Ranchi. MoUs have
already been signed with these Institutions and the Centres at Kanpur is operational. The setting up of Incubation
Centres in Sunrise Industries also formed a component of the Comprehensive Policy Package on SSI announced by the
Honorable Prime Minister on 30 th August, 2000. Ministries on Non-Conventional Energy Sources, Information
Technology, Science and Technology (Department of Bio-Technology), Department of Scientific & Industrial Research,
(CSIR) and Telecommunications have been requested to set up Incubation Centres under their Ministries. The Tenth
Plan Working Group on SSI also recommended setting up Incubation Centres for which it has suggested an outlay of
Rs. 1000 crores. The Report of the Working Group has been sent to the Planning Commission for their consideration.
However, no outlay has been indicated for this Scheme so far.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should vigorously pursue with the various
Ministries/Department the setting up of incubation centers under their Ministries/Departments. The Committee wishes
to know the details of response received from the various Ministries/Departments in this regard.
CREDIT TO SSI SECTOR
Para 6.3
Observation/Recommendation
        While welcoming these steps, the Committee feels that there is need for effective implementation of the provision
of these schemes* by providing clear instructions. Banks had identified a time frame for clearance / rejection (with
reasons) of loan applications. However, they need to follow it sincerely. Further, once a loan has been sanctioned, a time
frame for the release of various instalments should be committed in accordance with the needs of the entrepreneurs. It
must also be ensured that the provision of the concept of single window, the time involved in making the disbursements
is considerably reduced. As far as the National Equity Fund (NEF) Scheme is concerned, it may be noted that the
disbursements under the Scheme are very small. The Scheme needs to be made more effective and efficient.
      *(a)   The limit for composite loans has been increased from Rs. 2 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs.
        (b)   391 specialized branches of public sector banks have been opened for small-scale industries as of September
30th, 2001.
        (c)   The exemption limit for collateral security has been increased from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 5 lakhs.
        (d)   The project cost limit under the National Equity Fund has been increase from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs.

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Action Taken/Comments
        Instructions already exist for sanction of composite loans upto Rs. 25 lakh, operationalisation of Specialised SSI
branches, sanction of collateral free loan upto a limit of Rs. 5 lakh and implementation of National Equity Fund Scheme
(NFF). Banks have been advised to lay down a clear cut monitoring system, which captures the process of sanctioning
loan from the receipt of application to sanction or rejection and the reasons for rejection.
        As regards the NEF Scheme, Banks have been advised by the RBI to make efforts to ensure further utilization of
the limits by giving wider publicity to the Scheme at the branch level. The Banks have been advised to instruct their
branches particularly the Specialized SSI branches to make earnest efforts in extending the facilities under the Scheme
to entrepreneurs in SSI and tiny sector and also impress upon their field level functionaries to popularize the Scheme.
SIDBI has been taking various steps for popularising the NEF. The Scheme has made significant improvement during
the last one year. The sanctions and disbursements under the Scheme have increased to Rs. 5.17 crore and Rs. 35.18
crores respectively in 2001-02 from Rs. 19.55 crore and Rs. 16.22 crore in Financial year 2001-01.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that receipt on receiving the loan applications may be issued by the banks to
individual Small Scale Sector Units. The Committee wishes to know whether the banks have actually laid down any
clear-cut monitoring system, which captures the process of sanctioning of loan from the receipt of application to
sanction or rejection thereof and the reasons for rejection.
        The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should elicit information about how far
banks have taken any concrete steps to popularize the NEF Scheme and outcome thereof.
LOAN WITHOUT  COLLATORAL
Para 6.4
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee also recommends that SSIs, branches of Banks should display prominently on the bank counters
that loans upto Rs. 5 lakhs are available without collateral. This would dispel the wrong notion that loans are not given
without collateral.
Action Taken/Comments
        In the Standing Advisory Committee Meeting on flow of institutional credit to SSI held on 3 rd April, 2002, a
decision was taken that banks should display n their branch premises the limits up to which collateral free loans are
available and other relevant information relating to finance of SSI sector. RBI has already advised all the banks for
implementation of the same.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee wishes to know the bank-wise information about the display in their branch premises the details of
the limits upto which collateral free loans are available and other relevant information relating to financing of Small
Scale Industries Sector.
ACCELARATED DEPRECIATION TO SSI UNITS
Para 9.7
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that removal of Quantitative Restrictions has brought Indian industry face-to-face with
foreign products, which are technologically far superior. Moreover, technical barriers to trade are emerging as major
non-tariff barriers to access the markets of the developed countries. Therefore, Indian industry, particularly to SSI
Sectors need support to upgrade to the high technical standards set by the developed countries. Accelerated rate of
depreciation may be allowed to SSIs units on purchase of plant and machinery for technology upgradation.
Action Taken/Comments
        This Ministry has launched the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme for technology upgradation of the SSIs in
certain select products/sub-sectors and the banks have been advised about the Scheme for providing financial assistance
accordingly. Banks have also been instructed to develop schemes to encourage investment by SSI units in technology
upgradation and harmonize the same with SIDBI.
        Additional depreciation @ 15% has been allowed on new plant & machinery for setting up new units or expanding
installed capacity of existing units by at least 25%, in the Union Budget 2002-03.
Further Recommendation

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
        The Committee wishes to know the details of the schemes introduced/likely to be introduced by the banks to
encourage investment by Small Scale Industrial Units in technology upgradation and harnessing of the loan with SIDBI.
ANTI-DUMPING MEASURES
Para 11.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that on account of almost all products coming under Open General License (OGL)
list, the Government may further strengthen that anti-dumping mechanism so that remedial measures may be initiated
expeditiously. Countervailing duties and safeguard duties may be imposed in order to protect domestic producers from
cheap imports. It may not be possible for SSIs units to function in such a competitive market. However, if they want to
grow from SSI level, all facilities available to them should continue for at least five years.
Action Taken/Comments
        The WTO Cell in the Office of DC (SSI) has taken up the matter with Directorate General of Anti-Dumping &
Allied Duties, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, to take appropriate action to further
strengthen the Anti-Dumping mechanism and to impose countervailing duties so as to initiate remedial measures
expeditiously. The matter was also taken up with Director General of Safeguards, to take appropriate action in order to
protect domestic producers from cheap imports. Under the Mission for the Millennium, this office had conducted an
exercise to study the compatibility with the WTO Agreements regarding the various support measures and schemes of
this Ministry. This was done in consultation with the Trade Policy Division, Department of Commerce, and Ministry of
Commerce & Industry. It is opined that all the schemes are WTO compatible.
        The Director General of Safeguards has already taken up action in respect of 12 products for investigations. So far,
safeguard duties in respect of 7 cases have been imposed.
        This Ministry has recently formulated a Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme to enhance the exports by
the SSIs. Under the Scheme, financial assistance of participation in international exhibitions, overseas study, tours,
assistance towards the production of publicity material, market studies etc. is given. Under the aforesaid Scheme,
financial assistance upto Rs. 1 lakh is also given to SSI Association who have initiated anti-dumping investigations.
        Majority of the Schemes and Programmes being implemented by the Government for the growth and development
of SSI Sector in India are continuous and perpetual as regards their periodicity. The period-specific Schemes like
Reimbursement of expense incurred on ISO-9000 Certification would continue till the end of Tenth Five Year Plan
period (March 2007); the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme was envisaged for a period of 5 years ending
September, 2005; the Scheme for setting up of Training Centers by industry Association was envisaged to be in
operation for an initial period of 5 years w.e.f. 2001-02 and extension thereafter will be considered on the basis of
performance and success of the Scheme. The support to the SSI sector in the form of various benefits incentives offered
through different Schemes would be available beyond 5 years also, therefore, the recommendation of the Committee to
continue the benefits available to the SSI sector for at least 5 years is in-built in the support measures already.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee desires that the Committee’s recommendation that if SSI Units want to grow from SSI level,
all facilities available to them should continue for at least five years and the Ministry’s reply thereto to the effect that the
benefits  available to SSI Sector for at least five years which was inbuilt in the support measures, would continue for
those SSIs who wanted to grow above the SSI level, should be given wide publicity through a suitably worded circular,
Press Releases and electronic media.
SICKNESS IN SSI SECTOR
Para 12.4
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that all banks should take effective steps to help sick SSIs restructure themselves. The
Committee observes that the abolition of Sick Industries Companies Act (SICA) so as to facilitate prompt winding up of
unviable enterprise and swift redeployment of their resources in production remains a promise. Similarly, on the
Competition Law, nothing has been done. It has reached only the stage of Parliamentary consideration. It has not
become a law.
Action Taken/Comments
        The major recommendations of the Working Group of Rehabilitation of Sick SSI units constituted by RBI under

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Kohli, the then Chairman of IBA were accepted and accordingly revised, detailed,
transparent guidelines on rehabilitation of sick SSI units have been issued by RBI vide circular dated 16 th January,
2002. These guidelines contain change of definition of sick SSI units, norms for deciding on the viability of sick SSI
unit besides providing an illustrative list of warning signals of incipient sickness. The banks have been advised to take
sympathetic attitude and strive for rehabilitation in respect of units in the SSI sector, particularly wherever the sickness
is on account of circumstances beyond the control of entrepreneurs. ‘Sick Industrial companies / undertakings’ as
defined under SICA, 1985 do not include small scale industrial undertakings.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that the Kohli Committee’s report on Rehabilitation of Sick SSI Units should be
published in booklet form in different Indian languages for circulation amongst the SSI Units with a view to educate and
encourage the SSI Sector.
SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES ACT
Para 12.5
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that action may be taken to regard to Sick Industrial Companies Act. Further,
Ministry should endeavour to see that Competition Law is enacted soon.
        In order to revive sick industries. The committee recommends further:-
        (a)   A special fund may be created for rehabilitation of sick SSIs and the Commercial Banks may earmark a
portion of loans to ailing (SSIs).
        (b)   The State Level Inter Institutional Committees (SLIICs) need to be revitalized and DICs may be used as a
forum to redress the grievances regarding delays in rehabilitation.
        (c)   An Arbitration Clause may also be included in all borrower-lender arrangements in terms of Indian Arbitration
Act to avoid protracted litigation and costs. Although Entrepreneurship Development through small enterprises
are basically owner-managed, a significant number of them do employ persons for performing managerial
functions. The SSI units on the growth path should encourage their key personnel to think and work more as
entrepreneurs than as mere employees.
Action Taken/Comments
        A Bill to repeal Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA) was introduced in Lok Sabha on
30th August, 2001. The bill is presently under consideration of Parliamentary Standing Committee. However, SSI do
not come under the purview of SICA.
        (a)   The RBI’s revised guidelines on rehabilitation of sick SSI units include norms of assistance to sick units to
bring about improvement in the rehabilitation of potentially viable units. If a sick SSI unit is found potentially
viable, the banks will be taking measures for rehabilitation for which assistance from any special fund may not
be considered necessary.
        (b)   State Level Inter Institutional Committees (SLIIC) have been formed in each State with Secretary (Industry)
of the State Government as Chairman and the In-charge of Regional Office of RBI, RPCD as Convener. 
Besides banks and financial institutions and Government Officials, representatives of local SSI Associations
are also invited to the meetings of the forum to be held every quarter.  RBI has issued instructions to its
Regional Offices to ensure holding of the meetings regularly.  The Kohli Committee has also recommended
that this forum may be revitalized by holding its meeting as per schedule and with active participation by
officials who are empowered to take decision. It has therefore suggested that in case of the Chairman’s
inability to attend a scheduled meeting, the Regional Director, RBI may Chair the meeting.   This suggestion is
under consideration of RBI. Regarding using the DICs as a forum to redress the grievances regarding delays in
rehabilitation,  it may be stated that the viability of a sick unit is left to the commercial judgment of financing
bank.  Once the sick unit has been identified as potentially viable, banks have been given a time cap of 6
months for implementation of the rehabilitation package. However, as recommended by the Committee, DICs
may be used as a forum to redress the grievances regarding delays in rehabilitation.
        (c)   The Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2002 which has come into effect from 14 th June, 2002 provides for the
Banking Ombudsman to act as an arbitrator in any dispute between a bank and its constituents or between a
bank and another bank, if both the parties agree for such a reference and the value of the claim in such dispute
does not exceed Rs. 10 lakh.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee expects that RBI would accept and implement Kohli Committee’s suggestion with regard to

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
revitalization of SLIIC.  The Committee also expects that Central Government in coordination with the State Industries
Departments use the Dices as a forum to redress the grievances regarding delay in rehabilitation.   The Committee
further recommends that the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2002 should be published in different Indian languages for
circulation to SSI Sector as a means to create awareness amongst SSIs about the existence and availability of such a
mechanism.
DE-RESERVATION OF SSI ITEMS
Para 18.4
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee feels that the Government should have given such* a package to the affected units.  This may
include timely and low cost credit; export assistance and proper infrastructure facilities. After
 
*      The Abid Hussain Committee recommended that the abolition of reservation should accompany a support package
for the small industries, which include equity support, interest   rate concessions, technology assistance etc. The
Abid Hussain Committee, therefore, recommended allocation of Rs. 500 crore per year i.e. Rs. 2,500 crore over the
next five years for the purpose.
 
giving the package, a time frame may be simultaneously given a such affected units to enable them to fight for survival. 
In the absence for such package, the Committee feels the units might be hard–pressed to survive.  Moreover, effecting
dereservation without any package will bring deleterious socio economic changes as reservation directly affects
employment and economic growth.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Government has already provided the needed support to SSI units through the Comprehensive Policy package,
which covers various aspects such as availability of timely and low cost credit, export assistance and infrastructure
facilities.  A phased dereservation of items has since been followed.  In addition, at all stages, stakeholders are being
consulted before placing the issue of reservation / de-reservation before the Advisory Committee constituted under
Industries Development & Regulation Act, 1951.  Government also got commissioned a Study through an independent
agency to find out the impact of dereservation.   The Study has not revealed any negative impact on the sectors
dereserved except for a marginal impact in respect of a few items.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee finds that the reply does not indicate the time-frame, which should be given after awarding the
package to SSI Units.  The Committee recommends that a final time-frame for the purpose should be given as well as
monitoring should be done about the progress made by the sick units.
INTEGRATED INFRASTRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT SCHEME (IIDS)
Para 19.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee recommends that unless State Governments play a proactive role in creating infrastructure for
industries, the integration and harmonization of villages with industrial development cannot be achieved.   Active
participation of State Governments,  NGOs and SSI Associations should be ensured by providing appropriate
encouragement to them.  This is in keeping with the Industrial policy announced in 1991 to give special thrust to the
promotion and strengthening of small, tiny and village industries. 
Action Taken/Comments
        All important issues pertaining to the promotion and strengthening of small tiny and village industries are
discussed in the SSI Board Meeting, which is held periodically, The State Governments, NGOs and SSI associations are
permanent members of the SSI Board.  They are encouraged to put forth their views/ideas and suggestions at this forum
and are, in turn, apprised of the initiatives taken by the Ministry of SSI. Each and every State Government takes active
part in the deliberations of this meeting  individually.  Besides, State-specific problems are also addressed through field
offices of SIDO located in every State, as and when required.
Further Recommendation
        The Committee still feels that infrastructure facilities in States are in a bad shape.  The Committee would like to
address the problems separately.


93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED
VENTURE CAPITAL FUNDS
Paras 10.3  & 10.4
Observation/Recommendation
Para 10.3
        The Committee observes that SIDBI has experience in managing Venture Capital Funds for small industries set up
both at regional and national levels and the Banks is poised to take up such activities further with fund support from the
Government.
Para 10.4
        The Committee recommends that in order to initiate the activities of the proposed fund and run the same on
sustainable basis, initially a fund support of Rs. 20 crore may be provided by the Government of India to SIDBI. 
Income Tax exemption may also be restored to SIDBI.
Action Taken/Comments
        Withdrawal of tax exemption status to SIDBI was announced in the Budget 2001-02.  Subsequently though the
issue was reviewed, tax exemption status was not restored.  However, in the Union Budget 2002-03, it was inter-alia
announced that all capital gains exemption u/s 54 EC of the Income Tax Act would be available in respect of amounts
invested in Bonds issued by the SIDBI.
Para 14.4
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee further recommends that:-
        (a)   Establishment of a Marketing Development Fund with a minimum corpus of Rs. 500 crore should be made.
        (b)   Engagement of marketing experts by State Financial Corporations and banks for appraisal of projects may be
done.
        (c)   Consultancy by banks to small-scale units regarding formulation of their marketing plans may be taken up.
        (d)   Organisation of exhibition events for SSI products in major cities of the country and abroad may be done.
        (e)   Appointment of a Central level educational institution for designing of short-term courses on specific aspects
of marketing and other management aspects may be made.
        (f)    A well-planned strategy at the national level for developing exports from small-scale industries sector,
including identification of sub-sectors with high export potential may be carried out.
        (g)   Recognition of marketing companies as small-scale enterprises and provision of institutional credit facilities to
them for the necessary infrastructure and purchase of goods may be done.
Action Taken/Comments
        (a)   Funds to the tune of Rs.600 lakhs have been proposed under Tenth Plan for providing financial assistance to
SSI units under the Market Development Assistance Scheme (SSI-MDA).
        (b)   RBI has informed that the officials of the banks dealing with appraisal of projects have, during the course of
their jobs, developed expertise in appraising projects.  Moreover, their appraisal skills are updated through
appropriate training from time to time.   However, if and when required, banks may engage marketing experts
for appraising projects.
        (c)   RBI has informed that the banks may perform the role of consultants to small-scale units regarding
formulation of their market plan, as and when required.
        (d)   To give wider exposure to SSI products during 2001-02, the office of DC (SSI) participated in 6 International
Trade Fairs/exhibitions (abroad) and 7 domestic exhibitions by displaying products from SSI units covering
general as well as specific industry groups in the model SIDO stall and also encouraging representatives from
participating units to visit the fair personally. For the year 2002-03, this office has decided to participate in 7
International exhibitions (abroad) and 10 domestic exhibitions/fairs.
        (e)   National Institute of Small Industry Extension Training, Hyderabad, has been identified as a Central Level

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
Institution as it is already conducting short-term training   programmes on specific aspects of marketing and
other management aspects.
        (f)    The strategic plan for developing exports from the Small Scale Industries (SSI) is a part of the Medium Term
Export Strategy 2002-2007 announced by Ministry of Commerce and Industry, (Department of Commerce
recently). This strategic plan consists of identifying the product categories currently having strong SSI
presence and perceived to record high demand growth in global markets, identifying and implementing the
specific components of the policy package for strengthening and upgrading the production potential and export
orientation of these SSI sector, and developing a high tech and efficient SSI sector as a whole.
        (g)   So far as the issue of recognizing marketing companies as small enterprises and provision of institutional
credit facility to them is concerned, this matter is currently under examination. Inputs on the matter have been
received from the Reserve Bank of India and SIDBI. Further consultations with SIDBI are in progress.
LABOUR REFORMS IN SSIs
Para 16.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of a plethora of labour laws, a single unified Act with simple
provisions understandable by the entrepreneurs of SSI units be legislated. SSI units employing unto 50 persons should
be kept outside the purview of the labour law. Instead of the complex Industrial Disputes Act, a simpler law to govern
the relationship between the Employer and the Employee be made applicable. The Shops and Establishments Act may
also be suitably modified.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Administrative Staff College of India has presented the draft of a Small Enterprises Development Bill in the
47th Meeting of the SSI Board held on 4 th July 2002. The draft bill suggests streamlining of inspections and reduction
of a large number of forms under various labour laws. In addition, it is learnt that the National Commission of Labour
has recommended the enactment of a Small Enterprises Employment Relations Act under which SSI units employing
upto 20 persons could be kept outside the purview of Labour Laws.
CUMBERSOME LEGISLATION
Para 16.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee further observes that the existing social security legislations such Employees’ Provident Fund &
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, Employees' State Insurance Act, Maternity Benefits Act, Workmen’s Compensation Act,
and the Payment of Gratuity Act are very cumbersome for entrepreneurs of small scale units to understand and comply
with. The Committee therefore recommends that instead of so many social security legislations, a comprehensive Social
Security Scheme be formulated for providing for one insurance cover to each workman. The small scale units should be
able to devote more time to quality management rather than inspector management.
Action Taken/Comments
        All State Chief Ministers have been requested by MOS (SSI) to put in place a Self-Certification System in place of
returns submitted under various labour laws.
        The 38 th Session of Indian Labour Conference shall also be taking up the problems and challenges being faced by
the small-scale sector.
DELAYED PAYMENT TO SSIs
Para 20.3
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee, therefore, recommends that stringent action should be taken against the erring large companies
which have failed to make payment to SSIs in due time. Necessary amendment for taking punitive action may also be
contemplated in the Delayed Payment Act.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 provides for
payment of penal interest by the buyer to supplier for payments made after the due date at one and half time of prime
lending rate charged by State Bank of India. The Act also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Income-tax Act, 1961, the amount of interest payable or paid by any buyer, under or in accordance with the provisions

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
of this Act, shall not, for the purpose of computation of income under the Income-tax Act, 1961, be allowed as
deduction.
        In order to discuss further amendments to the interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale Ancillary Industrial
Undertakings Act, 1993 and Amendment Act, 1998 a meeting was held with representatives of Small Scale Industry
Associations, officials of Ministry of Law, (CBDT and Department of Company Affairs on 4 th June, 2002. The
participants were of the view that since IFCs were set up after the Act was amended and these are now working in most
of the States and are given awards, it would be  appropriate that some feedback on IFCs working be obtained viz.
Number of cases of delayed payments received by them, Number of awards given, type of awards such as principal and
interest, average time taken to decide a case, constraints faced by the IFCs in their working and suggestions, if any, to
make them effective. Accordingly, the States have been requested to furnish the above information.
PURCHASE PREFERENCE FOR SSI SECTOR
Para 22.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee therefore, recommends that in order to protect small-scale sector from multinational companies and
others, a certain % of items say 33% should be purchased by Central and State Government Departments/agencies
specially when the items reserved for SSI sector have been withdrawn and majority of the items have been put on OGL
list. The policy of purchase preference system as followed by USA Government for protection of indigenous industries
may be emulated. Necessary action in this regard should be initiated by the Ministry of SSI immediately.
Action Taken/Comments
        The Draft Small Enterprises Development Bill, 2002 includes a provision to this effect in Chapter VII – Measures
of Trade Protection envisaging that Central Government and State/UT Governments shall, notify Central and State/UT
Procurement policy to be followed by the respective Governments in the purchase of goods or availing of services for
their use and also notify the percentage or quantum which shall be reserved for the small enterprises.
        The State Governments/concerned agencies have been asked to submit their views/comments on the Draft Bill by
August 15, 2002.
PARTNERSHIP ACT
Para 23.2
Observation/Recommendation
        The Committee observes that proposal of Limited Partnership mooted by the SSI Association has been a long
pending demand. This should be looked into by the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of SSI should take appropriate
action in the matter.
Action Taken/Comments
        Ministry of Law, Department of Company Affairs has examined the matter and constituted a Working Group
consisting of officers of Department of Company Affairs, Min. of SSI & ARI and O/o DC (SSI). It was agreed in the
meeting that Min. of SSI would suggest various points required to be incorporated in the proposed legislation to
Department of Company Affairs after which the matter would be taken up jointly for further consideration to decide as
to which of the Ministry i.e. Min. of Law or Min. of SSI is to pilot the bill. This Ministry has since conveyed its views
to Min. of Law for its consideration.
                                                    OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
        The Committee notes that Government has conducted studies in various areas of Small Scale Industries Sector. The
Committee recommends that Government should provide an Action-Plan on basis of the studies made. (Para 3.6)
        The Committee recommends that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should vigorously pursue with the various
Ministries/Departments the setting up of incubation centres under their Ministries/Departments. The Committee wishes
to know the details of response received from the various Ministries/Departments in this regard.  (Para 3.7)
        The Committee recommends that receipts on receiving the loan applications may be issued by the banks to
individual Small Scale Sector Units. The Committee wishes to know whether the banks have actually laid down any
clear-cut monitoring system, which captures the process of sanctioning of loan from the receipt of application to

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
sanction or rejection thereof and the reasons for rejection.
        The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Small Scale Industries should elicit information about how far
banks have taken any concrete steps to popularize the NEF Scheme and outcome thereof.
                                                                                                                                             (Para 6.3)
        The Committee wishes to know the bank-wise information about the display in their branch premises the details of
the limits up to which collateral free loans are available and other relevant information relating to financing of Small
Scale Industries Sector.                                                                                                                  (Para 6.4)
        The Committee wishes to know the details of the schemes introduced/likely to be introduced by the banks to
encourage investment by Small Scale Industries Units in technology upgradation and harnessing of the loan with
SIDBI.      (Para 9)
        The Committee desires that the Committee’s recommendation that if SSI Units want to grow from SSI level, all
facilities available to them should continue for at least five years and the Ministry’s reply thereto to the effect that the
benefits available to SSI sector for at least five years which was inbuilt in the support measures, would continue for
those SSIs who wanted to grow above the SSI level, should be given wide publicity through a suitably worded circular,
press release and electronic media.                                                                                                                                 (Para
11.2)
        The Committee recommends that the Kohli Committee’s report on Rehabilitation of Sick SSI Units should be
published in booklet form in different Indians languages for circulation amongst the SSI Units with a view to educate
and encourage the SSI Sector.                                                                                                                         (Para 12.4)
        The Committee expects that RBI would accept and implement Kohli Committee’s suggestion with regard to
revitalization of SLIIC. The Committee also expects that Central Government in coordination with the State Industries
Departments use the DICs as a forum to redress the grievances regarding delay in rehabilitation. The Committee further
recommends that the Banking Ombudsman Scheme, 2002 should be published in different Indian languages for
circulation to SSI sector as a means to create awareness amongst SSIs about the existence and availability of such a
mechanism.        (Para 12.5)
        The Committee finds that the reply does not indicate the time frame, which should be given after awarding the
package to SSI Units. The Committee recommends that a final time frame for the purpose should be given as well as
monitoring should be done about the progress made by the sick units.
                                                                                                                                           (Para 18.4)
        The Committee still feels that infrastructure facilities in States are in a bad shape. The Committee would like to
address the problem separately.                                                                                                       (Para 19.3)
   MINUTES  
XIII
                                                     
THIRTEENTH  MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11th December, 2002 in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
        PRESENT
   1.  Dr. P.C. Alexander           ----     Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. M.M. Agarwal
   3.  Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan
   4.  Shri P.K. Maheshwari
        LOK SABHA
   5.  Shri Nepal Chandra Das
   6.  Shri A.C. Jose
   7.  Shri Ram Singh Kaswan
   8.  Shri A. Narendra
   9.  Shri Ananta Nayak
10.  Shri Malyala Rajaiah
11.  Shri P. Rajendran

93rd Report of Committee on Industry
file:///D/Committee%20on%20Industry/93rdreport.htm[04-07-2016 12:19:50]
12.  Dr. B.B. Ramaiah
13.  Shri Tarachand Sahu
14.  Chowdhary Talib Hussain
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Joint Secretary
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
        Shri Rakesh Naithani, Committee Officer
2.     At the out set the Chairman welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda for the meeting of the day.
3.0   The Committee thereafter, took up auto policy for discussion. The Chairman apprised the Members that the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry had recommended in its 59th Report that the Government should
formulate an Auto Policy in view of the ongoing liberalization of the economy and W.T.O. Obligations. In response to
the Committee's recommendations the Department of Heavy Industries in its action taken note has informed the
Committee that Government of India has brought out an Auto Policy on 7th March, 2002.
3.1   The Chairman stated that the Committee on Industry took up the auto policy for detailed discussion as the policy
laid down certain recommendations for the growth of the Industry. Since most of these recommendations required
actions by the Ministries other than the Department of Heavy Industries and so far these recommendations had not been
translated into real Government Policy.
3.2   The Chairman apprised the Members that the Committee had already taken up the matter for discussion and in this
regard the Committee had held two meetings on 24th June and 16th July, 2002. Based on the discussion held on 24th
June, 2002 a questionnaire was prepared and replies thereon was obtained from Department of Heavy Industries. In the
Meeting held on 16th July, 2002 the Committee had interacted with Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI);
Society of India Automobiles Manufacturers (SIAM); Automotive Tyre Manufacturers Association (ATMA); and
Automotive Component Manufacturers Association (ACMA); Prozon Inc. (manufacture of Fuel saver). Apprising the
Members the details of discussion held in these two meetings, the Chairman spelt out the scope for discussion in auto
policy which inter-alia  included import of second hand imported cars; lack of testing facilities; foreign direct
investment, research and development; construction of bus-body building; terminal life policy; lifting of quantitive
restriction; using spurious items and related 'e' mark issue; excise duty on tyre and concession on imported tyre; Ban on
used tyre; difficulties due to octroi on 5-6 States, switching over from tube tyre to tubeless tyre; encouragement to small
car industries; infrastructure import tariff; environmental aspects etc.
3.3   The Committee, thereafter, discussed in details the aims of Auto Policy which aimed at to promote integrated,
phased, enduring and self-sustained growth of the Indian Automobile Industry. The Committee discussed also the
objective to Auto Policy which inter-alia include promotion of a globally competitive automotive industry; exalting the
sector as a lever of industrial growth and an employment; Establishment of an international hub for manufacturing small
affordable passenger cars and key centre for manufacturing tractors and two wheelers in the world; ensuring a balanced
transition to open trade at a minimal risk to the Indian Economy and local industry; modernisation of the industry by
facilitating indigenous design, research and development; steering up India's software industry into automotive
technology; development of domestic safety and environemental standard at par with international standards; assisting
development of vehicles propelled by alternative energy sources.
 
4.0 * * *
4.1   After a brief discussion all reports were adopted unanimously without any modification.
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.