PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
         RAJYA SABHA                   
                 
 
                                                                                                      
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY  
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                  ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 2 10TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008 -09) 
PERTAINING TO  
 
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
______________________________ ______________________________________________   
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    4 th March, 2010  )  
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE  LOK SABHA ON 4 th March, 2010 )  
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIA T 
NEW DELHI  
  
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (SAKA)  
 
214 


 
                      PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA  
  
  
  
           
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY  
 
TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                  ON 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE 2 10TH   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008 -09) 
PERTAINING TO  
 
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
   ___________________________________________________________________  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    4 th March,2010 )  
   (LAID ON THE TABLE  OF THE   LOK SABHA ON 4 th March, 2010 )  
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIA T 
NEW DELHI  
  
 March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (SAKA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
C O N T E N T S 
  
                                                                 PAGES 
   
 1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                               ( i )                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 2.  INTRODUCTION                                          ( ii)                                                                                                                                                         
 3. REPORT                                                                                                                 
   (i) CHAPTER – I                                                                                                     
      Recommendations/observations, which have been 
      accepted by the Ministry.                      
  
(ii) CHAPTER–II                                                   
                                                                                                                                       
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
does not desire to pursue  in view of the ministry’s   
replies for the present                              
  
(iii) CHAPTER–III                       
  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the  
Committee has either not accepted the replies of the Ministry                 
or has asked the Ministry to review its replies.               
     
(iv) CHAPTER – IV                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final  
replies of the Ministry have not been received                                                                     
  
4.    OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                      
        OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INDUSTRY  
(Constituted w.e.f 31 st August , 2009)  
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
 
    
 1.   Shri Akhilesh Das Gupta  —  Chairman 
2. Shri G. Sanjeeva Reddy 
3.   Shri  Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
4. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
5.   Shri Natuji H. Thakor 
6. Smt. Kusum Rai 
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy 
8. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9. Shri  O. T. Lepcha 
10.  Shri Nandamuri Harikrishana  
          LOK SABHA  
 
11.    Shri Suvendu Adhikari 
12.   Shri Badruddin Ajmal 
13.   Shri Bansagopal Chowdhury 
14.   Shri Sabbam Hari 
15.   Smt. Poonam Veljibhai Jat 
16.   Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
17.   Shri M. Krishnaswamy 
18.   Shri Pakuri Lal 
19.   Shri Bharat Ram Meghwal 
20.   Shri Devendra Nagpal 
21.   Shri Gorakhnath Pandey 
22.   Shri Krishanbhai V. Patel 
23.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
24.   Shri Ramsinh Rathwa 
25.   Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
26.   Shri Raju Shetti  
27.   Shri Suresh Kashinath Taware 
28.   Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
29.   Vacant 
30.   Vacant 
31.   Vacant 
        SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Director 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint  Director 
Shri Anil Kumar Saini, Committee Officer  
Shri Dharmendera Mohley,  Committee Officer 
 


 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry, having  been  authorized  by the Committee, hereby present this  Two Hundred  
and Fourteenth  Report on Action Taken Notes  furnished  by the Ministry of  Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in the Committee ’s Two 
Hundred and Tenth Report on the  Demands For Grants (2008 -09) for the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises .    
 
2. I thank the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises for furnishing the 
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Committee ’s Two Hundred 
and Tenth Report. 
  
3. The Committee in its meeting held on the   11th December , 2009 considered and 
adopted the report. 
  
                           Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta    
                                                                                                                                 Chairman                                                                                      
                                                                                         Department -related Parliamentary 
                                                                                              Standing Committee on Industry 
 
New Delhi 
11th December, 2009 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
REPORT 
  
  
 The Action Taken Report of the Committee deals with the Ac tion Taken by the 
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises on the recommendations contained in 
the Committee’s Two Hundred and Tenth  Report on the  Demands For Grants (2008 -09) 
pertaining to Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.   
  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises  in respect of the   recommendations contained in the Report.   These 
have been categorized as follows: 
  
Chapter -I- The recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry.  
    
Chapter -II- The recommendation/observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the ministry’s  replies for the present.  
  
Chapter -III- The recommendations/observations in respect of which the Committee has 
either not accepted replies of the Ministry or has asked the Ministry to review its reply. 
Chapter -IV- The recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received.     
3. In respect of recommendati ons placed in Chapter -IV, the Ministry has either 
furnished the interim replies or couched its language in  vague terms like  noted for 
compliance/guidance, therefore, the Committee desires  that the Ministry should furnish 
Action Taken Notes in  respects of recommendations categorized   in Chapter -IV  in detail 
and to the point, as per the intention and spirit of the recommendations of the Committee. 
    
4. The details of the ATR is being discussed in the succeeding pages.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
CHAPTER-I 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The C ommittee takes a serious note of the reduction under the various 
Schemes/Programmes in view of the role and contribution of the MSME sector in 
creation of larger employment opportunities at a lower capital cost. M/o MS & ME 
should take up the matter with the Planning C ommission strongly and get the 
projected sum released so as to run the Schemes /Programmes smoothly and provide 
employment to larger sector in the country as per the policy of the Government .  
Para (10) 
 
 Action taken/Comments  
 
The Ministry will strongly take up the matter with the Planning Commission for 
increasing the allocation of funds at RE stage taking into account the pace of actual 
expenditure in 2008-09. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recomme nds that in order to promote climate friendly 
technologies for MSME sector there is a need to create Central Climate Friendly 
Technology Fund to help MSMEs to adopt these technologies for which the initial 
funding could be done by Central Government with p rivate participation by way of 
contribution to this fund in terms of technology resources.  
Para (36) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 In pursuance of Package for Promotion of Micro and Small Enterprises, 
‘Technology Mission’ has been established with a view to assi st  micro, small and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) in technology upgradation, energy conservation and pollution 
mitigation. Further, a ‘Technology Mission Unit (TMU) ’ has been created in the MSME - 
Development Institute, New Delhi to implement the activities o f Technology Mission.  A 
‘Programme Coordinator’ has been engaged and suitable action plan is being firmed up.  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee desires that in order to provide real help to the micro 
industries direct and easy access to the tec hnologies developed by Central Scientific 
Organisations should be encouraged.  
Para (37) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 In pursuance of Package for Promotion of Micro and Small Enterprises, 
‘Technology Mission’ has been established with a view to assist  micro, sm all and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) in technology upgradation, energy conservation and pollution 
mitigation. Further, a ‘Technology Mission Unit (TMU) ’ has been created in the MSME - 
Development Institute, New Delhi to implement the activities of Technology Mission.  A 
‘Programme Coordinator’ has been engaged and suitable action plan is being firmed up.  


  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee recommends that the registration of Institutes in NER should 
be expedited and Committee be informed of the progr ess made in this regard.  
Para (205) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
There was a ban on registration of new khadi institutions with KVIC and State KVI 
Boards. Now KVIC has given relaxation for registration of new khadi institutions managed 
by SC/ST and institutions located in North Eastern Region. By the end of June 2008, 70 
khadi institutions proposals have been received by KVIC for their registration, of which 34 
new khadi institutions have already been registered and remaining proposals are under 
examination.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 


 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes a serious note that instead of furnishing target s for the 
Schemes /Programmes for the year 2007 -08 the projection under the various Schemes 
/Programmes have bee n furnished . It also noted that no target s for Skill 
Development/(Entrepreneurship Development Programme (E DP) was set which is the 
backbone of success for each scheme and programme.  
Para (13) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 It is submitted that the projected del iverables/physical outputs against the Budget 
allocation for the schemes refer to the targets under the scheme. 
 
 The scheme of Management Development Programme (MDP)/ Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme (EDP)/Skill Development is a sub -scheme of the ma jor scheme 
Promotional Services Institutions & Programmes and for which a budget provision of 
Rs.6.12 crore during 2007 -08 was kept against which an expenditure of Rs.9.60 crore has 
been made.  Physical target of conducting 1,400 Nos. of EDPs/Skill Develop ment 
Programmes and 400 Nos. of MDPs benefiting 1,10,000 persons during the year 2007 -08 
was set against which 2,706 Nos. of EDPs/Skill Development Programmes and 281 Nos. of 
MDPs have been conducted benefiting 1,42,479 persons during the period.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee appreciates that despite the fact that the funds allocated under 
Credit Guarantee Scheme for 2007 -08 exhausted be fore the end of financial year, the 
targets for coverage of women and SC/ST owned enterprises achieved is th ree times 
higher. It would like to know the skills and planning devised for execution and 
recommends for application of planning on these lines in other Schemes/Programmes 
to achieve the target.  
Para (27) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 Under the Micro Finance Pro gramme, funds are provided to SIDBI under Portfolio 
Risk Fund( PRF) which is used for 75% of security deposit requirement from the 
MFIs/NGOs. Although the fund provided by the Government under ‘PRF’ was fully 
utilized by SIDBI before the end of financial ye ar, SIDBI continued to provide loans to the 
MFIs/NGOs under the existing dispensation after obtaining the necessary approval from 
the SIDBI Board. Hence, the achievement under the scheme was higher than the targets 
fixed. At the end of FY 2008 -09, there wa s a shortfall of Rs. 21.20 crore under PRF (i.e. 
amount utilized by SIDBI in excess of the funds provided by the Government). 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 


The Committee notes that the C redit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme(CLCSS) 
has been launched for the  technology upgradation of small industries sector in 
selected products. This scheme is implemented through SIDBI and NABARD. With 
the increasing competition due to liberalization of the economy, the survival and 
growth of the SSI units are critically depe ndent on their modernization and 
technological upgrdation.  It feels that the ceiling of loan amount should be enhanced 
to Rs. 1 crore and the rate of subsidy should be 15%.  
Para (32)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The ceiling of loan amount has been enhanced t o Rs.1 crore and the rate of subsidy 
to 15% under the scheme w.e.f. 29th September 2005. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Government, with an objective to 
support the manufacturing sector, particularly the Small and M edium Enterprises 
(SMEs) in their endeavour to become competitive, announced 10 -point initiative 
under   “National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme ” (NMCP). The said 
programme has the 10 components/ programmes. The NMCP was formulated   by the 
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) in consultation with the 
industry and other stake holders including Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises.   
Para (40) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 No comments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committe e views that the NMCP is to be implemented through the 
Ministry of MSME during Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007 -2012) under Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode, wherein the total cost is likely to be Rs. 973.25 crore, out of 
which Rs.745.10 crore would be G overnment contribution.  
Para (41) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 No comments. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee desires that the report on the causes and incidence of sickness 
be brought out by the Ministry at the earliest and at the same time it ex pects that 
report on each survey and study  conducted on MSME sector, either by the Ministry 
or agency hired by it should be informed to the Committee with a copy of each such 
survey /report.  


 
Para (47) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The final Report on ‘causes and incidence of sickness ’ has been submitted by A F 
Ferguson recently and is presently under examination. Once the Report is approved, a copy 
of the same would be forwarded to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee is pleased to  note the exports facilitated and recommends that 
NSIC should  continue its efforts with a close co -ordination of M/o MS & ME to 
provide a great er fillip to the MSME sector but is also surprised to note the static 
value of exports in the 2006-07 and 2007-08. It would like to know the reason s for the 
static growth.  
 
Para (69) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
NSIC is engaged in facilitation of Export of Product & Project (Plant & Machinery) 
being manufactured by MSME through participation in number of international exhibitions. 
In the said events, NSIC participates with the MSMEs that gives them an opportunity to 
interact with buyer(s) directly for finalization of orders. The delegations from different 
countries who visit NSIC are taken around to the MSMEs for discussions to  facilitate 
generation of export business for their products/machines. Besides above, NSIC also 
directly exports products like Builders ’ Hardware, Hand Tools, Engineering components, 
etc., on procuring orders from overseas buyers. In all the above endeavou rs, NSIC 
maintains close coordination with MSMEs for export facilitation of their products.  
NSIC is concentrating on Project Exports and has received export orders for the supply of 
projects worth Rs. 3.16 crore from overseas buyer recently in the year 20 07-08 which is 
under process and would be exported in the next year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
 
The Committee observed the export orders and feels that the reasons for the 
retardation may be informed to the C ommittee and efforts should be made to 
counteract the problem area s at priority. 
Para (71) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
  
NSIC was engaged in executing direct export orders from MSME but to assist more 
number of units, it was decided to facilitate the units in export instead of engaging in direct 
export. The figures given are direct export business. But in the year 2007 -08 a number of 
units were facilitated in exporting and the value of exports facilitated amounts to Rs. 70 
crores. Further, with a view to enhance the export of low cost technologies relevant  for 
creating training, self employment opportunities, NSIC have invited number of potential 
buyers/delegations from different overseas countries to NSIC Incubation Centre in New 


Delhi where the lower cost technologies are displayed in operation. Various v isiting 
delegate members have expressed their willingness to import low cost technologies from 
NSIC. 
With the change in approach as explained above, NSIC is mainly engaged in 
facilitating the Export of Product & Project by participating in Exhibitions both  
International and Domestic. Project Export business i.e. supplying of Plant & Machinery 
manufactured by SME units to overseas buyers on Turnkey basis is also being done as and 
when specific orders are obtained. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
The Committee is pleased to note the  contribution of NSIC in conducting 
Entrepreneurship Development Programme  and hopes that NSIC would continue to 
play its active role in awareness and skill development.   
Para (75) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 NSIC is engaged in conductin g various technical training programmes in its 
Technical Training and Development Centers and these programmes are meant for 
imparting skill in various trades in conventional technical trades as well as hi -tech areas. In 
addition to this small enterprises establishment programmes are conducted for imparting 
entrepreneurship training to enable the participants to put up their own enterprise. Also 
NSIC has embarked upon incubators for small enterprises establishment as well as training 
cum incubation centres under public private partnership mode of operation. Thus NSIC 
continues to play an active role for skill upgradation and entrepreneurship development. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee finds that the amount allocated under Khadi and VI loans was 
under utilized in 2007 -08. 
Para (98) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Under the Khadi Loan and VI Loan Sub -heads of KVIC, financial assistance is 
provided for strengthening the khadi institutions located in North Eastern States. Funds 
earmarked and released by the Ministry of MSME to KVIC under these heads during 2007-
08 are as under: 
 
 
Sub-head BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08  Amount released  
Khadi Loan Rs. 3.00 crore Rs.1.00 crore Rs. 1.00 crore 
 
VI Loan Rs. 1.00 crore Rs. 0.50 crore Rs. 0.01 crore* 
 
      
            


* Despite efforts of KVIC, funds allocated under VI loans were not fully utilized in 2007 -
08. However, the unutilized amount with respect to RE 2007 -08 was transferred to Non 
Lapsable Central Pool Resources (NLCPR). 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committe e notes with concern that the KVIC is not making optimum 
capacity utilization of its existing production capacity as against a production capacity 
of 33 lakhs kgs only 20 .39 lakh kgs was produced by the Central Silver Plants.  
Para (106) 
 
Action taken/Comm ents 
 
As far as raw material supply is concerned, KVIC operates 6 Central Sliver Plants 
at Kuttur, Chitradurga, Sehore, Raibareilly, Etah and Hajipur to provide improved quality 
of raw material to the khadi institutions. The existing production capacity of  6 sliver plants 
together is around 33 lakh kgs.  With the special efforts of KVIC, the production in these 
sliver plants has shown an increasing trend during last three years as given under: 
 
Year 
 
Qty. lakh Kgs 
2005-06 21.85 
2006-07 24.46 
2007-08(P) 29.74 
 
KVIC is taking special steps to further improve the performance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that KVIC should expeditiously finalise the proposal 
to prepare short films on various schemes of KVIC for creating better awareness among the 
masses. 
Para (114) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
There is a separate directorate of publicity in the Central Office, KVIC to give wide 
publicity of khadi and village industry activities/programmes undertaken by KVIC among 
the masses. It publishes and  distributes booklet on KVI programmes, organises press 
conference, give advertisement in various News papers, Souvenirs and magazines, 
organization of awareness camps, etc., from time to time.  
KVIC has also made a TV serial on “REGP- Success Stories” for telecast which is 
in the process of getting approved by Doordarshan for release. A short film “Drishti Anant” 
of 30 minutes duration highlighting the various activities/schemes undertaken by KVIC is 
also under completion.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee noted the number of projects taken up under P roduct 
Development, Design Intervention and Packaging  in 2007 -08 and feels that the 


number has come down. It also feels that the impact of this intervention should be 
evaluated on priority keeping in  view the increased sales and production . 
 
Para (120) 
 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The Product Development, Design Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP) scheme 
was launched in November 2002 as a small intervention with a view to selectively 
improving the quality  of khadi products and also to diversify into new products.  The 
scheme envisages improvement in product quality, introducing new designs and better 
packaging of products in a limited way. It also seeks to uplift the marketability of khadi by 
enlisting the support of professional designers approved by the National Institute of Design 
(NID). Under this scheme, financial assistance is provided to the institutions or 
entrepreneurs affiliated to the KVIC or State KVIBs upto Rs. 2 lakh per project per year or 
75 per cent of the project cost whichever is less. In the case of individual entrepreneurs, 
assistance is upto Rs. 1 lakh or 75 per cent of the project cost, whichever is less. Internal 
studies conducted by KVIC have indicated that production and sale have i ncreased 
approximately by 13 per cent and 21 per cent, respectively, in the case of projects taken up 
under PRODIP.  The progress made under this scheme during X Plan and in 2007 -08 is as 
follows: 
 
Year Total No. of  KVI projects assisted 
2003-04 121 
2004-05 69 
2005-06 116 
2006-07 162 
Total  468 
2007-08 218 
The impact of the interventions for increased sales and production has been got 
evaluated by KVIC through the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad. The 
evaluation report reveals that after implementation of PRODIP, khadi and village industries 
taking up the packaging design are able to make the products competitive and sales of such 
products have increased. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee appreciates ‘Ready To Use Mission ’ and  recommends its 
extension to all States/UTs in phases and also recommends that either NIFT or any 
other fashion technology institute of repute may be involved for improving the design 
and quality of khadi which would ultimately lead to increased sale a nd thereby 
providing larger employment opportunities.  
Para (143) 
Action taken/Comments  
 


KVIC has tied up with some reputed organizations like NIFT for improving the 
designs and quality of khadi products under its project “Ready To Use Mission”. Initially, 
KVIC has implemented this project at Murshidabad, West Bengal and Padiyur, TamilNadu. 
After successful implementation of this project in these States, two more projects have 
been sanctioned by KVIC in Rajasthan. KVIC intends to implement the scheme in Utta r 
Pradesh and Gujarat and gradually in all States. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that product diversification, design and fashion 
development and fashion shows in major cities would assist marketing of khadi, 
marketability of products o f village industries could be enhanced by concentrating 
more on quality and packaging.  
Para (144) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
For improved design and packaging a scheme “Product Development  Design 
Intervention and Packaging (PRODIP)” has been implemented by KV IC. Fashion Shows 
are also organized by KVIC in the last few years such as in the International Trade Fair 
held in Delhi. The draft evaluation report of PRODIP reveals that after implementation of 
PRODIP, design and quality of products have improved and si multaneously sales have 
increased. KVIC decided to conduct more awareness camps on the said scheme among the 
institutions/ entrepreneurs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that apart from sale of KVI products through 
Bhavans, Bhandars, Mobile Vans, and three wheelers in all big cities, their marketing 
on commission basis at district and village market s besides weekly haats needs to be 
encouraged. It feels the need of more Khadi Bazaars with the active involvement of 
State Governments and  Local Bodies.  
Para (145) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
KVIC undertakes marketing activities of khadi and village industries products 
through its 12 departmentally run Khadi Gramodyog Bhawans located in urban areas and 
7050 institutional/retail sales outlets spre ad in different parts of the country. The 
suggestions of the Committee for establishment of khadi bazaars with the active 
involvement of State Governments and local bodies is greatly appreciated. KVIC has 
initiated steps for such establishment. In this regard, two proposals from Assam KVI Board 
and J & K KVI Board have been received which are under consideration in KVIC. Letters 
have also been issued from the Ministry to the State Governments to allot stalls for ‘Khadi 
Haats’. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that all training component s should be properly 
networked with technology support and market support funds of Board and all 


financial assistance through scheme to be given due support to the beneficiaries 
trained. 
Para (170) 
 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
Coir Board is providing training in spinning coir yarn, weaving mats and matting, 
composting of coir pith, machinery maintenance etc.  The duration of the training varies 
from five days to one year for Advanced Training Courses.  In the above  training 
programmes, Coir Board is operating field training through its Regional Offices in spinning 
of coir yarn and providing ratts under 75% assistance under Mahila Coir Yojana Scheme.  
Coir Board is also popularising various technologies developed in Board's Research 
Institutes through R&D demonstrations in coir cluster.   
As suggested by the Committee, the above training components are being 
networked with Coir Board's financial assistance scheme, namely the new schemes for 
‘Rejuvenation, Modernisatio n and Technology Upgradation ’  and Scheme of Fund For 
Regeneration of Traditional Industries ( SFURTI).  In all training courses, Coir Board is 
providing the scheme details to the entrepreneurs to establish the technology based coir 
units availing the Board 's assistance.  With respect to the market support funds, the coir 
corporations, federations, co -operative societies and associations are being addressed to 
participate in the domestic as well as foreign exhibitions organised by Coir Board through 
which market linkages are provided. Coir Board is also extending Market Development 
Assistance to co -operative societies and conducts workshops to resolve specific issues 
related to technology/ marketing among the coir clusters. More efforts will be undertaken 
by Coir Board in XI plan to concentrate on the above activities in order to network the 
technology support and market support and all financial assistance to the trained 
beneficiaries. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that the present set up o f Coir Board should be 
restructured so as to reduce the expenditure of the Board. It also feels that the Board 
should have 20 members out of which 15 members may represent experts from trade, 
technology, market etc.  and 5 from Government side.  
Para (175)  
 
 
 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Amendment of Coir Industry Act, 1953 is under consideration.  Constitution of the 
Board comes under the said Act.  Necessary modifications in the constitution of the Board 
in line with the recommendation of the DRPSC on Industry  will be considered at the time 
of amendment of the Coir Industry Act, 1953. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 


The Committee notes the under utilization and less achievement in Mahila 
Coir Yojana and no utilization of funds allocated for Welfare Measures in 200 7-08. 
Para (177) 
 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Kerala is the major beneficiary of Mahila Coir Yojana where a large number of 
artisans were trained and ratts distributed during 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 under a special 
drive.  Low turn out of artisans for training and  procuring ratts during 2007 -08 are 
attributed to this special drive in recent years.  
During 2007 -08, an amount of Rs.7.48 lakh was spent for renewal of Group 
Personal Accident Insurance Scheme, a Scheme implemented by the Coir Board for the 
benefit of 4 lakh coir workers all over the country.  The Board also rewarded 16 children of 
coir workers in the coir producing States of the country who scored highest marks in the 
SSLC/Matriculation examination conducted by the State/Board spending an amount of 
Rs.2.40 lakh.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee noted the action plan of the Coir Board and desires to have 
more detailed information /planning under each head of activities intended by the 
Board to be augmented in 2008 -09. 
Para (181) 
Action taken/C omments 
 
Under BE 2008 -09, an allocation of Rs.55 crore has been provided for 
implementing various plan programmes of the Coir Board including the new central sector 
scheme on "Rejuvenation, Modernisation and Technology Upgradation of the Coir 
Industry”.  Out of the total allocation, Rs.23 crore is towards implementation of plan 
general, schemes/ programmes for Skill Upgradation & Quality Improvement, 
Development of Production Infrastructure, Domestic Market Promotion, Export Market 
Promotion, Trade & Indus try Related Functional Support Services and Welfare Measures.  
Rs.7 crore is earmarked for Science & Technology programmes.  The North Eastern 
Region component in the allocation for Plan ‘general’ is Rs.1.30 crore.  The allocation 
provided for implementati on of the new scheme "Rejuvenation, Modernisation and 
Technology Upgradation" is Rs.25 crore including with NER component at Rs.2.50 crore.   
 
(i) Science & Technology (Outlay:  Rs.7.00 crore)  
 
Under this scheme focussed attention will be bestowed on five comp onents viz. (a) 
Modernisation of Production Process,  (b)  Development of Machinery & Equipment, (c)  
Product Development & Diversification, (d)  Development of Environment Friendly 
Technologies and (e) Technology Transfer, Incubation, Testing and Service Facilities.   
The physical outputs anticipated under the above programmes during the year are as 
indicated below.   
Sl. No. Activity Nos. 
1 Development of coir machinery for producing coir 3 
2 Testing and Services to the Industry 400 


3 Demonstration of S&T Technologies (viz. C-POM, 
COIRRET, Emulsion treatment, Anugraha Loom, Geotextiles 
etc.) 
100 
4 Seminars/ Workshop to disseminate the S&T findings 6 
 
(ii)  Skill Upgradation & Quality Improvement (Outlay:  Rs.4.50 crore)  
It is proposed to provide skill  upgradation training for production of value added 
products to 6,000 workers/artisans besides organising 25 Entrepreneur Development 
Programmes and 30 Quality Improvement Programmes with the objective of upgradation 
and maintenance of quality of coir products.     
 
(iii)  Development of Production Infrastructure (Outlay:  Rs.4 crore)  
It is proposed to provide financial assistance to 130 units in coir sector under the 
Development of Production Infrastructure Scheme.   
 
 
(iv)  Domestic Market Promotion (Outl ay:  Rs.6 crore)  
Participation in domestic exhibitions, popularisation of coir and coir products in the 
domestic market and extending market development assistance are the major components 
of the scheme.  It is proposed to participate at least in 100 important exhibitions in potential 
regions in India during 2008-09.  Market Development Assistance @ 10% of the total sales 
turnover to be shared on 1:1 basis between the Coir Board and the concerned State 
Government is planned to be provided to agencies engage d in the sale of coir and coir 
products in the co-operative and public sector.   
 
(v)  Export Market Promotion (Outlay:  Rs.2.20 crore)  
It is proposed to participate in around ten international exhibitions and fairs besides 
providing Export Market Developm ent Assistance at least to 50 exporters for undertaking 
promotional activities.  Besides, it is proposed to participate in 25 catalogue shows and 
other publicity programmes. 
 
(vi)  Trade & Industry Related Functional Support Services (Outlay: Rs.3.70 crore ) 
Under this scheme, seven surveys and studies on various aspects of relevance to the 
industry and trade would be undertaken so as to provide necessary feedback for 
formulation of strategy and plan of action.  In -house training would be provided to 75 
persons including permanent staff members of the Coir Board.   
 
(vii)  Welfare Measures (Outlay:  Rs.2.60 crore)  
Coir Board Coir Workers Personal Accident Insurance Scheme is proposed to be 
continued for the benefit of coir workers as in the preceding years.   
 
(viii) Rejuvenation, Modernization & Technology Upgradation (Outlay: Rs.25 crore)  
The scheme envisages replacement of outdated ratts/looms and providing  
workshed to spinners and tiny household units resulting in increase in production and 
wages of workers. During 2008-09, 1,000 spinning units would be assisted besides 800 tiny 
household units in the manufacturing sector. It is expected that approximately 9500 
additional employment opportunities would be generated during 2008-09. 
As a result of the program mes being implemented during 2008 -09, it is expected 
that the following targets would be achieved during 2008-09. 
 Production (coir fibre) :  5,00,000 tonnes 


 Export    :  Rs.600 crore 
 Cumulative Employment :  6.90 lakh 
Initially, export target of coir a nd coir products during 2008 -09 was fixed at 750 
crore. However, this has been reviewed keeping in view the impact of appreciation of rupee 
on pricing of coir exports and it is now proposed to re-fix it at Rs. 600 crore. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee is surprised to note that no funds were allocated for Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands which has seen mass level devastation due to Tsunami whereas for 
the year 2006 -07 very small amount as compared to Lakshadweep had been allocated. 
It would like to know  the reasons therefore and urges the Ministry to take up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance for more allocation . 
     Para (186)   
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The coir unit in the A & N Island was completely washed out during the time of 
Tsunami. The Board pro vided an amount of Rs. 1.00 lakh to conduct an Entrepreneurship 
Development Programme in A & N Islands since the coir activities in the Island have to be 
reorganized all over. As per the request from the A & N Administration, the Board has 
undertaken a stu dy in association with A&N Consultancy Centre  to revive the industry in 
the Island.  The programmes for the development of coir industry in the A & N Islands will 
be chalked out and implemented by Coir Board on the basis of the recommendations of the 
study from the available allocation of funds after evaluation of which a ugmentation of 
funds will be considered. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is surprised to note that 44 crores worth of coir export would 
be done by the coir board with in a very short span  whereas the information in 
Outcome Budget mentions 64% physical outputs in export .     
Para (189) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As on 31 March, 2008, the export of coir and coir products from the country stood 
to the tune of Rs.592.88 crore against a target of Rs.680 crore and the achievement is 87% 
of the target.  The information provided as 64% achievement in export is in respect of the 
period, April - December, 2007.   Like all other industries which depends on export trade, 
coir has also been facin g set backs due to the rupee appreciation against dollar. It is 
expected that as a result of the remedial measures undertaken by the Government of India, 
the Indian Rupee would be in an advantageous position during the year 2008 -09 and the 
exports could improve. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that the target for replacement of outdated ratts / looms is 
very low for each of the two years i.e 2007 -08 and 2008 -09. It recommends that the 
necessary approvals and sanctions should be expedited an d the targets be enhanced 
keeping in view the Spinning/Household units in each coir producing States so that 
the modernization could take place at a faster pace resulting in enhancement of the 


earnings of workers and income of spinners and household units ultimately leading to 
more employment opportunities.  
  Para (191) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The Scheme for ‘Rejuvenation, Modernization and Technology Upgradation of 
Coir Industry’ was approved by the Competent Authority in March, 2008 at a total outlay 
of Rs.243 crore with a government grant of Rs.99 crore for providing assistance to 4000 
spinning units and 3200 tiny/household units during XI Plan.  During 2007 -08, an amount 
of Rs.9 crore was sanctioned by the Government towards grant under the Scheme for 
assisting 350 spinning units and 300 tiny/household units spread across the States of 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.  During 2008 -09, it is proposed to assist 1000 spinning 
units and 800 tiny/household units engaged in the coir industry. 
 
Recommendation/Ob servation 
 
 The Committee note s that only six institutions have been brought under khadi 
for the last one year and desires to know the reasons for no increase in the number of 
khadi institutions.  
Para (192) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
There was a ban on registration of new khadi institutions with KVIC and State KVI 
Boards. Now KVIC has given relaxation for registration of new khadi institutions managed 
by SC/ST and institutions located in North Eastern Region. By the end of June 2008, 70 
khadi institutions proposals have been received by KVIC for their registration, of which 34 
new khadi institutions have already been registered and remaining proposals are under 
examination. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that the renewal of registration of K hadi Certificate, by 
State Government  department, under Societies Registration Act, need not be insisted 
upon as it causes inordinate delay in release of funds to the directly aided institutions 
in N.E. region.  
 
Para (197) 
Action taken/Comments  
Khadi Certificates are issued/renewals to the Khadi Institutions keeping in view the 
safeguards for ensuring its purity (i.e. made of natural fibre) and genuineness (i.e. the 
process of hand spinning and hand weaving). It also helps ensure proper earnings to 
artisans including various social welfare measures in a self-employment environment in the 
institutions besides quality and fair price to the customer. Khadi certificate is issued to 
societies based on their status under the Act they have registered. Since some State s have 
provision for renewal of the society registration certificates, it needs to be linked with the 
renewal of khadi certificate. Unless the status of registration of the society is valid as per 
the State Act, renewal of khadi certificate without a valid registration certificate will lead to 
difficulties for settlement of dues of the institutions. 
 


  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee is of the considered view that for streamlining and 
strengthening the contribution of the MSME sector in the nation al economy, the focus 
should be on the following:   
 
(i) Providing requisite credit, technology upgradation, modernization and marketing 
support to the MSME sector;  
(ii) Infrastructure upgradation in general and particularly in the major small 
enterprises clusters; these would include road connectivity, regular supply of power, 
common effluent treatment facility and water supply, etc.  
(iii) Reduction in the plethora of rules and regulations presently applicable to the 
micro and small enterprises sector;  
(iv) Providing necessary support to the service industry to fulfill its growth and 
employment generation potential; and  
(v) Providing training to existing and potential entrepreneurs and workers on an 
extensive scale and facilitating modern management practi ces and skill up gradation 
through advanced training facilities for capacity building in the small enterprises 
sector. 
 
Para (206) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
(i) The Government has announced on 10 th August 2005 a ‘Policy Package for stepping up 
Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises ’ with an objective to double the flow of credit to 
the sector within a period of five years.  In March 2007, the Government announced a 
comprehensive Package for the Promotion of Micro and Small Enterprises, which 
comprises of severa l proposals/schemes having direct impact on the promotion and 
development of the micro and small enterprises, particularly in view of the fast changing 
economic environment, wherein, to be competitive is the key of success. These, inter alia, 
include credit and fiscal support, cluster-based development, infrastructure, technology and 
marketing support. Capacity building of MSME Associations  and support to women 
entrepreneurs are the other important features of this Package.  The Government has also 
launched an all -India campaign under the National Manufacturing Competitiveness 
Programme (NMCP) for the MSMEs, which has specific components that are aimed at 
enhancing the competitiveness of the enterprise in this sector —  so as to withstand global 
and organized competition and to thrive through better technologies and skills. The 
components of the NMCP seek to introduce the best elements of industrial competitiveness 
in the SME sector, which has often been unable to afford such practices and techniques. 
(ii) In t he last few years, the Government has been focusing on the strategy of Cluster 
Development for development of the MSEs - through which different ‘clusters’ and 
concentrations of enterprises are given the benefit of a whole variety of interventions, 
ranging from exposure to skill development, from credit to marketing and from 
technological improvements to better infrastructure facilities. Under the Scheme, the 
following amendments have been made with effect from 1 October 2007: (i) The 
Scheme of Integrated I nfrastructural Development has been subsumed under the 
Scheme, with all its existing features and funding pattern. The assistance under the 
Scheme will also be available for setting up new clusters/industrial estate; (ii) 
Assistance under the Scheme shall be available up to 90% of the cost (subject to 


ceiling of Rs.9 crore) for cluster developed exclusively for MSEs operated and/or 
owned by women; and (iii) Assistance shall be available to Associations of Women 
Entrepreneurs for establishing exhibition cent ers at central places for display and sale 
of products of women -owned MSEs. Till July 2008, 408 clusters have been approved 
for interventions under the scheme, including soft and hard interventions and 
diagnostic studies.   
 (iii) Government has promulgate d the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 which has paved the way for streamlining the rules and 
providing statutory status to many provisions.  In addition, simplification has been 
proposed in the legislations related to labour. 
(iv) The service sector has been classified in MSMED Act, 2006 for the first time and, 
therefore, to gather data and information on this sector, a study has been entrusted to 
Management Development Institute, Gurgaon by Office of the DC (MSME).  The 
formulation of schemes/programmes for necessary support to the service industry to fulfill 
its growth and employment generation potential would be taken up after the study is 
complete.  
(v) The Government has taken up skill development as a high priority are a through various 
measures like enhancing the training capabilities of the Tool Rooms, MSME Development 
Institutes and other organization under the Ministry of MSME. In line with the Skill 
Development Mission launched by the Government, the agencies under the Ministry of 
MSME conducted programmes for skill development for nearly 1.8 lakh trainees during 
2007-08. The Ministry has set an ambitious target to enhance the training capabilities of its 
existing organizations to 5  lakh trainees in the near future. Further, the Ministry of MSME 
provide all such trainings to disadvantaged sections of the society like the trainings for 
SCs/STs, free of cost. A number of programmes are also being organised for women and 
other weaker sections of the society free of cost,  besides providing a monthly stipend of 
Rs.500/- per month during the entire period of training. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee considered the reply of the Ministry and is of the view that the 
developments in these sectors should be vigorously  pursued viz., Steel, Coal and 
Railways.  The Committee may be kept informed of the outcome.  
 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry of MSME should constitute a 
Committee which may work out on the following schemes: - 
a) Accreditation norms for Associations;  
b) Formulation of schemes required for EDP and upgradation  
c) Schemes for Infrastructural support like library, incubators, project to 
avail of external testing facility.  
d) Schemes for sponsoring research, studies etc.  
e) Secretarial training and up gradation.  
Para (208) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The Ministry has been pursuing with the Ministries of Steel and Coal on the matters 
relating to promotion and development of the MSME sector. Based on the representations 
received from the MSMEs and its Associations, the Hon ’ble Minister of MSME had taken 
up the matter regarding control/rollback of the steel prices with the Hon ’ble Minister of 
Steel. Further, the Ministry of Coal has  framed new coal distribution policy, which has 


become effective from April, 2008. As  recommended by this Ministry,  both inclusion of 
NSIC as a nodal agency to distribute coal to MSME sector and enhanced earmarking of 
coal from 4 million ton to 8 million ton for MSMEs have been included in the new coal 
distribution policy. This office has requested a ll States Governments to take necessary 
action for distribution of coal to MSME sector as per new policy. 
(a) Under the scheme for capacity building, strengthening of database and advocacy by 
MSE Industry/Enterprise Associations and for holding Seminars/ S ymposiums/ Workshops 
by the Associations, financial assistance is provided to various associations, to strengthen 
their role and increase their efficiency, depending on the size and the reach of the 
Association.  The Ministry of MSME/Office of DC (MSME) pr ovides 50% of the cost of 
modernization of the facilities and equipment and training of personnel, conducting 
workshops, etc. There are certain norms laid down on the basis of which the Association 
are selected for assistance: 
(i) The associations should be in operation since five years; 
(ii) The association should maintain its account and should give audited accounts of 
last 3 year along with their proposal; 
(iii) The association should be registered with societies act and provide their 
registration certificate; 
(iv) The national-level association should have at least 300 members, State -level at 
least 200 member and district level at least 100 members; 
(v) The association should provide the details of activities undertaken by them;  
(vi) The association should not be a very big one. 
 
The associations satisfying all the above eligibility criteria are considered for 
financial assistance under the scheme and then the Committee submits its recommendations 
to the Competent Authority for Approval. 
(b) There is already a scheme for Entrepreneu rship Development Programmes (EDPs) and 
Entrepreneurship Skill Development Programmes (ESDPs) for providing training to 
entrepreneurs. The scheme is modified time to time to make it more effective and result 
oriented. 
 
(c)  There are already four MSME Test ing Centres under the Ministry of MSME, 
located at New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. These Testing Centres provide 
Testing and Calibration facilities to industries in general and MSMEs in particular 
for raw material and semi -finished/finished product s manufactured by them. Besides, 
there are seven MSME Testing Stations located at Jaipur, Bhopal, Kolhapur, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ettumanur. Further, a new scheme, namely, Support for 
Entrepreneurial and Managerial Development of MSMEs through Incubator s has 
been launched under the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme. The 
scheme has provisions to establish incubators in MSME DIs, IITs, NITs and State 
Government Engineering Colleges . 
  
(d) The Ministry has formulated comprehensive guidelines for awarding 
survey/studies/policy research under the scheme of Surveys, Studies and Policy Research 
of the Ministry.  These guidelines are placed on the website of the Ministry. 
 
(e)  The Office of the DC (MSME) already has a scheme for secretarial traini ng and 
upgradation of their skills, namely, DC (MSME) Officers’ Training Programme. Under the 
scheme, officers/ staffs of the DC (MSME) and its field offices are sent on various training 
programme to update their technical and management skills. For the ye ar 2008-09, Rs.0.50 


crore has been allocated under the scheme and about 400 officers/staffs will be nominated 
under this scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee is also constrained to note the major reduction in  Credit Support 
Programmes consisting of three schemes and playing a major role in the promotion and 
development of the MSME sector. The Committee expresses its displeasure on the 
allocation of insufficient funds under Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro and Small 
Industries ( CGTMSE) and Micro Financing which were exhausted even before the 
completion of last Financial Year and thus hampering the execution under these schemes. 
 
Para (11) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 The concern of the Committee has been noted and th e Ministry would take the 
matter with the Planning Commission at RE stage. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
The Committee would like to know the allocation made at RE stage by the 
Planning  Commission  under  various  schemes  including  CGTM SE &    Micro 
financing. The Committee hopes that Ministry would ensure sufficient funds under 
each and every scheme/programme and also constantly monitor its proper utilization 
keeping in view the targets to be achieved through its review meetings with nodal 
orvanizations resp onsible for implementation.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 


 
The Committee also takes note that the funds allocated under Trade Related 
Entrepreneurship Assistance and Development ( TREAD) remained unutilized throughout 
the year and thus negated the empowerm ent of women. Committee desires to know the 
reasons for non –utilisation and hopes that the Government would ensure proper and timely 
utilization under each and every scheme/Programme in XIth plan. It also expresses 
apprehension about the achievement of th e targets fixed under Credit Guarantee Scheme 
with such a major reduction. 
Para (12) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 Under the TREAD Scheme, funds to the extent of Rs.51.65 lakh were utilized out 
of allocated funds of Rs.100.00 lakh during the year 2007 -08.  The l ower utilization is 
mainly due to the fact that the scheme is demand driven and the release of fund depends 
upon the number of proposals received through banks.  Every effort will be made for 
proper and timely utilization of funds under each and every sche me/programme in the XIth  
Plan.  
 
Under the Credit Guarantee Scheme, a physical target to provide guarantee cover to 
30,000 MSEs was kept during the year 2007 -08. Against this, actual achievement was 
30,285 MSEs. The physical target kept for the year 2008 -09 for Credit Guarantee Scheme 
is to provide guarantee cover to 50,000 MSEs.  Every effort will be made to achieve the 
targets. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
The Committee note s   that though the target achieved under C redit 
Guarantee Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises  is over and above the target fixed 
for 2007 -08 but the Ministry has failed to mention about the related aspects like 
NPAs, recovery, etc.  The committee recommends that the information containing the 
details of NPAs, recovery etc. should be s upplied to it on priority basis so that a 
concrete view may be taken in this regard.   
 
 The Committee apprehends that perhaps the slackness on the part of 
NGOs/Institutes may be one of the reasons for low demand under the TREAD 
Scheme, the Ministry of MS & ME should ascertain the credentials of NGOs and 
training institutes which are nodal for providing training.  The Committee would 
further like to know whether some target is allocated to them to release the grants and 
what arethe criteria for each trainin g programme.  
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes the under utilization against allocation in Development of 
NER and Sikkim and in other schemes and desires to know the reasons. 
Para (14) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
The reasons for shortfall are as follows: 
 


(a)  Quality of Technology Support Institutions & Programmes: The N ational 
Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme Schemes were under finalisation.  The 
schemes of Credit Linked Capital Subsidy (CLCSS) and ISO 9000/14001 reimbursement 
are demand driven. Since no proposal was received from NER, this resulted in savings of 
Rs.13.04 crore. 
 
(b)    MSME Cluster Development Programmes and MSME Growth Poles:  The scheme of 
MSE Cluster Development Programmes is a demand driven and scheme of MSME Growt h 
Poles was not approved resulting into savings of Rs.4.40 crore. 
The shortfall against other schemes is nominal and amounts to Rs.0.98 crore only. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the status of finalization of Schemes under 
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme (NMCP)  and the steps seing 
taken for its implementation, if the schemes/have already finalized.  The details of the 
Schemes may also be furnished.   
 
 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee after noting th e achievements made against the targets during 
previous year 2006 -07 is of the considered view that pointed reply to the query should be 
furnished by the Ministry. It notes that the reasons for shortfall in achievement have not 
been furnished. It is dismay ed to find that under some schemes the Ministry has made the 
expenditure more than the allocation for which no reason has been furnished. 
Para (16) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 The reasons for shortfall/excess in expenditure against the budget allocation during  
the year 2006-07 are as follows: 
 
(i) Promotion of Small Scale Industries: Free lease line connectivity was provided by 
National Informatics Centre (NIC).  Earlier this office was having connectivity with VSNL 
on payment basis.  Further, the computerizati on of Branch MSME -DIs and upgradation of 
hardware of MSME -DIs were dropped.  Less number of claims under medical treatment 
and reduced travel expenses due to economy measures resulted in savings of Rs.2.92 crore.   
 
(ii) Science, Technology, Environment Re search & Development:  Non -finalization of 
installation of Wood Seasoning Plant at PPDC, Meerut and equipments for Testing 
Labarotary,  Non -finalization of Quotations/Tender of Civil work for CDGI, Firozabad 
resulted in savings of Rs.0.77 crore only. 
 
(iii) Training & Manpower Development:  Savings of Rs.1.38 crore from sanctioned 
amount due to adoption of economy measures. 
 
(iv) TREAD:  The Steering Committee decided to conduct a review of the TREAD 
Scheme to find out the reasons of poor performance.  The fresh cases of TREAD placed 


before the Committee were accordingly deferred and hence there was a saving of Rs.0.55 
crore. 
 
(v) Ancillary Development:  The saving is only nominal. 
 
(vi) Testing Centres:  Saving of Rs.1.07 crore is due to poor response from the Industry 
Associations for the Scheme of Testing Centre by Industry Associations who had been 
approved earlier for Grant -in-aid under the Scheme but did not come forward for sanction 
of grant-in-aid.  Part of the saving can also be due to adoption of ec onomy measures by 
MSME-TCs. 
 
(vii) Technology Upgradation:  Suitable proposals in sufficient numbers for Small 
Industry Cluster Development Programme have not been received from the State 
Governments.  There was also not enough response from MSEs for reimb ursement of 
expenditure on ISO 9000 Certification resulting in savings of Rs.22.84 crore. 
 
 
 
(viii) Integrated Infrastructural Development Scheme:  The saving is only nominal. 
 
(ix) Collection of Statistics:  Sample Survey of registered MSEs was to be cond ucted 
during 2006-07.  However, since Fourth Census of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
as suggested in Promotional Package of MSEs was also to be conducted during 2007 -08, 
the proposed sample survey was dropped resulting in savings of Rs.3.62 crore. 
 
(x) Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises:  As approved in 
the Package for Promotion of Micro & Small Enterprises, it was envisaged to enhance the 
corpus fund under Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme to Rs.2,500 crore in the next four years  
(up to Financial year 2010 -11) in order to achieve higher coverage of Micro & Small 
Enterprises and hence the excess utilisation. 
 
(xi) Micro Finance Programme:  Savings are due to the fact that out of the total 
allocation of Rs.32.28 crore, an amount of Rs.22.28 crore was earmarked for ‘Risk Capital 
Fund’ which is a new scheme proposed under Promotional Package.  Due to late 
announcement of Package EFC approval could not be held.  Since the scheme itself was 
not approved during the year, no sanction could be issued.  Hence the  
savings of Rs. 20.28 crore. 
 
(xii) Credit Linked Capital Subsidy for Technology Upgradation: The Scheme is demand 
driven and is a priority scheme under the Ministry of MSME. Since more number of 
proposals than anticipated were recei ved for disbursement of subsidy, this resulted in 
excess expenditure of Rs.18.54 crore. 
(xiii) Promotion of Micro & Small Enterprises:  Provision was made at RE stage by way 
of supplementary and the saving was due to late announcement of Promotional Package. 
 
The reasons for shortfall in the NER & Sikkim are as follows:- 
(a) Under the Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, no case from NE States was 
received for assistance, resulting in shortfall of Rs.6.71 crore. 


(b) Only Rs.1.67 lakh were reimbursed to MSE units f or NE region to obtain ISO -
9001 certification and only Rs.36.15 lakh was incurred under the SICDP.  Both the 
schemes are demand driven, thus, resulting in a saving of Rs.7.04 crore. 
(c) Under collection of statistics scheme, there was low demand of funds from NE 
Region, thus resulting in saving of Rs.0.40 crore. 
(d) Out of the total allocation of Rs.3.00 crore, an amount of Rs.2.00 crore was 
earmarked for ‘Risk Capital Fund ’ which is a new scheme proposed under 
Promotional Package.  Due to late announcement of Pack age EFC approval could 
not be held.  Since the scheme itself was not approved during the year, no sanction 
could be issued resulting in saving of Rs.2.00 crore. 
(e) The shortfall against other schemes is nominal and cumulatively amounts to 
Rs.1.20 crore only. 
The achievements made against the target in respect of ARI sector is as under:  
      (Rs. in crore) 
Organisation/ 
scheme 
RE 2006-07 Actual Exp. 
in 2006-07 
KVIC 592.93 589.82 (99.47%) 
Coir Board 23.00 22.90 (99.56%) 
PMRY 252.60 248.51(98.38%) 
SFURTI 25.97 25.53 (98.30%) 
Total 894.50 886.76(99.13%)  
It may be seen from the table that more than 99 percent of the funds earmarked in 
RE 2006-07 for ARI sector has been utilized. Hence there, is no shortfall in achievement. 
Further, it is subm itted that expenditure in excess of  the allocation has not been made in 
any scheme/heads under ARI sector.  The details of funds allocated in RE 2006 -07 and 
funds released under various heads by the Ministry are as under:    
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Heads  RE 2006-07 Actual 
KVIC   
Khadi grant 
 
138.30 138.30 
 
VI Grant 52.00 52.00 
S&T (Khadi) 1.50 1.50 
S&T(VI) 4.00 0.90 
Interest Subsidy (khadi) 19.00 19.00 
Interest Subsidy (VI) 5.00 5.00 
REGP 372.63 372.63 
Khadi loan 0.49 0.49 
VI loan 0.01 0.00 
Total 592.93 589.82 
Coir Board   
Coir Board Grants 17.40 17.40 
Grants S&T 5.50 5.50 
Coop. of Coir Industry 0.10 0.00 
Total 23.00 22.90 
PMRY 252.60 248.51 
SFURTI 25.97 25.53 


 
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee while going thr ough the reasons for shortfall or excess in 
expenditure against budget allocation for the year 2006 -07 is of the holistic view that 
the Ministry should ensure that the unfinalized schemes and work should be  given a 
momentum and  taken up on priority basis.   It would also like to know the outcome of 
the decision of the steering Committee on (TREAD).  Moreover, the State 
Governments should be pursued for Cluster Development Programme.  The Ministry 
is advised to desist from any envisaged expenditure to unfinished schemes rather such 
allocation should be used towards other running schemes and  programmes.  
 
  The Committee would like to know the reasons and causes for shortfall  for 
various schemes like C redit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, ISO -9001 certificatio n 
etc.  It is also of the view that despite the actual expenditure in  2006 -07 no substantial 
progress has been made  as far as NER is concerned.  
 The Committee would also like to know the status of fourth census of MS&ME 
as proposed in Promotional Packag e of MSE Scheme on Trade Related 
Entrepreneurship Assistance and Development.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes that the Scheme on Trade Related Entrepreneurship 
Assistance and Development ( TREAD) envisages the development of Micro/Tiny Wom en 
Enterprises both in rural   and urban areas. To make this scheme operational in real sense it 
feels that the number of participating Banks should be increased. It also feels that the 
associations who have availed grants from M/o MS& ME should be made el igible for 
proper implementation after their evaluation.  Even in Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme 
specific time limit by Banks for appraisal of project should be there once the application is 
accepted by the banks, as the Scheme allows additional comfort to b ank through the Credit 
Guarantee Trust for Small Industries . The Guarantee cover under the Scheme should be 
enhanced to Rs. 50 lakhs and priority should be given to women entrepreneurs who are not 
able to provide security. 
Para (18)  
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
 At present 4 banks, namely, State Bank of India, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank and 
Allahabad Bank ha ve signed MoU with this office for operating the scheme as a lending 
agency to the women beneficiaries through NGOs under the TREAD scheme. Office of the 
DC (MSME) has made regular efforts to involve all the banks in this scheme by discussing 
the contents of the scheme with them and through correspondence. CMDs of all 
nationalized banks have been requested to participate in the scheme as a lending agency fo r 
the scheme.  As a result 2 more banks, viz., Dena Bank  and Indian Bank have become 
lending agencies under the scheme .  It is hoped that more banks shall become lending 
agencies shortly.  
Under the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme, guarantee cover for credit facility upto 
Rs.50 lakh is available w.e.f. July 02, 2007.    
 
Further recommendations  


 
The Committee is satisfied with the progress and efforts being made by the 
Ministry but it is of the view that  nationalized banks should be persuaded time and 
again.  The scheme requires evaluation on urgent basis.  As far the Credit facility upto 
50 lakh under C redit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises scheme 
is concerned the Committee is  feels that still there is apprehension among Public 
Sector Bank s which needs to be dispelled in co-ordination with Reserve Bank of India.  
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee feels that the associations in MSME sector should be benchmarked 
by the Government of India and only the benchmarked associations shoul d be made 
eligible to represent the industrial sector at various forums.   
Para (19) 
Action taken/Comments 
 MSME Policy Division of Office of the DC (MSME) has already performed 
benchmarking of associations related to MSMEs and constituted National Board f or 
MSME and Advisory Committee in accordance with section 3 and section 7(2) respectively 
of the MSMED Act, 2006.  This grading is utilized by the Ministry in inviting associations 
for consultations in various other forums.  
  
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee would  like to have a list of the associations in MSME sector 
which have been bench mark ed by the Government of India to represent the 
industrial sector at various fore and urges that a review of the association should be 
conducted  quarterly or  half yearly taking into consideration the role played by them 
in guiding and supporting the entrepreneurs for various schemes and programmes 
run by Ministry  and its nodal organization.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee appreciates the effort of the Government to bring more 
Banks/Financial Institutions under Member Lending Institutions ( MLIs) but it desires that 
more concrete efforts and measures are required to motivate the private and foreign banks 
operating in the country and funding to priorit y sector to join the MLIs. The Committee 
would like to be informed about the measures and steps taken in this regard. 
Para (23)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
CGTMSE has been undertaking several initiatives with a view to creating greater 
awareness about Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS) including regular interaction with 
bankers, industry associations, etc. across the country.  A special advertising campaign has 
also been launched in the print media. As regards more concrete efforts and measures to 
motivate the private and foreign banks operating in the country to join as MLIs, CGTMSE 
have been meeting the key management executives of private sector banks to impress upon 
them the importance/benefit of joining as MLIs under the scheme.  The efforts are bearing 
result and as on date 14 leading private sector banks are registered with the Trust as MLIs.  


A few more private sector banks have evinced interest and are expected to register as MLI 
shortly. 
 
Further recommendations   
 
The Committee  recommends that further sinc ere  efforts should be made  to 
bring in more banks over and above 14 leading private sector banks and urges that 
advertising campaign should continue vigorously in all leading national/Regional 
Dailies which is still lacking. It also recommends that  sensitization for  programme for  
Public Sector Banks should be done in a time bound manner.  They should be given at 
least a target of 5 -10 accounts depending upon the potentiality of the Branch and they 
should be instructed to involve themselves in EDPs condu cted by DICs.  DICs in the 
States should be entrusted with the responsibility of identifying the prospective 
entrepreneurs and viable projects.  The Committee also feels that lead bank of the 
concerned district should be asked to take initiative in coverin g CGTFS for which 
DIC should extend all necessary support . Moreover DICs should bring in NGOs and 
Stree Shakti Groups in the process of increasing the coverage under CGTFS.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee takes a serious note that against a t otal budget allocation of 1000 
lakhs only 138 lakhs was sanctioned upto August, 2007. As the scheme is important and 
the country is moving towards manufacturing competency. The Committee feels that 
industries should be encouraged to adopt certifications in  a big way with the proper 
implementation of the scheme by the Departments.  
Para (34) 
 Action taken/Comments 
 
 The concerns of the Committee noted. The utilization of funds under ISO -
9000/14001 certification scheme during 2006 -07 was Rs.13.05 crore, again st the BE of 
Rs.18.50 crore. 
 
Further recommendations   
 
 The Committee recommends  that the  Ministry  should conduct a survey for  
ISO 9000/14001 Certificate   scheme wherein the number of SMEs availing the 
reimbursement  should be listed since the inceptio n of the Scheme.  Moreover , it would 
like the Ministry to make use of the entire allocation for each year with the help of 
State Government and Financial Institution .   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take pr oactive action to 
ensure that State Governments and other stake holders take action in time bound     manner. 
  
Para (90) 
 
Action taken/Comments 


 The Ministry of MSME approves cluster projects to the State Government or other 
stakeholders with a condition that progress in the cluster shall be monitored by Cluster 
Development Coordination Committee to be constituted at the cluster level. The Ministry 
of MSME also calls for the progress report from the implementing agency from time to 
time. Based on these reports, mid term review is done for expediting the implementation of 
the project. However, the observation of the Committee has been noted for further 
compliance. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that despite assurances it seem s that 
Ministry is lacking somewhere in its efforts.  It should take up the matter constantly 
with the concerned State Governments/Stake holders.  Moreover it would also like to 
know the number and name s of the States where MSME Cluster Development 
Programme and MSME Credit Pale Scheme  projects have been taken up and 
whether the implementing agency is facing any serious constraints in expediting it.  
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee notes the past performance of the VI Grants for other activitie s like 
rebate on polyvastra, exhibitions which has a clear objective of promotion of Village 
Industries products to increase the sale of VI products, polyvastra etc., and finds that 
against the allocation under Plan Head  no achievement has been made . It also desires to 
be informed about reasons of no achievement. 
Para (95) 
 
 
Action taken/Comments 
Under the Village Industries Heads of KVIC, KVIC meets the expenditure broadly 
in setting up of common facility centres under Rural Industries Service Centres ( RISC) 
Scheme, assistance under PRODIP scheme for development of new products, design and 
better packaging, science and technology activities for improvement of VI products, rebate 
on polyvastra, EDP/training programmes for skill development, publicity of KV I products, 
promotion of marketing of KVI products by organ izing exhibitions and participation in 
various domestic/International level exhibitions. The achievements made under major 
activities of KVIC in 2007-08 are as follows: 
 
2007-08 S.No Programmes 
undertaken under 
VI Head of KVIC  Target Achievement 
1 RISC 75 units (upto Rs. 5 lakh) 
10 units (upto Rs. 25 lakh 
73 units (upto Rs. 5 lakh) 
sanctioned; 06 units (upto Rs. 25 
lakh) sanctioned 
2. PRODIP 85 projects 89 projects sanctioned 
3. S&T 100 projects 45 projects sanctioned 
4. Training 53700 persons 53927 persons trained 
5. Exhibitions 139 events 159 Events (121 exhibitions 


 
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee note s that even before the end of the financial year 20 07-08 the 
KVIC has met the target fixed but at the same time  it takes strong objection to the 
fact that out of the targeted projects under S&T less than half have been sanctioned.  
It recommends that KVIC should fix more target keeping in view its success  and 
achievement.  
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the performance of KVIC in 
marketing is poor. Against a target of 139 events only 96 events could take place utilizing 
an amount of Rs.8.11 crores against allocation of 15.00 crores in 2007 -08 and recommends 
that necessary corrective measures may be taken and Committee be apprised of the same. 
Para (96) 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
To promote khadi and village industry products and to increase their sale in the 
domestic market, KVIC finally organized 159 events (121 exhibitions and 38 other events) 
during the year 2007 -08 against the target of 139 events. Further, KVIC utilised Rs. 10.92 
crore against the allocation of Rs. 12.00 crore (Revised) for organizing such  events. In the 
current financial year 2008 -09, a target has been fixed by KVIC to organize around 153 
events (104 exhibitions and 49 other events) in the country. 
Further, it is informed that for improved quality and marketing of khadi and village 
industry products, many steps have been initiated by the KVIC which includes payment of 
rebate on sales of khadi and polyvastra, organization of exhibitions at 
National/Zonal/District levels, participation in national and international exhibitions, 
provide financial assistance to units under Product Development, Design Intervention and 
Packaging (PRODIP) Scheme for improved designs and packaging of khadi products, 
Launching `Mission Khadi to convert the khadi fabric into ready -made garments with 
modern designs, Ti e-up with the National Institute of Design (NID), Ahmedabad and 
National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), New Delhi for design inputs, Entering 
into an Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Textiles Committee, to make 
available their laboratory infrastructure for checking quality of khadi cloth. Interfaces were 
also established with reputed Research and Development (R&D) institutes to extend results 
of their R&D efforts to KVI units and setting up of Mahatma Gandhi Institute for Rural 
Industrialization a National level organization. KVIC has also taken initiatives to attract 
modern youth of the country by conducting marketing development courses for the youth 
who have just passed out of schools and colleges through 38 Multi Disciplinary Training 
Centres, etc. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the rebate on sales of Khadi and 
Polyvastra should be extended and ensured to the grass root level.  Moreover, it 
conducted + 38 other events) 


would like to know the progress made in “Mission Khadi ” and Mo U signed with 
Textile Committee for laboratory infrastructure.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that around 1042 posts in KVIC are 
lying vacant for more than one year and recommends that these may be filled up 
expeditiously. 
 Para (97) 
 
Action taken/Comments 
 
A proposal to fill up the post lying vacant for more than one year in KVIC was received 
from KVIC. KVIC has been asked to forward some clarifications/justifications before 
taking up with the Ministry of Finance to consider the proposal favorably. 
 
 
Further recommendations  
  
 The Committee expresses its dismay over the number of employees working 
with KVIC as the Committee in its deliberations with KVIC has keenly felt the lack of 
required m anpower for proper im plementation of schemes and programmes.  It 
recommends that it is in the interest of the KVIC as well as Ministry to fill up the 
required posts lying vacant since long,  in view of the new scheme which has been 
entrusted to the KVIC namely PMEGP as it feel s that the scheme will not be 
implemented successfully in the absence of requirement  man power.    
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
The Committee desires the study report on traditional industries be submitted to it 
and expresses its dismay that it covers on ly the traditional industries in existence before 
March 1995. It would like to know the reasons. 
Para (201) 
Action taken/Comments 
 
Earlier, KVIC was financing village industry units based on pattern approach upto 
March 1995.  The pattern approach was disco ntinued and project approach adopted after 
implementation of Rural Employment Generation Programme (REGP).  Therefore, it was 
appropriate to know the present status of traditional village industry units financed under 
pattern approach (upto March 1995) by conducting the proposed study so that suitable 
remedial and support measures could be considered to strengthen them. 
 
Further recommendations  
 
The Committee hopes that the report on traditional Industries be submitted to 
it for its perusal shortly. 
  
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The C ommittee finds to it s dismay that figures provided in Outcome Budget 
2008-09 under quantifiable deliverable/ physical targets are different for  guarantee 
cover to SMEs. The C ommittee takes it seriously an d desires the Ministry to be more 
careful in future in furnishing the data and dispel the confusion.  
Para (21) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 The concern of the Committee has been noted and utmost care would be taken in 
future in furnishing the correct data. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee notes the variation in the figures under Tool Rooms & 
Technical I nstitutions for actual achievement in deliverables/physical Outputs in the 
Outcome B udget 2007 -08. It also observes  that though the figures provided in 
Outcome Budget are year ending but it would like to know how the achievements are 
made in the fag end of the Financial Year.  
Para (30) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
 From the figures mentioned in the Outcome Budget 2007 -08, it is observed that the 
financial/physical targets had already been achieved by February 2008, which shows that 
the progress are made throughout the year and not at the fag end of the financial year. 
However, efforts would be made in future to utilize the funds in a uniform manner 
throughout the year. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee desires that the Government Purchase & Price Preference 
Policy which is under preparation as per the provisions of MSMED Act 2006 be 
expedited by the Government and it should be made obligatory for all Cen tral/State 
Ministries, Departments or PSUs. It would like to know the details and progress made 
in this regard.   
 
Para (64)      
Action taken/Comments  
 


 In line with provisions of MSMED Act, 2006, the Ministry of MSME has prepared 
a draft Note for the Cab inet on ‘Procurement Preference Policy for MSEs ’. The draft note 
has been circulated to the Ministries/Departments for obtaining their views/comments on 
the note.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee would like to have a detailed information on the  steps taken to 
promote marketing  of VI products. 
Para (118)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Besides the information given in reply to paragraph no. 96 , KVIC undertakes 
marketing activities of khadi and village industries products through its 12 departmentally 
run Khadi Gramodyog Bhawans located in urban areas and 7050 institutional/retail sales 
outlets spread in different parts of the country.  
  The Department of Commerce, Government of India has granted Deemed Export 
Promotional Council (EPC) status to KVIC in  December 2006. Under the Market 
Development Assistance, Department of Commerce has extended financial assistance of 
Rs. 100 lakh to KVIC (as deemed EPC) for their export promotional activities in 2007 -08. 
KVIC is also organizing domestic exhibitions in various parts of the country to increase the 
sale of KVI products. KVIC also participates alongwith institutions in international 
exhibitions for increasing the export of KVI products abroad. KVIC has participated in 6 
International Exhibitions/Trade Fairs d uring 2007 -08 alongwith representatives of the 
institutions/REGP units to expand the marketing if KVI products in the International 
market. It is proposed to participate in 10 international Trade Fairs during 2008-09. 
 Besides, there is a proposal for intr oducing a new scheme on pilot basis titled 
“Strengthening of infrastructure of existing weak Khadi Institutions and assistance for 
marketing infrastructure ” to assist  selected marketing outlets for renovation and 
improvement of marketing infrastructure during XI Plan. 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee desires to be informed of the outcome of the study report for 
continuation of the Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate  (ISEC) Scheme. 
Para (128) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
KVIC has already assigned the responsibility of evaluation of Interest Subsidy 
Eligibility Certificate (ISEC) scheme to Development and  Research Services (DRS) Pvt. 
Ltd, Delhi. Final report is awaited. The Committee will be apprised of the outcome of the 
study report for continuation of the ISEC scheme, once the final report is received. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that workshed scheme for Khadi Artisans should 
be operationalised immediately to fulfil the objectives of schemes.  
Para (134) 


 
 
 
Action taken/Co mments 
 
The “Workshed Scheme for Khadi Artisans ” has been approved by the competent 
authority and guidelines have been issued on 27 May 2008 to KVIC for its implementation. 
A provision of Rs. 25 crore has also been earmarked in BE 2008-09.   
 
Recommendatio n/Observation  
 
The Committee may be apprised whether the Scheme for Enhancing 
Productivity and Competitiveness of Khadi Industries is approved or not, if not, the 
reasons therefore may kindly be furnished.  
Para (142) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
  The “Scheme for Enhancing Productivity and Competitiveness of Khadi Industries ” 
has been approved by the competent authority and guidelines issued on 11 July 2008 to 
KVIC for implementation . An amount of Rs. 10 crore has been earmarked under this 
scheme for 2008-09. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status of merger of 
REGP and PMRY into Prime Minister ’s Employment Generation Programme 
(PMEGP) and steps taken to provide 6 lakh additional employment opportunities in 
2008-09. 
 
Para (150)  
Action taken/Comments  
 
The Ministry of MSME has recently launched a new Central Sector credit linked 
subsidy Scheme called ‘Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP) ’. 
Under the Scheme, Rs.4735 crore, including Rs.250 crore to wards Forward and Backward 
linkages, has been earmarked to generate around 37 lakh employment opportunities in the 
Country, during the next four years. It is a significant initiative with attractive subsidy 
levels for promoting self -employment through sett ing up micro enterprises with special 
focus on rural areas.  
 
  
 
 
 
The 
subs
idy 
leve
ls 
under PMEGP are as follows: 
Categories of beneficiaries under 
PMEGP  
Owner’s 
contribution 
Rate of Subsidy 
 (of cost of Project) 
Area  Urban   Rural 
General  10% 15% 25% 
Special (including SC/STs/OBCs/ 
Minorities/Women, Ex-servicemen, 
Physically Challenged, NER, Hill and 
Border Areas ) 
05% 25% 35% 


 
 The upper limit of the cost of project that could be setup in the manufacturing sector 
is Rs.25 lakh while that in the bu siness/service sector is Rs.10 lakh. While KVIC has been 
given the overall responsibility for implementing PMEGP at the national level, it will 
directly do so in respect of the targets for rural areas, as defined in the KVIC Act, through 
its State Offices and State Khadi and Village Industries Boards (KVIBs). Implementation 
of PMEGP in urban areas and other rural areas will be done through the State Governments 
{District Industries Centres (DICs)}. 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee Noted the dela y in ‘Take off ’ of SFURTI scheme due to 
unfamiliarity of Technical Agencies with KVI and coir industries and other 
difficulties which should be dispelled. The Committee also recommends that KVIC 
and Coir Board should adopt a comprehensive approach for clus ter development. The 
requirements of khadi, VI and coir clusters should be met without constraints. 
Identification and appointment of Cluster Development Assistants (CDAs) in each 
cluster should be given priority.  
Para (158) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to KVIC and Coir 
Board who are the Nodal Agencies for implementation of SFURTI. Further, in 7 th SSC 
meeting of SFURTI held on 10 March 2008, Nodal Agencies have been asked to 
implement the Methodology of Mo nitoring Tools for SFURTI presented by UNIDO 
experts explaining the various tools and reporting formats to assess the progress of the 
scheme on experimental basis in the field for assessing the progress. It is also informed that 
appointment of Cluster Development Executives (CDEs) has been completed in most of the 
clusters. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
 The Committee takes note of the under utilization in SFURTI  and slow take 
off in clusters and  desires that the work in clusters should be expedited and Mi nistry 
should ensure that no fund allocated  remains unutilized . It notes that the Ministry 
on the one hand ask for the funds for the scheme whereas on the other hand it 
remains unutilized. The Committee directs the Ministry to concentrate more on 
outcome than outlays. 
 
Para (160) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As informed earlier that the Government does not release funds to a cluster directly. 
It releases funds to the Nodal Agencies who are responsible for holding and disbursement 
of funds. Funds allocated and released by the Ministry to the Nodal Agencies under this 
scheme so far are as under:    
 
          (Rs. crore) 


Funds released by the Ministry 
Year 
Funds allocation 
(RE) KVIC Coir Board Total  
2005-06 1.5 1.12 0.38 1.5 (100%) 
2006-07 25.97 19.03 6.50 25.53 (98.3%) 
2007-08 21.00 9.04 6.27 15.31(72.9%) 
 
It may be seen from the table that during 2005 -06, hundred percent funds has been 
released while in 2006 -07, 98.3 per cent has been released by the Ministry to Nodal 
Agencies. In the last month of the f inancial year 2007 -08, it has been observed that Nodal 
Agencies have already an unspent balance of around Rs. 3.97 crore (Rs. 11.27 crore by the 
end of 3 rd quarter). Accordingly, only Rs.8.62 crore has been released to Nodal Agencies 
for carrying out the p roposed activity of 48 clusters whose Diagnostic Study Reports 
(DSRs) and action plans were approved by the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) in its 7 th 
meeting held on 10 March 2008. Nodal Agencies have also been instructed by the SSC to 
promptly and fully utilize the funds which have been allocated to them. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee takes note of the allocation for 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and 
desires to know the reasons for not allocating more funds to Coir Board as it feels that 
most of the clusters in coir sector would be launched in phases in 2008 -09. 
Para (162)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As stated earlier, the Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries 
(SFURTI) has been launched with a view to develop around 100 clusters over a period of 5 
years (beginning 2005-06) with an total Plan outlay of Rs. 97.25 crore.  So far, 33 khadi, 59 
village industry clusters and 26 coir clusters have been approved under SFURTI for their 
development (including clusters in reserve to accommodate any drop out). The average cost 
of cluster has been estimated under this scheme is between Rs. 0.80 crore to Rs. 1 crore. 
The budget estimates under the head of SFURTI have been allocated between the Nodal 
Agencies, i.e., KVIC (for khadi and VI clusters) and Coir Board (for coir clusters) in line 
with the number of clusters to be developed by them. The Ministry releases funds to Nodal 
Agencies based on their demand and utilization certificates furnished by them. Moreover, 
for 26 coir clusters, the Ministry has already released Rs. 13.15 crore as on 31 March 2008. 
In the current financial year i.e., 2008 -09, a provision of Rs. 21 crore has been made under 
this scheme. Funds will be released to the Coir Board as per their requirement/demand. 
   
  
 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observes with concern that the pace of progress under 
SFURTI is very slow. Against a target of 100 clusters (Khadi , VI, and Coir) only 13 
have been inaugurated so far within a time span of 3 years (Base year 2005 -06). The 


Committee also noted the reply of the Ministry regarding operationalisation and 
functionality of clusters and recommends that the Ministry should make vigorous 
efforts in Co - ordination with KVIC and Coir Board so as to set up the targeted 
clusters within targ eted time span.  
 
Para (163) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Cluster development approach under SFURTI is the new initiative undertaken by 
the Ministry of MSME (erstwhile Ministry of ARI) and accordingly, in the first year i.e., 
2005-06, the SSC of SFURTI analysed various issues on criteria of selection of clusters for 
development, selection of technical agents/implementing agencies/cluster development 
agents, scope, volume of work involved, advertisement of scheme alongwith Implementing 
Agencies and Technical Agenci es, etc. Proposals under SFURTI from various 
Implementing Agencies alongwith comments of State Government began to be received by 
the Nodal Agencies only by the end of 2005 -06.  Thereafter selection of clusters, technical 
agencies and other cluster develop ment activities like training, coordination with State 
Government, MoU between Nodal Agencies and Implementing Agencies/Technical 
Agencies have commenced i.e., from 2006-07. 
For operationalisation and full such functioning of the approved clusters under 
SFURTI, regular review meetings of SSC are organized. KVIC and Coir Board also review 
the implementation of the scheme under approved clusters with the Implementing 
Agencies, Technical Agencies, Cluster Development Executives, etc. With the efforts of 
the Ministry along Nodal Agencies, cluster development activities in all the clusters have 
almost completed and 24 (khadi 13 and VI 11) clusters have been inaugurated by the end of 
April 2008. As reported, a number of clusters are in process for inauguration.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that for development, production and infrastructure, the 
financial assistance is too low. It should be modified to provide better financial 
assistance. The subsidy component need s to be released through banks  in case of loan 
and to the industry directly in case of own investment for which the 
industry/enterprises should have PAN number.  
Para (171) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As per instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission the 
existing sche mes including Development of Production Infrastructure (DPI)  being 
implemented by the Coir Board has been got evaluated through independent agency. 
Report of the agency has been received and its observations/recommendations are being 
examined. As the coir  sector units are tiny/ household industries located in rural and 
economically backward areas, Coir Board feels that the insistence on PAN Card may not 
always be feasible upon at this juncture.  However, assistance will be released through 
Banks. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that the Coir Board should establish full fledged 
data base system through outsourcing if necessary. Coir board should have technical 


persons in statistics and market research. Evaluati on of Board Schemes , 
survey/census, commodity market study for domestic and export markets should be 
carried out once in two year. The web site of Coir Board should have all reports and 
studies. 
Para (172) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Coir Board is in the process of developing a full fl edged data base system in its 
offices by engaging a consultant in a phased manner.  It has also decided to engage a 
Statistical Advisor on contract basis for advising on the matters relating to collection and 
dissemination of statistics.  Recently, the Boa rd engaged some independent agencies to 
make evaluation studies on its schemes and projects.  The final report of the Agency will be 
uploaded in the web-site of the Coir Board. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee feels that the Coir Board should fo cus on technology transfer 
and incubation training, infrastructure assistance and to create common facility 
centres/technology upgradation centres and market support /credit support schemes 
subsidizing the interest rate to the entrepreneurs for development  of sector. 
Para (173) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
Coir Board has been transferring technologies developed by its two Research 
Institutes viz. Central Coir Research Institute (CCRI) and Central Institute of Coir 
Technology (CICT).  The technology of pithplus, c ocolawn, ‘Anugraha’ Metallic 
Handloom, coir composites etc. are some of the technologies transferred to the trade by 
organising various seminars for demonstrating technologies.  Under SFURTI, 26 clusters 
have been identified and both the research institute s are disseminating the technologies for 
those clusters to the Implementing Agencies through a MoU with the Implementing 
Agency to transfer various coir processing technologies and to provide necessary 
incubation training at nominal cost.  This will be implemented during 2008-09 and 2009-10 
and is expected to result in successful technology transfer and incubation training 
programmes. 
Under SFURTI, Coir Board is extending the benefits of Common Facility Centres 
and Technology Upgradation Centres in 26 clusters all over India.   
The market support and credit support schemes like Market Development 
Assistance to Coir Industries and Development of Production Infrastructure Scheme, and 
new scheme for Rejuvenation, Modernisation and Technology Upgradation etc. al ready 
exist for the development of coir sector.  Coir Board can consider formulating a scheme for 
subsidising the interest rate to the entrepreneur after critical assessment of performance of 
all its existing assistance schemes. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee  recommends that funds allocated under science and 
technology need to be spent on applied research and development activities , if  
required out sourcing  the scientist and collaborating with national/international 
reputed research organizatio ns and consortium of machinery manufacturers 
associations etc.  


     Para (174)   
Action taken/Comments  
 
Coir Board is getting its funds allocation for its research and developmental 
activities through Plan S&T.  Board has already taken many collaborative pr ojects in 
association with different institutes and reputed organisations like Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Association for the Cultivation of 
Science, IIT, IIS etc.   Coir Board will collaborate in Public Private Partic ipation mode for 
conducting various research activities with national/ international reputed research 
organisations including the consortium of machinery manufacturers association etc. during 
the XIth plan.  Board's research institutes are also popularisin g various applications of coir 
products like coir geotextiles, coir composites, coir pith manure etc. all over India, 
specifically in north and north eastern States under Plan S&T funds in order to popularise 
the technology, product and to arrive the specification with the user departments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that the Market Development Assistance Scheme 
of present pattern is supporting co -operative sector and it may be extended to the 
consortium of Tiny/Household and Smal l industries of private sector for which their 
accounts and sales turnover may be audited by Board  or those recommended by the 
State Authorities of industries department.  
     Para (176)   
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As per the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission, the 
existing schemes including Market Development Assistance being implemented by the 
Coir Board. Coir Board has been got evaluated through independent agency. The report of 
the agency has been received and its recommend ations are being examined for taking a 
decision for continuation of the scheme during XI Plan with or without modification. The 
recommendation made by the Committee would be taken into consideration before arriving 
at a decision in the matter. 
 Recommendat ion/Observation  
 
The Committee is constrained to note that the number of Khadi institutions 
registered with KVIC/State KVIBs in NER are very less and recommends that the 
Ministry should work aggressively for its increase.  
Para (194) 
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
As replied in paragraph No.192 above, KVIC has given relaxation for registration 
of new khadi institutions in North Eastern Region. The procedure for registration of new 
institution in NER is being simplified to give proper impetus. A total amount of Rs. 17.50 
crore has been earmarked in BE 2008-09 for NER in khadi sector.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 


 The Committee recommends that the State KVI Boards may be motivated to 
take up the programme s departmentally wherever there is no possibility of promoting 
new khadi institutions . 
Para (195) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to KVIC for taking 
up the issue with S tate KVI Boards for implementation of various programmes 
departmentally wherever there is no possibili ty of promoting new khadi institutions. This 
will be monitored. 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee observed that some State KVIB are being run without full time 
CEO accordingly it recommends that State KVI Boards should  have full time Chief 
Executive Officer s  for  faster pace of programme implementation through KVIB .  
Para (196) 
Action taken/Comments  
 
A letter has been issued to all the State Chief Secretaries communicating the 
recommendation of the Committee as the subject falls in the jurisdiction of States.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
The Committee recommends that the condition of mortgage should be relaxed 
so as to create equitable mortgage in favour of the Commission. It also recommends 
that the status of Sub office, Silchar,  should be upg raded to Divisional Office by 
adequately strengthening it.  
                  Para (198)  
 
Action taken/Comments  
 
A proposal for the relaxation of the condition of equitable mortgage for the khadi 
institutions located in North Eastern Region is under finali sation in KVIC.  As far as the 
upgradation of Silchar office from Sub office to Divisional office is concerned KVIC has 
been asked to seriously consider the same and report compliance. 
****** 
