PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYASABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
CREDIT FLOW TO SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
(MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
AND AGRO & RURAL INDUSTRIES) 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 21sT DECEMBER, 2000) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21sT DECEMBER, 2000) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2000/AGRAHAYANA, 1922 (SAKA) 

I ilfi !11 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
INTRODUCTION 
REPORT OF THE COMMITIEE 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
OF THE COMMITIEE AT A GLANCE 
MINUTES (RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE) 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-50 
51-56 
51-65 

II' 

COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY 
I. Shri Ramdas Agarwal -- Chairman 
RAJYASABHA 
2. Shri Khan Gufran Zahidi 
3. Shri J ibon Roy 
4. Shri Somappa R. Bommai 
5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
6. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhundar 
7. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
8. Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha 
9. Shri Shibu Soren 
I 0. Dr. Faguni Ram 
II. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
12. Prof. M.M. Aggawal 
13. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOKSABHA 
14. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
15. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
16. Shri Ramanand Singh 
17. Shri R. Basanagouda Patil 
18. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
19. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
20. Shri Anant Nayak 
21. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
22. Shri A. Narendra 
23. Shri A.C. Jose 
24. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
25. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
26. Shri Thomas Hansda 
27. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
28. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
29. Shri Sunil Khan 
30. Shri P. Rajendran 
31. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
32. Shri M. Rajaiah 
33. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
34. Shri Deepak Kumar 
35. Shri Manjay Lal 
36. Shri Anant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
37. Shri Ram Sajivan 
38. Shri K. Malaisamy 
(i) 

39. Shri Nagmani 
40. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
41. Shri Rizwan Zaheer 
42. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
43. Shri G.J. Javiya, 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray Under Secretary 
Shri Momraj Singh, Committee Officer 
(ii) 

I N T R 0 D U C T I ON 
L the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Industry. having been authorised by the Committee, hereby present this Forty-third Report on 
the Credit Flow to Small scale Industries. Taking into account the significance of Small Scale 
Sector it was decided in the Committee's meeting held on 25th September, 2000 that the 
Committee should assess the Credit Flow to the Sector in the aftermath of the policy announced 
by the Hon'ble Prime Minister in the First National Conference of SSI Sector on the 30th August, 
2000. 
2. The Committee at its meeting held on 25th September, 2000, inter-alia examined the 
background note on the Credit Flow to SSI sector furnished by the Ministry of SSI and A&RI 
and thereafter, decided to have interaction with officials of the Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries and Agro & Rural Industries, RBI!Banks/Financial Institutions/KVIC and 
representatives of SSI Association and NGOs to assess the impact of the policy/package on the 
SSI units. 
3. The Committee in its next meeting held on 4th October, 2000 decided to undertake a 
visit to Mumbai from gth to II th October, 2000 to take stock of the ground realities pertaining to 
credit facilities being extended to SSI sector by the Banks and Financial Institutions. 
4. The Report has been prepared on the basis of the background note furnished by the 
Ministry of SSI and A&RI and discussions held in three days meeting in Mumbai with the 
representatives of SSI and NGO and officials the Ministry of SSI and A&RI and RBI/Banks 
and Financial Institutions. On behalf of the Committee I wish to thank all the representatives and 
officials who appeared before the Committee and·· placed their considered views. The 
Committee, while appreciating the concern of the Government to SSI Sector, hopes that the 
Government will implement the recommendations made in the present report in order to ensure 
the continued credit flow to SSI sector. 
5. The Committee in its meeting held on 18th December, 2000 considered and adopted 
the Report. 
NEW DELHI; 
December 18, 2001 
(iii) 
RAMDAS AGARWAL 
Chairman, 
Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on .fndustry. 

REPORT 
Small Scale Industries Sector plays paramount role in the National economy and has 
vast potential in terms of employment, output, export promotion, expansion of base for 
indigenous entrepreneurship and decentralization of industries in rural areas. The number of 
persons employed in the SSI sector was 171.58 lakhs while the production of the sector at 
current prices was Rs.5,27,515 crore produced in more than 3 million units. The SSI sector 
export performance has been of the order of Rs.48,979 crores. In this respect the achievement 
of growth in SSI sector has been 7. 7. per cent in 1998-99 compared to 4 per cent growth in the 
industrial sector. The Employment growth between 1998-99 has been of the order of 2.62 
percent over previous year which has been better than the overall growth in the employment 
of around I per cent. The sector has exceeded the employment target in 81h Five Year Plan and 
the achievement in the Ninth Five Year Plan is satisfactory in this regard with a growth rate 
around 4 per cent per year. 
During the course of examination of Demand for Grants (2000-0 1) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Small Scale Industry and Agro & Rural Industries, the Department Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry took up the issue of credit flow to SSI Sector in 
detail. It was informed to the Committee by the Secretary that the problematic area in the sector 
is about SSI credit, as percentage of net banking credit was about 16 per cent, in March, 1996 
which went up to 17.33 per cent in March, 1999. In absolute terms, the credit to the SSI sector 
has increased to Rs.42,674 crores in March, 1999 which is a significant improvement, compared 
with the figure of Rs.30,000 crores il'l March, 1996. However, the disturbing feature is that the 
amount of credit to the tiny sector is not adequate. But at the end of March, 1999, the tiny sector 
got a credit of Rs.8,837.47 crores which is about 20.7 per cent of the credit going to the SSI 
sector and as per the norms laid down by the RBI, 60 per cent of the SSI credit should have gone 
to the tiny sector. It is this reason which has prompted to launch the Credit Guarantee Scheme. 
Moreover the RBI had advised the banks to introduce special branches for the small scale sector 
and 3 89 branches have already been set lip. The banks have also been directed by Ministry of 
Finance to enhance the coverage of Small Scale Industries branches to individual districts. 
Apart from this, SIDBI has introduced Single Window Scheme for working capital and term 
loans. Since the Small Scale Industries sector is facing the problem because of absence of 
working capital loans in time and in case ifthe same institution will be responsible for both term 
loans and working capital, the situation will improve. 
The Committee was informed during examination of Demands for Grants (2000-200 1) 
that in order to improve the credit flow to Small Scale Industries the Credit Guarantee Scheme 
has been launched during the year 2000-2001. This' provides for contribution to a fund to 
generate loans without any collateral. The scheme will be implemented jointly by the Central 
Government and Small Industries Development Bank of India through a trust. The funds required 
for the scheme will be provided by Government of India and SIDBI in the ratio of 4: 1. SIDBI is 
also presently administrating the technology development and modernisation funds scheme for 
assisting technological development and modernisation of Small Scale Industries units. This 
scheme has certain concessional features including interest at prime lending rate for direct 
assistance for improving the credit flow. In past also RBI had issued instruction that out of funds 
normally available to Small Scale Industries sector, 40% would be given to the units with 
investment in Plan and machinery up to Rs.S lakhs, 20% to the unit with investment between Rs.S 
lakhs and 25 lakhs and remaining 40% for other units. The single window scheme of SIDBI has 
also been extended to all the districts. 
1 

" I 
The committee also came to understand that Banks and financial institutions generally do 
not entertain new entrepreneurs and not even provided the application forms. New exporters with 
confirm orders do not get the opportunity to even open a bank account. 
The Committee in its 40
1
h Report on Demands for Grants (2000-2001) pertaining to the 
Ministry of SSI and A&RI recommended that in order to mitigate financial difficulties in the 
early stages of start up , venture capital companies should be established to provide financial and 
managerial assistance to the new enterprises. 
The table below gives the position with regard to flow of credit to Small Scale Industries 
and tiny sectors from public sector banks. 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Net Bank Credit At the end At the end of At the end of At the end of 
of March March 1997 March 1998 March 1999 
1996 
Net Bank Credit 1,84,381 1,89,684 2,18,219 2,46,203 
Credit to SMALL 29,485 31,542 38,109 42,674 
SCALE 
INDUSTRIES 
SSI Credit as %age 15.99 16.6 17.5 17.33 
ofNet Bank Credit 
Net Credit to Tiny 8183 9515 10273 8837 
Sector 
Tiny credit as 27.76 30.2 27.0 20.71 
percentage of net 
SSI credit 
The Committee came to know that despite of the various schemes and instructions the 
credit flow against the target of 60% for tiny sector the actual flow has been only 20.71%. 
The Committee in its 40th Report felt that if the banks were able to achieve the target 
of 60% of creqit to tiny sector, the contribution of Small Scale Industries Sector would have been 
much higher as it stands now. The Committee in that Report had the recommended that effort 
should be made to achieve the target of 60%.The Committee also noted that the Net Bank 
Credit is Rs.2,46,203 crore and credit to Small Scale Industries Sector is Rs.42,674 crore at the 
end of March, 1999 i.e. only 17% of finance to the Small Scale Industries Sector which is 
contributing 35% in exports and the aggregated value of production of Small Scale Industries 
sector in 1998-99 was Rs. 5,27,515 crore. The Committee therefore recommended in its 40th 
Report that banks and other financial institutions should meet the fund requirement of Small 
Scale Industries Sector by providing them more lending facilities so that they can contribute more 
to the economy. 
The Ministz of SSI and A&RI in its Action Taken notes on the recommendation 
contained in the 401 Report stated that the issue was taken up ~ith the RBI who have informed 
that the flow of credit to SSI Sector has shown a steady increase over the years. The advances of 
the Public Sector Banks to SSI Sector have gone up considerably from Rs.l6, 783 crore in March, 
1991 to Rs.42,674 crores in March, 1999 constituting 17.3% of the Net Bank Credit. Many 
measures taken as a follow up of the Nayak Committee and Kapur Committee recommendations 
and the policies initiated by the Government have resulted in the increase in the credit flow. 
Further, the recent instructions issued to Banks for raising the exemption limit for non-obtention 
2 
I •II• II II II·· 

and the policies initiated by the Government have resulted in the increase in the credit flow. 
Further, the recent instructions issued to Banks for raising the exemption limit for non-obtention 
of collateral securities from Rs.l lakh to Rs.5 lakhs, raising the limit of composite loans from 
Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.l 0 lakhs, opening of specialised SSI branches in each District, etc., would 
provide more lending facilities to the SSI Sector. The new scheme of Credit Guarantee Fund and 
the proposed scheme of credit linked capital subsidy for Technology upgradation are expected to 
improve the flow of credit to the SSI sector. 
The Committee in its 40th report outlined the general perception that SIDBI has a 
number of good schemes, their reach is inadequate as most of the schemes are routed through 
primary lending institutions. There has been mixed response whether SIDBI, an Apex 
institution, as hitherto, should confine largely to providing resource support to intermediaries for 
implementation of various schemes and programmes, or should do more of direct retail lending. 
Given the structure and stature of SIDBI, it is largely expected to play a role of the Apex Bank 
providing resource support to the PLis and initiating appropriate developmental programme for 
the healthy growth of Small Scale Industries. Its direct lending has been specifically in those 
areas where PLis have been shy in assisting the units or in high risk areas such as infrastructure, 
marke.ting, venture financing etc. Therefore, the Committee recommended that SIDBI should 
take initiative and act as a watch dog to monitor the activities of Indian and Foreign Banks. 
Being mainly for the small scale sector, it would be appropriate if SIDBI is placed under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries. 
Replying to the recommendation contained in the 40th report the Ministry of SSI and A&RI 
informed the Committee that the issue was taken up with the SIDBI and Banking Division, 
Ministry of Finance. The SIDBI has endorsed the view that there is need for adequate provision 
to the SIDBI to monitor the activity of Primary Lending Institutions (including Indian and 
Foreign Banks) with regard to their assistance and policies towards SSI Sector. This is 
necessary keeping in view the coordination role envisaged from the SIDBI in terms of SIDBI 
Act 1989. Banking Division, Ministry of Finance has also endorsed the views ofthe SIDBI. 
The matter regarding, placing SIDBI under the Administrative Control of Ministry of 
(SSI and A&R ) was also taken up with the Banking Division, Ministry of Finance and the 
SIDBI. The SIDBI, is of the view that good coordination exists between the SIDBI and Ministry 
of SSI and A&RI with regard to framing suitable policy guidelines and programmes for the 
benefit of SSis. However, as far as Administrative control of the SIDBI is concerned, keeping in 
view that the SIDBl is primarily an All-India Financial Institution and the Administrative control 
of Banks/ All-India Financial Institution is with the Ministry of Finance it would be appropriate if 
the SIDBI continues to be under the Administrative control of the Ministry of Finance. Banking 
Division, Ministry of Finance has also endorsed the views of SIDBI. SIDBI is primarily a 
refinancing agency. In the interest of proper linking of SIDBI with financial and monetary 
policy, it is essential that the SIDBI should continue under the Ministry of Finance. Secretary 
(SSI and A&RI) is already a member of the Board of Directors and DC (SSI) in the National 
Advisory Committee. DC (SSI) is also a member in the Board of Trustees of Credit Guarantee 
Trust Fund which has been created for running the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme. D{: (SSI) is 
also a member in SIDBI's Committee on Micro Credit. 
The issue of credit/loan disbursement by foreign banks was examined in the 
Committees 40th Report wherein it is stated that the job of giving loan to entrepreneurs mainly 
rests with Nationalised Banks. All scheduled commercial banks and banks in private sector 
should give 40% of their lending to Private sector. To give support to foreign banks and the 
private sector banks there is a provision that if there is a shortfall in the priority sector lending, 
which include Small Scale Industries, tiny industries, beneficiaries of PMRY and other things, 
they <.;an deposit that shortfall. The private sector is with NABARD and the foreign banks with 
3 

'' I 
SIDBI. The foreign banks found it more convenient to deposit this amount with SIDBI rather 
than disburse it. Thus, the priority sector lending objective is not fulfilled by foreign banks. As 
intimated by the Ministry, as a group, foreign banks have achieved the target of 10% of net bank 
credit stipulated in the case of lending to SSI sector. However, some individual banks have not 
achieved the target. As per the existing rules, foreign banks which report shortfalls in lending to 
the priority sector or the sub-sectors (SSI & Export) are required to place deposits equivalent to 
the entire shortfall with SIDBI for the period of one year at a rate of 8% per annum. 
The Committee in its 40th Report recommended that the foreign banks should also be put 
in the level playing field and no concession on this account may be provided. RBI and Ministry 
of Finance should issue instructions and insist upon them to lend directly to small enteq}rises as 
the priority sector lending objective is not fulfilled by the foreign banks. 
The Ministry ofSSI and A&RI replied in its Action Taken note on the Committee's 40th 
Report that the recommendation of the Committee were taken up with the RBI. The RBI has 
infomed that foreign banks are required to lend 32% of their Net Bank Credit to priority sector as 
they are not expected to lend to agriculture in view of location of their branches. These banks, 
however, have been prescribed sub-target of 10% for SSI and 12% for exports. The foreign 
banks which report short fall in lending to priority sector or the sub-sectors (SSI& Exports) are 
required to place deposits equivalent to the entire short fall with the SIDBI for a period of one 
year at a rate of interest of 8% per annum. This system has taken into accoWJt the inability of 
some banks to achieve the target/sub-target due to their locational disadvantaae and provides an 
alternative mechanism to channelise the funds for the development of small sc:ale industries, by 
depositing with the SIDBI. 
Considering the importance of Small Scale Industries for national economic development 
and growth the Govt. of India has accorded high priority to this sector. Hon'ble Prime Minister, 
Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, announced on 30th August, 2000 special package for SSI. The policy 
& decision taken by the Ministry of SSI and A&RI and announced on 301h and 3151 August, 2000 
in the National Conference of SSI Sector held at New Delhi include the following items relating 
to flow of credit to SSI sector: 
(i) The loan limit under composite Loan Scheme would be enhanced from Rs.1 0 lakhs to 
Rs.25 lakhs. 
(ii) Industry r~lated service and business enterprises with a maximum investment of Rs.IO 
lakhs will qualify for priority lending. 
(iii) Bearing in mind the urgent used for technology upgradation Government is happy to 
announce a capital subsidy of 12% for investment in technology in selected sectors. 
An inter-ministerial committee of experts will be set up to define the scope of 
technology upgradation and sectoral priorities. 
(iv) In the National Equity Fund Scheme, the project cost limit will be revised from rs.25 
lakhs to Rs.50 lakhs. The soft loan limit will be retained at 25% of the project cost 
subject to a maximum of Rs.IO lakhs per project. Assistance under the NEF will be 
provided at a service charge of 5% per annum. 
(v) The Nayak Committee's recommendations regarding provision of 20 per cent of the 
ptojected turnover as working capital is being commended to the financial institutions 
and banks. 
(vi) The eligibility limit for coverage under the credit Guarantee Scheme has been revised 
to Rs.25 lakhs from the present limit of Rs.l 0 lakhs. 
4 
1 •II• II' !I lj1 

(vii) SIDBI will continue to give concessional rate of refinance to the tiny sector which is 
now at 10.5 per cent as compared to 12 per cent for the SSI sector. This policy will 
continue. 
(viii) The Department of Economic Affairs will appoint a task force to suggest 
revitalization/restructuring of the State Finance Corporations. 
(ix) The Reserve Bank of India is being requested to appoint a Task Force to go into the 
question of how to strengthen and popularize factoring services and on how to 
encourage bills culture, without recourse to the SSI suppliers. The Task Force shall 
give its report within six months of its constitution. 
(x) The RBI is being requested to take up with the banks the question of Sub-allocating 
overall limits to the large borrowers specifically for meeting the payment obligations in 
respect of purchases from the SSis, either on cash basis or on bills basis. 
(xi) The Reserve Bank of India is being requested to draw up revised guidelines for the 
rehabilitation of currently sick but potentially viable SSI units. Such guidelines should 
be detailed, transparent and non-discretionary. 
(xii) Under the National Equity Fund (NEF) Scheme, 30 percent of the investment will be 
earmarked for the tiny sector 
(xiii) Commercial banks are being requested to develop schemes to encourage investment in 
technology upgradation and harmonies the same with SIDBI 
(xiv) The National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) will continue to give composite loans 
upto Rs.25 lakhs to the tiny sector and continue to charge one per cent concessional 
interest rate. 
The Secretariat asked the Ministry of SSI and A&RI for a background note on the 
Flow of Credit to Small Scale Sector in the aftermath of announcement of package pertaining 
to SSI sector in the National Conference on SSI and the Ministry accordingly, furnished the 
background note on the subject. Background note furnished by the Ministry stipulates the 
schemes announced on 30
1
h August, 2000 and gives the details of its impacts on Small Sector. 
According to the background note Composite Loan Scheme which has been enhanced from 
Rs.1 0 lakhs to Rs.25 lakhs is a potent tool for meeting the credit requirements of artisans, 
village, cottage industries and small industries in the tiny sector, by making available both term 
loan and working capital assistance from a single agency. This helps the borrower in avoiding 
paper work and other operational problems. SIDBI refinances these loans to bank. With the 
raising of the limit, it is expected that credit requirements of tiny units would be met by a single 
financing agency, which comprise 98% of the small scale sector. The background note 
highlights that Industry related service and business enterprises with a maximum investment of 
Rs.l 0 lakhs will qualify for priority lending. The enhancement in investment limit, of industry 
related service and business enterprises from Rs.S lakhs to Rs.1 0 lakhs would enable large 
number of enterprises to have access to priority sector credit. 
The background note points out that having due regard for the urgent need for 
technology upgradation Government is happy to announce a ~apital subsidy of 12% for 
investment in technology in selected sectors like leather products, food processing, information 
technology (hardware), drugs and pharmaceuticals, auto parts &*components, electronic industry, 
dyes and intermediates, toys, hand tools etc. Introducing new scheme for providing capital 
subsidy of 12% for select sector would help flow of increased investment towards technological 
upgradation and modernisation thus enhancing the competitiveness of these sector. It is being 
stated that the scheme will be operated through small industries development bank of India 
5 

(SIDBI) for five years starting from the year 2000-2001. It proposes to against 15,000 units 
every year out of which 14,000 would be tiny units with investment below Rs.25 lakhs. 
Preference would be given to tiny units in sanctions and disbursements of loans. SIDBI would 
ensure that minimum 75% of interest support under the scheme flows to tiny sector. The 
Ministry further states that in its background note that presently, SIDBI has been providing 
assistance for technology upgradation and modernisation under its technology development and 
modernisation fund (TDMF) Scheme and Refinance Scheme for technology development and 
modernisation (RTDM). The assistance provided by the SIDBI is not sufficient to cover the 
vast SSI sectors. The requirement of funds for the SSI sector are enormous. It was therefore, 
decided that banks will be requested to develop schemes to encourage investment in technology 
upgradation and harmonies the same with SIDBI. 
As regards the National Equity Fund Scheme of SIDBI it is being stated that under 
NEF Scheme the project limit which has been revised from Rs.25 lakh to Rs.50 lakhs is a potent 
tool for providing the assistance to tiny sector units by bridging the gap in their equity. 
Enhancement of project cost limit under NEF scheme to Rs.50 lakh would further help a large 
number for promoters, have access to equity type support from SIDBI/GOI . The service 
charge for providing assistance under the scheme has been increased from I% to 5% so that 
SIDBI gets some returns on its investments. In order to preclude the possibility that that the 
funds under the National Equity Fund (NEF) Scheme are not cornered by non-tiny SSis , it has 
been decided that 30% of investment under NEF Scheme would be earmarked for tiny sector. 
According to the SIDBI which has been implementing this scheme, given the existing 
definition of tiny units of Rs.25 lakhs investment in plant and machinery it is expected that 
majority of the beneficiaries ofNEF would be from this sector. 
The background note also stipulates that the Credit Guarantee Fund (Scheme) for 
Small Industries (CGFSI) to provide guarantee to loans upto Rs.25 lakhs extended by 
Commercial Banks and few selected well performing Regional Rural Banks is a unique feature 
of Government's announcement of package for SSI the scheme is being operated by credit 
Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (CGTSI) jointly set up by the Government of India 
and SIDBI. Under the Scheme the guarantee is being extended by CGTSI to the eligible 
lending institutions covering 75 per cent of the risk in respect of their collateral free crec· 
faciliti~s to new and existing SSI units, including those engaged in IT and software industry. 
Maximum credit, that could be covered per borrower is Rs.25 lakhs. Scheduled commercial 
banks, select well performing Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and the National Small Industries 
Corporation (NSIC) Ltd. are the eligible institutions for the guarantee cover. SIDBI in a note 
to this Secretariat on the Scheme further clarified that p~rticipating in the scheme by the 
lending institution are optional. However, Punjab National Bank, Bank of Baroda and Indian 
Overseas Banks have registered with CGTSI for availing of Guarantee facility in respect of 
their eligible collateral free credit facilities extending to the eligible borrowers. It has been 
further stated that Credit Guarantee Fund for Small Industries will have a corpus of Rs.l25 
crore, out of which Rs.I 00 crore is being contributed by the Government of India and Rs.25 
crore by the SIDBI. The enhancement of loan limit for coverage under credit guarantee scheme 
would enable most of the units in the SSI sector, have access to bank credit which is collateral 
free and or third party guarantee free. 
The background further points out that the SIDBI wiii continue to give concessional 
rate of refinance to the tiny sector which is now at I 0.5 per cent as compared to I2 per cent 
for the SSI sector. The availability of concessionaf rate of refinance at I 0.5 per cent would bel p 
tiny units avail credit facilities at concessional rates. Moreover, the National Small Industries 
Corporation (NSIC) will continue to give composite loans upto Rs.25 lakhs to the tiny sector and 
continue to charge one per cent concessional interest rate. NSIC has launched a Composite 
6 
" I 

Term Loan Scheme for the benefit of existing and prospective entrepreneurs to acquire land and 
building, machinery and requirement and working capital under one roof to the tiny units. Under 
the scheme composite loans are given upto rs.25 lakhs and given to tiny sector at one percent 
below the normal lending rate ofNSIC. 
On the issue of revitalization/restructuring of the State Finance Corporations, it is 
being stated that the Department of Economic Affairs will appoint a Task Force to suggest 
revitalization/restructuring of the State Finance Corporation. The background note outlines that 
the State Financial Corporations (SFCs) are operating as regional development banks for 
development of small and medium enterprises in their respective states. There are 18 SFCs in 
the country, of which 17 were set up under the SFCs Act 1951. Tamil Nadu Industrial 
Investment corporation Ltd. was established in 1949 under the Companies Act as Madras 
Industrial Investment Corporation, also functions as SFC. The capital of these corporations has 
generally been contributed by State Governments and lOBI. SIDBI provides refinance and 
other assistance to these SFCs. Most of SFCs are plagued by low recoveries. All the three 
Committees namely, Nayak Committee, Abid Hussain Committee and Kapur Committee have 
recommended the restructuring of SFCs. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Chairman 
& M.D. lOBI has been constituted on 5
1
h September, 2000 to revitalize SFC one meeting of this 
Committee has already been held in Mumbai on 21.9.2000. 
The background note points out that all the committees namely, Nayak Committee, 
Abid Hussain Committee and Kapur Committee, set up since the start of economic reforms have 
stressed on the growth offactoring services in the country. The Reserve Bank oflndia is being 
requested to appoint a Task Force to go into the question of how to strengthen and popularize 
factoring services and on how to encourage bills culture, without recourse to the SSI suppliers. 
With a view to encouraging bill culture and to providing assistance to SSI units for collection of 
payments in respect of the supplies made by them, Small Industries Development Bank of India 
9SIDBI) in association with State Bank of Indian and Canara Bank have set up subsidiaries to 
provide and popularize factoring services in the SSI sector. Factoring involves a continuing 
arrangement under which the factoring organization assumes the credit and collection functions 
for its clients, purchase their receivable at a discount at agreed rates as they arise. Factoring J;IMlY 
also include an arrangement under which the factor maintains the sales ledger of the client, 
attends to their book-keeping duties relating to such accounts. Receivables and performs their 
ancillary functions as well. Expansion of these services at reasonable cost to the entrepreneur 
would help, to a great extent, in solving the problem of delayed payment from large units. In 
order to solve the problem of delayed payment RBI is being requested to take up with the 
banks the question of sub-allocating over-all limit to the large borrowers specifically for 
meeting the payments obligations in respect of purchase from the SSis, either on cash basis 
or on bill basis which will make obligatory on the part of large SSI to utilize those limits only 
for making payments to SSis. The RBI is looking into the issue of sub-allocating overall limits 
to the large borrower specifically for making the payment obligation of SSI. 
On the issue of rehabilitation of currently sick but potentially viable SSI units, the 
background note states that Reserve Bank of India is being requested to draw up revised 
detailed transparent and non-discretionary guidelines. However, at present State Level Inter 
Institutional Committee (SLIIC) is the only mechanism set up by RBI in all States under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Industries, Department of concerned State Governments to provide 
forum for the exchange of information and discussions on problems faced by SSI units. The 
Committee brings different parties connected with the rehabilitation of viable sick units together 
so that detailed parameters for rehabilitation based on consensus can emerge. 
The Standing Committee on Industry in its meeting held on 25th September, 2000 have 
examined the background notes on Credit Flow to SSI Sector furnished by Ministry of SSI and 
7 

A&RI and thereafter decided to have interaction with the officials of Ministry of Small Scale 
Industries and Agro & Rural Industries, RBI/Banks/Financial Institutions/K VIC and 
representative of SSI Associations and NGOs to assess the impact of the recent policy 
announcement on the credit flow and the problems being faced by the SSI units and the 
Banks/Finance Industries. The Committee in its meeting held on the 41h October,2000 decided 
to undertake a visit to Mumbai from 81h to 11th October, 2000 to take stock of ground realities 
pertaining to credit facilities being provided to SSI Sector by the banks and financial institutions. 
MEETING WITH OFFICIALS OF KHADI 
COMMISSION ( KVIC ) 
AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
The Committee interacted with the representatives of Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC) and came to know that Khadi and Village Industries have the unique 
capacity to generate large employment opportunities in the rural areas at a low capital cost and 
have therefore occupied an important place in the national economy. These industries develop 
local initiatives, cooperation and spirit of self-reliance in the economy and at the same time 
help in utilisation of available manpower for processing local available raw materials by 
adoption of simple techniques. The functions of the KVIC are generally to plan, promote and 
assist in implementation of programmes for the development of Khadi and Village Industries. 
To achieve this, it undertakes (a) financing of eligible agencies, (b) training of persons employed 
or desirous of seeking employment of in Khadi and Village Industries (c) supply of 
tools/equipment, (d) R&D in Khadi and Village Industries sector, (e) promotion to sale and 
marketing of Khadi and Village Industries products. (f) promotion and encouragement of 
cooperative efforts among the persons engaged in Khadi and Village Industries etc. The 
different sources of finance available for development programme for KVIC are, in addition to 
the funds released by Government of India under budgetary source, are funds drawn from 
consortium Bank credit and funds drawn by the beneficiaries from the Banks under ISEC 
scheme and Margin Money Scheme. KVIC is extending financial assistance to implementing 
agencies in the form of grant and loan for Khadi and Village Industries activities from budgetary 
sources and CBC fund. Additional funds are also mobilized for Khadi and polyester under 
ISEC scheme from institutional financial sources for viable projects of village industry under 
Margin Money Scheme. 
The Committee was informed that the Budgetary source fund for the activities of the 
KVIC are provided by the Central Government viz. Ministry of SSI and A&RI are in the form 
of plan and non-plan expenditure. Moreover, the some funds are provided by the Ministry of 
Non-Conventional Energy Sources. These funds are provided by way of grants and loans and 
the Commission re-allocates them to implementing agencies, namely the State KVIC Boards, 
societies registered under the Societies Registration Act. 1860 and cooperative societies 
registered under the Cooperative Act. of the state Governments. The major portion of the grant 
by the Commission is for disbursement of rebate on retail sales of Khadi. 
The Committee was apprised that the Interest Subsidy Eligibility Certificate scheme 
(ISEC) was introduced by Government of India in 1978. Under the Scheme, implementing 
agencies can avail of bank loan as recommended by KVIC and they are required to pay only 4 
percent of interest and difference between interest charged by the Banks on the amount 
recommended by KVIC and the 4 percent is borne by KVIC. Upto 1999-2000 Bank loans 
under the scheme had reached to the level of Rs.362.23 crores. However, there is a gap in 
actual fund required under the ISEC by the Institutions i.e. the level of Interest Subsidy 
Eligibility Certificate issued by KVIC and actual funds released by the Banks to the Institutions 
under the scheme. 
8 
" I I ·•I' II• II I! I 

In view of inadequacy of budgetary support to KVIC, 1995-96 Union budget mooted 
creation of a consortium of Nationalised Banks for financing the KVIC Sector. Accordingly, 
provision of Rs.1 000 crores was made through Consortium of Banks, for which Government 
of India has provided guarantee. As on 30.9.2000 KVIC has withdrawn Rs.716.00 crores 
from the Banks. 
The Consortium funds drawn by KVIC was to be re-loaned to the State KVIBs and 
directly aided agencies of KVIC. For State KVIBs, the same was to be guaranteed by State 
Governments. In the case of Bihar and Assam State Governments such guarantee was not 
provided, depriving the concerned State KVIBs from the benefit of this scheme. 
KVIC introduced the Margin Money Scheme for financing viable village industry 
projects. The launching of the Margin Money Scheme was based on recommendations made 
by the High Power Committee. Under this Scheme, 25% Margin Money is being provided 
for taking up viable Village Industries projects under general category and 30% Margin Money 
to those belonging to SC/ST/Minorities/PHC and other weaker Sections. Apart from 
implementing this Margin Money Scheme directly by KVIC and State KVI Boards, KVIC also 
made arrangement with 27 National Schedule Commercial banks for implementing this scheme, 
foi which an amount of Rs.132 crores was placed at the disposal of these Banks during the 
financial year 1997-98. Subsequently, after making assessment/review of utilisation by the 
Banks KVIC has withdrawn certain amount from the less performing banks arid replenished 
too comparatively better performing banks. Accordingly as on date the total Margin Money 
advances made available to Nationalised Banks stands at Rs.153.91 crores and Rs.1 08.17 crores 
has been already utilised by them. 
In addition to Nationalised Banks, Margin Money Scheme is being implemented 
through Regional Rural banks (RRBs), selected Cooperative banks and Private Scheduled 
Commercial Banks on reimbursement basis. As far as N.E. Region is concerned, the North 
Eastern Development Financial Institution (NEDFI) is also identified for implementing the 
Scheme. A proposal for implementing this scheme through selected State Financial Corporation 
is under consideration. · 
The Government of India reviewed the progress of implementation of REGP and 
Margin Money Scheme during first All India Industry Ministries confidence on 24'h August, 
1996 and announced a package of Rs.148.00 crores in favour of various State 
Governments/Union Territories for implementation of REGP and Margin Money Scheme in 
their respective States/Union Territories. The Commission released an amount of Rs.1 07.25 
crores in favour of 28 State/UT KVI Boards (except Assam and Bihar in the absence of State 
Government Guarantee). It was expected that the State/UT Boards would get in touch with 
local Banks for sanction of V.I. projects for implementation of Margin Money Scheme. Out 
of Rs.107.25 crores, Boards have utilised an amount ofRs.71.79 crores upto 17.8.2000. 
During the course of interaction with officials of KVIC the following issues were 
discussed:-
(i) Initially the whole KVIC programme was depending on budgetary source from 
Government of India. However, due to constraints on budgetary resources, 
budget of KVIC was not sufficient to meet the requirements. The budgetary 
support to KVIC was about 1.80% of total Public Sector outlay in the 2"d plan 
and it was gradually reduced to about 0.20% in the 8
1
h Five Year Plan and 
remained at the same level in 9th plan also. Due to changes in economic 
policy, there is hardly any scope to get increased budgetary support from the 
Government of India. 
9 

" I 
(ii) The institutional finance to the sector has substantially increased in the last 2 
decades. It was only Rs.8.45 crores in the years 1980-81 and has increased to 
Rs.850.00 crores in 1999-2000. The High Power Committee has estimated the 
requirement of Institutional Finance of this sector to the tune of Rs.3735 crores 
for the 8'h plan and in 9'h plan the HPC has recommended total outlay of 
Rs.l6800 crores and 2/3rd i.e. Rs.ll200 crores, should come from the 
institutional finance during 91h plan, which suggests more than Rs.2000 crores 
per year from the Banks to this sector. 
(iii) To operate the Margin Money Scheme of KVIC through all Banks including 
Cooperative Banks and other Private Banks. Through all Financial 
Institutions, including SFCs', Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Corporations_ 
and other financing agencies in different states. Further to operate the scheme 
through all Government Agencies/Corporations like SIDCs etc., to give boost 
to the scheme. SIDBI's Scheme may be extended to entrepreneurs under 
KVIC also. 
(iv) Recently announced credit guarantee scheme for Rural entrepreneurs is 
expected to benefit to the entrepreneurs of this sector in a large way. 
(v) The Margin Money Scheme helps to develop entrepreneur skill among the rural 
craftsman. The master craftsmen in rural areas may be motivated to form Self 
Help Groups and take benefit of this scheme on Self Help Group basis. 
Approval of Self-Help Group is being sought from the Government of India to 
bring them under this Scheme. At present KVIC's schemes are being 
implementing through NGOs like Registered Institutions and Cooperative 
Societies. It is also proposed to operate the same through partnership firms 
form to give boost to the scheme. KVIC encourages the creation of better 
market opportunities. Though finance is being provided for setting up of Sales 
Outlets in rural areas, the fact remains that the major market for rural products is 
in urban centres. However, under the Rural Employment Generation 
Programme (REGP), it will be difficult to finance market outlets, which ure to 
be opened in urban areas. 
(vi) Common facilities Centres (CFCs) are very essential for helping the artisans to 
make available various facilities in a cluster of units. Artisans identified under 
KVIC's cluster scheme are individuals and mostly located in their villages with 
the industrial activity at their residential premises/ Hence it was felt necessary 
to provide the necessary support so that the backward and forward linkages 
could be established for the smooth operation of the programme. At present 40 
per cent of funds requirement for this purpose is being met from KVIC as grant 
and 45 percent loan from KVIC's CBC source whereas 15 per cent is 
contributed by the aided institutions, who would function as the Nodal 
Agency of the cluster. KVIC has already identified clusters for development of 
selected industries and Nationalised banks have been intimated about the 
clusters to give finances wherever necessary. 
(vii) Since under the Margin "Money Scheme the credit decision of financing is l~ft 
to the Banks, the scope of helping the traditional industries or priority 
industries is left out, or may not be even covered. Therefore, KVIC has 
decided to indicate the thrust areas, to which bank finance is to be given on 
priority basis. The areas are like bio-fertilisers, bio-chemical technologies and 
10 
111 II, ·II, 

also artisan based traditional industries/activities which can be covered with the 
help of Self Help Group. 
During the course of interaction with the officials of KVIC the Committee came 
across the fact that due to inadequate marketing network there has been large accumulation 
of inventories that is to the extent of Rs. 750 crores over which Committee expressed serious 
concern and wanted change in the marketing system of KVIC with adequate impetus on 
designing and quality of Khadi products. 
The Committee also expressed its concern over the discontinuation of subsidy on 
the part of KVIC to the States of Bihar and Assam in the absence of counter guarantee to be 
given by the respective Government to the KVIC . Members of the Committee wanted 
immediate action to be taken in this regard. 
Replying to the Committee's query as to the Sector of KVIC having the maximum 
potential of employment generation the KVIC officials and the officials of the Ministry of SSI 
and A&RI informed the Committee that leather , readymade garments and food processing 
sector gives the maximum number of employment. Elaborating on the issue the Committee 
was informed that in 1955-56 there were only 2 state KVI Boards, 242 registered institutions 
' and 60 cooperatives under its preview. The number has now increased to 30 State Khadi and 
Village Industries Boards, 5149 registered institutions, 30130 cooperatives societies, 7.98 lakh 
individuals and about 15000 sale outlets operating in 2.61 lakh villages in the country. 
Production which was at the level of Rs.l6.47 crores (Khadi Rs.5.54 crores and Village 
Industries Rs.1 0.93 crores) in 1955-56 , has increased to Rs.5112.37 crores (Khadi Rs.635.89 
crores and village Industries 4476.48 crores) in 1998-99. Similarly, the employment level has 
increased from 9.64 lakh persons (Khadi 6.57 lakhs and village industries 3.07 lakhs) to 58.29 
lakh persons (Khadi 13.85 lakhs and village industries 44.44 lakhs) during the same period . It 
is expected that during 1999-2000 KVIC's performance in terms of production and employment 
will be Rs.5563.90 crores and 60.20 lakhs persons respectively. 
SHRI MAHILA GRIHA UDYOG LIJJAT PAP AD 
The Committee interacted with the officials of Shri Mahila Griha Udyog Lijjat Papad 
which work as Cooperative Society and is recognised by Khadi & Village Industries 
Commission (KVIC). This organisation is working for 32 years and has more than 60 branches 
with the registered office in Mumbai. The special feature of this organisation is that 40,000 
women workers are engaged here having the high degree of organisational belongingness and 
high degree of commitment to work. Besides manufacturing papad the organisation also 
produces flour, pulse, quality spices, bakery, jeera chips, Sasa detergent etc. This is a model 
organisation of women run by women and for women. 
The officials of the organisation informed the Committee that total turnover of the 
organisation is Rs.300 crore and Bank of India, Bank of Baroda and Dena Bank are the main 
creditors to the organisation. Officials the KVIC informed the Committee that KVIC provides 
annual interest subsidy to the organisation. When the committee wanted to know whether the 
organisation is in need of further credit facilities in order to increase the production, the official 
replied that the organisation is asking for more loan from banks which has not been materialised 
so far. The Committee was further informed that the earned profit is re-invested as working 
capital. 
The President informed the Committee that the problems being likely to be faced by the 
organisation is due to imposition of sales tax and excise duty. The Government of Maharashtra 
has imposed 13% sales tax since 1995 on detergent while the Central Government levied 19% 
excise duty. It was being argued that since the manufacturing activities in the organisation is of 
11 

Grih Udyog nature so imposition of sales tax and excise duty is uncalled for. It was further 
argued that goods manufactured in village area should be tax free because this organisation has 
not only contributed to the generation of rural employment but also made welfare provisions for 
women and child education. 
Replying to the Committee's query, the official of the organisation informed that the 
Committee piece-rate wage system is enforced in the organisation and on an average one worker 
earns Rs. 70 to 150 as daily wages. 
As regards the marketing structure, the committee was informed that the organisation 
has good brand for the national and international market. The organisation has branch-depot­
retailer type of structure for physical distribution of the product besides having KVIC selling 
point. 
Meeting With Representatives Of Small Scale Industries Associations 
In order to have comprehensive understanding of the problems being faced by Small 
Scale Industries ·as regards to the credit facilities, the Committee interacted with various 
Associations of Small Scale Industries. 
ALL INDIA ASSOCIATION OF INDUSTRIES 
The representative of All India Association of Industries submitted a note on the 
"Financial Requirement of Small Scale Industry Sector in India" which highlights that the 
credit needs of Small Scale Industries are basically of two types i.e. long term loans and 
working capital . The working group on SSI for the Ninth Five Year Plan (1997-2002) 
estimated a long term credit requirement for the sector at Rs.345-365 billion and working 
capital funds at a level of Rs.l420-1460 billion, at 1997-98 prices. While the requirement of 
term loan for the sector is, by and large, being fulfilled by the financial institutions, the 
working capital requirement is not fully met leading to a credit gap situation. 
As regard the quantum of credit flow to SSI sector the Committee has been informed 
that the institutional source for SSI sector funding are operating in the country at the 
National and the State level . Apex level financial institution are Small Industrit"' 
Development Bank of India, Commercial Banks (CBs), Regional Rural Banks (RRB), 
Cooperative Banks (State Central and primary ) while State level Institutions are State 
Financi~l Corporations (SFCs), State Industrial Development Corporations (SIDC) , State 
Industrial Inves~ment Corporations (SIICs) and State Small Industries Development 
Corporation (SSIDCs) . Besides the National and State level institutions there are some 
other agencies like National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) , National Small Scale Industries 
Corporations of India (NSIC), North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd. (NEDFC). 
SIDBI as an apex institution is routing its financial assistance mainly through primary 
lending institutions. The bank's cumulative sanctions and disbursement to the SSI sector at the 
end of March, 1999 aggregated Rs.451.44 billion and Rs.329.88 billion respectively. The 
position of outstanding advances to SSI by all Commercial Banks in India at the end March, 
1999 showed an amount of Rs.515.85 billion which constituted 17 percent of their Net Bank 
Credit (NCB). Indian Public Sector banks provide the bulk of credit to the SSI sector with an 
amount outstanding of Rs.426.74. billion at the end of March, 1999. The contribution of 
Private Sector Indian Banks was at Rs.64.21 billion and that of Foreign banks Operating in 
India at Rs.24.60 billion. 
The Note on the "Financial Requirements of Small Scale Industry Sector in India" 
further informed the Committee that 196 RRBs, supplement the efforts of scheduled commercial 
12 

banks and cooperatives in credit dispensation for rural development in the country. The non­
agricultural advances, which include advances to rural artisans, village and cottage industries, 
retail trade, self-employment etc. accounted for about 55.6 percent of the total advances of 
RRBs during 1998-99. The RRBs disbursed a sum of Rs.46.3 billion during the year 1997-98, 
out of which Rs.l.94 billion were disbursed to rural artisans, village and cottage industries. 
The cooperative banks extend credit support to priority sectors including SSis. The 
total priority sector advances of 1241 reporting primary cooperative banks as at the end of 
March, 1998 amounted to Rs.l56.40 billion. State Financial Corporations extend financial 
assistance to small and medium industries in their respective states of operation. Provisional 
figure for 1999 show that total amount sanctioned to small scale sector was about Rs.l3,65 
billion as against Rs.l7 .68 billion in 1998. 
State Industrial Development Corporation/State Industrial Investment Corporations also 
cater to the financial needs of medium and large industries. During 1997-98 total amount 
sanctioned and disbursed to the SSI sector amounted to Rs.3.38 and Rs.2.22 respectively. For 
the benefit of small scale units including tiny units, the NABARD extends refinance to 
RRBs/banks for their funding of non-farm activities. Under rural non-farm sector, investment 
credit made available for activities in the manufacturing, processing and service sector for the 
small, tiny and village and cottage industries through SCBs, SCARDBs, RRBs, and CBs. 
NABARD also extend assistance to micro enterprises through NGOs and Self Help groups. 
NABARD disbursed a combined sum of Rs.1 0.53 billion for non-farm activities outside 
IRDP and for industry service and business under IRDP during 1998-99. The loan outstanding 
of KVIC to Khadi and Village Industries at the end of 1998-99 amounts to Rs.ll.86 billion. 
NSICL disbursed about Rs.8.9 billion to assists SSis through different schemes at the end of 
March, 1999. NEDF Corporation's sanctions to Rs.ll0.70 million and Rs.74.90 million 
respectively. 
The Note on the "Financial Requirements of Small Scale Industry Sector in India" 
highlights the problem pertaining to the ct:edit facilities to small scale sector by the banks 
which are as under:-
(i) Though the overall availability of credit from Commercial Banks to small scale 
industries has improved in absolute terms from Rs.179 .40 billion in March, 1991 
toRs. 515.85 billion in March, 1999, the availability of working capital credit 
in relation to annual turnover of SSis has not shown any significant 
improvement. The Nayak Committee found it to be 8.1 percent in 1990-91 and 
it stands at 8-9 percent even now. After a gap of I 0 years after the issuance of 
necessary guidelines by the RBI to improve the situation in this regard, nothing 
much has happened . 
(ii) Increase in the availability of bank credit to SSI sector is not commensurate to 
the increase in the productivity of this sector. For instance during the last ten 
years whereas the SSI production increased by 3.4 times the credit availability by 
the banks to the units increased by 2.9 times only. 
(iii) In spite of the RBI guidelines that 60 percent of the SSI credit should go to tiny 
sector, the quantum of credit to the sector as a percentage of SSI credit has been 
declining in recent years. 
(iv) It has been observed that most of the SSis do not take recourse to institutional 
credit on account of numerous factors. A study conducted by the Office of the 
DC (SSI) revealed that only 14 to 15 percent of SSI units avail bank finance 
This may be due to comprehensive conditions prescribed by the banks. 
13 

11. I 
(v) The most important inhibitive factor for SSis availing bank finance is the 
insistence of collateral security that may be 2 to 3 times higher than the amount 
of loan required. Even if entrepreneurs are successful in meeting collateral 
requirements, they find it difficult to arrange third party guarantees as required 
by banks. 
(vi) The term loan and working capital requirements are not met by one single 
agency particularly if the loan requirement is for higher amount (above Rs.l 
million ). As a result, there is a gap in the sanction of two types of loans and 
mostly there is no mechanism for joint appraisal by term lending agency (SFC) 
and agencies meeting working capital requirements (banks). Further, most of 
the SFCs which meet the term loan needs of SSis are having rather weak 
financial base/support. 
(vii) Though specialised bank branches have been set up, the experience has shown 
that they are inclined to finance the large SSis only and try to avoid the 
smaller. 
(viii) The cost of credit in India is high and in case of SSis, it works out to be still 
higher because the criterion of fixing the rate of interest above the prime-lending 
rate is the credit worthiness. The credit worthiness of SSis is rather poor as 
compared to large units. The SSis in fact have to compete for credit with the 
larger units, a situation which for obvious reasons is to their disadvantage . 
(ix) There is no incentive in supply of credit for promoting technology upgradation 
and modernisation which is the need of the hour in the context of economic 
reforms, liberalization, globalization and due to the emergence of the WTO 
regulations. 
(x) The banks lack inducement to advance small loans due to high risk involved , 
lot of paper work, and high processing cost, high rate of sickness and NPAs in 
the SSI sector. 
(xi) Indian SSI sector has no access to capital market or foreign capital. The equity 
cap of24 percent is not sufficient to encourage foreign investment in a big way. 
In the light of the above analysis the future credit policy for SSI sector should 
aiin at providing a level playing field with others in the domestic and global 
market:-
(i) Reduction in the cost of credit to the extent possible with in the overall 
condition of the economy. The government should make an endeavour 
to bring it at par with other countries particularly those with whom we 
have to compete. To begin with the cost of credit could be made 
identical for both small as well as large units. 
(ii) Inducement for undertaking programmes of modernisation and 
technology up-gradation. · 
(iii) Availability of higher amounts of loan without insistence on collateral 
and third party guarantees. This will, however, depend to a great extent 
on the experience under the recently launched Credit Guarantee Fund 
Scheme. 
(iv) Creation of a widespread institutional network for credit rating for SSI 
projects at affordable cost to them. 
14 
I •Ill II• II II• 

(v) Introduction of newer and more innovative finance schemes such as 
factory services and venture capital supported by incubation centres for 
new entrepreneurs. 
(vi) The policy measures required for popularizing venture capital concept 
may be initiated by Ministry of SSI & ARI. A separate legislation is 
enacted to promote the growth of venture capital in the country. 
(vii) In order to mitigate the post sale problems of SSI, there is a need to 
encourage bills culture without recourse to SSI. In this context, 
Government of India may be requested to help creating conducive 
climate for development of factoring services through appropriate policy 
prescriptions/legislative changes to ease the problems relating to stamp 
duty, registration fee, assignment of debt etc. A task force should be 
appointed to look into these problems. 
(viii) Strengthening of the financial/capital base of the SFCs, the institution that 
have played important role in the development of SSI sector by providing 
fixed capital. The respective State Governments, SIDBI and IDBI would 
have to play a major role in revamping the SFCs. 
(ix) There is a need for continuous and rigorous monitoring of the 
guidelines/direction issued by the RBI to the banks and other financial 
institutions for improving the flow of credit to SSI sector 
(x) Commercial Banks may be instructed by RBI not to take all future fixed 
assets of assisted units for securing its existing advances. This will help 
units, etc. to avail assistance from financial institutions for such 
programmes without difficulties. 
(xi) As announced in the Union Budget (2000-01) specialised SSI branches 
should be set up in every districts and also at least one in important SSI 
clusters. 
(xii) There is a need for a change in the attitude and orientation of 
commercial bank staff in their lending to the SSI sector. 
(xiii) RBI may take up the matter with the banks for sub-allocating the overall 
limits sanctioned by banks to such large borrowers specifically for 
meeting the payment obligations in respect of purchases from SSis either 
on cash basis or bills basis. 
(xiv) The Government should enact a legislation to simplify recovery 
procedures with out resorting to civil courts. This will result in 
recycling of funds held up in irretrievably sick SSI units. 
(xv) Wherever the unit is not in a position to rehabilitate, it should be allowed 
to closed down. Thus there an urgent need to have Exit Policy which 
should not focus only on labour but also entrepreneur 
(xvi) There is a need to provide rehabilitation finance to potentially viable sick 
units and all rehabilitation proposals should be duly registered and 
monitored at the board level of the financial institutions and banks. 
(xvii) When a unit is categorized as sick, merely making provisions for NPAs 
would not suffice but the banks concerned should continue operational 
15 

facilities for the unit that would help the recovery of loan. Rehabilitation 
measures should be taken in a specified time bound manner. 
(xviii) Equitable mortgage need to be encouraged to ensure simplified 
procedures for mortgage for land, assets etc. with the banks and to avoid 
stamp duty thereby enabling the SSI unit to obtain credit from banks 
against mortgage. 
(xix) SIDBI should promote financial intermediaries as Venture capital funds, 
equity funds, marketing consortiums, cooperative industrial banks, 
incubators, Consultancy services at national, state and district level to be 
operated by different agencies including industry associations. 
(xx) Commercial banks should fulfill priority sector lending targets by lending 
directly to SSI Sector instead of adopting soft approaches like 
subscription to bonds of SFCs/NABARD etc. 
(xxi) With in the amount earmarked for SSis, sub targets might be continued to 
be fixed for lending on incremental basis to micro, tiny and other SSI 
units. 
BOMBAY SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION 
The representative Bombay Small Scale Industries Association discussed the following 
ISSUeS:-
I. SIDBI is only refinancing organisation. They do not entertain any UNIT, whose 
requirements are less than Rs.50 lakhs. There are no provision for providing Working 
Capital by SIDBI to already running units. They only prefer the UNITS Registered as 
Permanent SSI State Administration. They are not assessable to Common Entrepreneur 
of SSI Sector. All the Committee members of SIDBI do not represent SSI UNITS or real 
Associations. 
2. There is no separate criteria to provide Finance to Small Scale Units, SFC also prefer the 
units having registration & should have their Units at Industrial Developed Area by the 
State Government. They all want collateral Securities for giving finance. The rate of 
Interest is very high. 
3. SSI Branches opened are unable to assist the UNITS already in production. Almost all 
these Financial Institutions prefer the PROJECT REPORTS to be prepared by the person 
of their own choice and as per their own direction. 
4. The Guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India remains with Head Office or Zonal 
Office. They are not given to the Customers. They are treated as "SECRET 
DOCUMENTS" Each & every Bank try to DICTATE their own Terms and Condition. 
Today it is easy to have Loan for Motor Car/Truck/Refrigerator/Television rather than the 
Loan for Running a Small Scale Unit. 
5. Though there is provision to nominate one Director on each Nationalised Bank from the 
Association of Small Scale Industries. It is not done. The nominations are called from 
Chambers of Commerce & Industry. 
BUNTS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
The representative of Bunts Chamber of Commerce & Industry submitted a note on the 
credit facilities to SSI Sector which highlight the importance of SSI Sector. The said note points 
out that SSI and tiny sector generates more employment and production per unit of capital 
employed wheo compared to large and medium industries. However, there is a strong notion 
16 
I!• I 

among the industrial giants, large and medium scale industry is that SSI and cottage industry 
enjoys a lot of benefits, concessions, patronage and favouritism by the government at their cost. 
Government's intention is also very clear to extend all these patronage to this vital sector of 
industry & business. However on minutely examining the reality there is hardly any benefit to 
this sector. Most of the benefits are only on paper and statute book. The note highlight the 
following issues :-
1. SSI sector is in need of effective utilisation of funds out of their working capital; 
2. Central excise benefits of central excise exemption to SSI units and MODV AT 
denial is a silent invisible killer of SSI and cottage industry sector. Buyer is 
forced to buy from large manufacturer since it is 16% cheaper for the same 
margin of 20% by Small Scale and Large Scale Manufacturer. From SSI- units 
government gained 16% at the 1
51 
stage itself whereas 0% for others. This 
anomaly can be set right if SSI sector is allowed MODV AT credit on inputs 
even if exempted to pay central excise and permit them to pay government dues 
like bank interest, provident fund, sales tax, ESIC, property tax out of RG23 
part-11 credit of MODV AT . This will go a long way to clear government dues 
and revenue loss to the government is also very negligible. 
3. Entrepreneur is always entangled with various inspectorates unnecessary 
multiple and over-lapping inspections and compliance. 
4. Special status should be created for debt recovery for bounced cheques, 
consistent payment defaulters. Bad debt, doubtful debts, strictly debts are very 
bad for any organisation but it acts as death knell for SSI and tiny sector. It is an 
irony that debtor enjoys whereas creditor pays central excise, sales tax, Octroi, 
income tax and even bank interest but debtor enjoys on such sinful default tax 
free, interest free asset which encourages him for further defaults. 
BOMBAY SMALL ENTREPRENEURS ASSOCIATION 
The representative of the Association stated that due to deterioration of the industrial 
scenario in the large scale sector owing to liberalisation they do not make the payment in time 
or as committed in the contract. They delay the payments indefinitely for months together even 
upto 6 months and more. The SSI sector should get finance based on 180 days credit (50% of 
the annual turnover). Though the Government enacted the prompt payment act to enable the SSI 
to get the payment in time, the Act is totally ineffective as no large sector/public sector is 
honouring the said act and on the contrary, off late the large sectors and public sectors started 
arbitrarily changing the payment terms to 90 to 180 days without even taking the consent of the 
supplying SSI units. The Government should strictly force the large/Medium and Public Sector 
undertakings to make the payment within 30 days falling which the penal interest of 20% is 
failing to be paid by Large/Medium/Public sector along with the payments without being asked 
by the SSI units. However it should be ensured that these payments are not delayed beyond 90 
days under any circumstances, even if these organisations agree to pay interest on payments 
made after 30 days. 
The Committee was further informed that the large scale industries close down or 
suspend the operation for an indefinite period in one unit and their other units continue to 
operate, and refuse the payment for the goods and services provided, and in some cases do not 
lift the material kept ready against the orders, under the pretext, the unit is closed down, but not 
under liquidation. Such companies should make the payment to SSI by formation of a 
permanent redressal forum, to attend to such complaints. There should qe no bureaucratic hassle 
as the Small Scale Industries are not in a position financially/administratively/legally to fight the 
17 

cases against such companies in the court of law and the large sector take undue advantage of 
this situation. 
As regards the Interest Payment, the Committee was informed that Indian Small Scale 
Industries are forced to pay interest on their borrowings from the banks/financial institutions at 
16118% per annum, whereas their counterparts abroad get the finance directly from the banks at 
rate around 5% in most of the advanced countries. Therefore, SIDBI should raise finance from 
the world market at rates prevailing in advance countries, and make available finance at such 
rates to Small Scale Industries directly/througit banks. 
Pertaining to the Margin Money held up by the Public Sector undertaking, all Public 
Sector undertakings withhold 5% to I 0% of the payment of the invoices, but they never make 
payment of this amount, with the result SSI sector is put into a loss by loosing the money in 
addition to the expenses incurred for follow up, to get the payments. 
With regards to the Non Return of Bank Guarantees by Public Sector Undertakings, all 
Public Sector undertakings while placing orders, insist for bank guarantees, against earnest 
money and performance guarantee, which is never returned by them on completion of the 
contract/order and the guarantee period, with the result the money of SSI units kept with the 
banks as FD for Margin Money is held up till the return of the Bank guarantees. We therefore, 
request that the Public Sector banks should be instructed to treat such expired bank guarantees as 
infructous and no claim need to be entertained after 15 days of expiry of such guarantees and the 
Margin Money of the SSI units should be discontinued in this liberalised regime. 
As regards to the Yearly Renewal of Bank Facilities, the present system of yearly 
renewal of bank facilities are to be dispensed with as the yearly renewal put unnecessary 
financial burden on Small Scale Industries for the Professional fees paid for completing the bank 
formalities and the time spend for collecting repetitive informations. Therefore, the renewal of 
the facilities should be done once in 5 years unless the bank manager who is having a day to day 
control over the bank accounts feels necessary to do otherwise. 
Karnataka Small Scale Industries Association 
The representative of Karnataka Small Scale Industries Association stated that SSI is 
essentially a self employment concept and provides multiplier effect to employment generation. 
Development of SSI in Rural and Semi Urban Areas will result in rapid wealth generation 
bridging the gap in Rural and Urban Economy. The Small Industry is facing increasing sickness 
and the impact M the WTO commitments. Therefore, measures will have to be evolved for 
restoring the health of sick units and at the same time to enhance the capabilities of existing 
small scale units to meet the challenges and opportunities arising out of the WTO commitments. 
The representative further stated that the following issues which require immediate 
attention are highlighted among the numerous problems facing the Small Industry Sector : 
(1) A separate Policy for Tiny Industries is called for in order to focus attention on 
the growth and development of the tiny Industries. A parallel SMEs Policy will 
also help to modernizing the growth of industries in the small and medium 
sector. 
(2) A BIFR type of Institution for rehabilitation of sick units should be created 
before the sickness becomes unmanageable. Units are to be prevented from 
falling sick by identifying the incipient sickness and also inducting effective 
remedial measures wherever they have become sick. 
(3) The problem of delayed payment for the supplies made by the Small Industry 
has spread l~ke a virus throughout the Country. Apart from the Private 
18 
II• II I> 

Institutions, the Government Departments and Government Public Sector 
Institutions are also resorting to the habit of delaying enormously the payment 
due to the Small Industries. The Delayed Payment Act introduced by 
Government of India and the amendments thereof has not been effective in 
finding solutions to this problem. The Government should disallow 
MODV AT of goods from SSI in the event of delay in payments and also make 
the units resorting to delayed payment ineligible for deduction of expenses to 
the extent of outstanding dues for calculations of Income Tax purpose. The 
other measures like special mention in the Balance Sheet etc., should continue. 
Factoring services also should be introduced in order to minimise the delayed 
payment. Separate credit for making payment to Small Industries can also be 
adopted. 
(4) The stipulation made in the Nayak's Committee Report for a minimum of20% 
of projected turn over as working capital is not being adhered to by Financial 
Institutions. The response time for sanction and disbursement of the Loan has 
been invariably too long. The rate of interest and service charges levied by 
Banking Institutions are pretty high affecting the competitiveness of cost from 
a global angle. The entire credit flow requires to be streamlined and at least 
25% of the net Bank Credit should flow to the SSI Sector considering the 
contribution and potential of this sector. The system of Credit Rating should be 
introduced as a criteria for sanction of credit to the units in SME Segment. 
Softer terms for better rating including waiver of collateral in deserving cases 
has to be considered. Tax incentives to Banks in proportion to the lending to 
the Small Industry also merits attention. 
(5) In the context of the WTO impact the element of Government marketing in the 
marketing mix strategy of the small industries should be strengthened by better 
co-ordination between State Governments and the Central Government 
programme and monitoring the implementation at the operational level. 
(6) Modernisation of Small Industries has become imperative in the context of 
WTO Commitments both for expansion of production capacity as well as 
upgradation of product quality. An incentive for modernisation have to be built 
up allowing 100% depreciation for measures for modernizing including those 
required for IT applications and pollution control. 
(7) A National Labour Welfare Organisation should be constituted to take care of 
all aspects of the welfare of the working clause including the Factory Rules, 
ESI, P.F, Gratuity etc. 
(8) The District Industries Centres should be strengthened with adequate 
delegation of powers and authority to execute small industry development 
programmes. 
(9) New types of training institutions in a decentralised manner, R&D support for 
small industries and an institution to conduct market research on behalf of the 
Small Industries and common Pollution Control Systems will be have to be 
established by way of strengthening of the infrastructure. 
(1 0) The existing Industrial Clusters require to be improved with better roads and 
amenities and other elements of infrastructure towards increasing the 
productivity. 
19 

f 
(11) Procedure for availing of funds for ad-hoc orders are cumbersome and time 
consuming. Credit is not based on Project/Order requirement as Credit support 
does not cover pre-production, production and post production requirements. 
The bureaucratic procedure in appraisal, procedure, sanction and release of 
funds does not match with the velocity of production. Insistence of collateral 
security has become rampant. Mentor concept of service is lacking in credit 
flow. Moreover, the apathy for small loans is very much evident. 
(12) The absence of arrangements for automatic increase in the working capital 
limit to combat the raising cost of inputs and inflationary pressure is a major 
factor in credit in flow. 
(13) The inadequate awareness on the part of SSI entrepreneurs about the RBI 
guidelines to funding institutions copies of which are not endorsed to 
association is another handicap. 
(14) The efforts of the entrepreneurs in Technology Upgradation/Modemisation 
gets nullified in the context of a high margin insisted upon by the funding 
institution. In the case of a unit, the modernisation project involved an 
investment of Rs. 60.00 lakhs. The banks insisted on 20% margin money 
amounting to Rs. 12.00 lakhs. In fact the original investment of the unit itself 
was only Rs. 10.00 lakhs. 
(15) The rate of interest is too high to be competitive for globalisation. However, 
there is scope for reducing total interest obl_igation on the part of the 
entrepreneur by remodelling the calculation methodology. For example, instead 
of charging interest on S.B. Ale on the basis of minimum between I st to I O'h 
every month, if the interest is allowed on daily balance basis the total amount 
will be significantly more benefiting the entrepreneur. 
WORLD ASSOCIATION FOR SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES 
The representative of World Association for Small & Medium Enterprises (WASMIE) 
stated that the credit to small enterprises be considered in the present context of the 
establishment of WTO which required that member nations provide more and more market 
access(in stages) and extend national treatment for imported products from other members. This 
has brought international competition at the doorstep of domestic operators, including SSI 
entrepreneurs. They regard credit as a critical factor in determining cost, quality and 
technological competitiveness, Credit, its adequacy, timeliness, cost, conditions at which 
available, different types of credit instruments and whether financial assistance is available 
along with some non-financial package of assistance are issues of vital importance to SSis in 
their strategy to face the challenges of globalization. · 
The following issues relating to credit flow to SSI were discussed during the course of 
interaction with the representatives :-
" I 
(i) Perceptions of SSI entrepreneurs about credit from financial institutions : 
(ii) Adequacy of quantum of loan : About 3/4'h of borrowers believe that it is 
inadequate. 
(iii) Mortgage terms and interactions . These are considered stiff by almost l/41h of 
borrowers. 
(iv) Attitude of bank officials 
percentage. 
I I' 
20 
Considered unhelpful by about the same 
I I I •lit II• ll' 

(v) Delay in sanctioning of loans : Banks take too much time in sanctioning loans. 
(vi) Access finance : About 50 percent of entrepreneurs feel that it has now, after 
the advent of globalization, become all the more difficult to access credit. 
(vii) It is difficult to get loans by SSI entrepreneurs for plant, equipment and 
accessories. 
The representatives suggested the following steps to be taken for better credit flow to 
SSI sector: 
(i). SSI- specialised branches are stated to be in 132 districts. This outreach is very 
inadequate considering that there are 490 SME clusters and 3 million SSis, SSI 
- specialised branches should be opened at all clusters, industrial estates and 
district headquarters. 
(ii). Commercial banks work out cash credit limit/loan size on the basis of stock in 
hand, production in progress, effective sales and collection of dues. This method 
turns out to be unfair when the SSI unit is not able to maintain schedule of 
collection. The element of collection of dues should be excluded from the 
method of estimation. 
(iii) Geographical restriction placed on banks on extending loans adversely affect 
access to credit of SSI units. 
(iv) Loan applications are complex ; these need to be simplified. 
(v). Export credit should be available to SSis at rate lower than to large enterprises 
as an incentive measure. 
(vi). Cost of raising funds to SIDBI is about 11 percent. To enable SIDBI to provide 
refinance to commercial banks at affordable rates, SlDBI should be provided 
funds by the government I RBI. 
(vii). Bank officials should be provided training in the appraisal of SSI projects. 
(viii). In Canada, entrepreneurs can apply for loans, quasi equity financing or venture 
capital by telephone, fax, internet, anytime from any where. Can we extend this 
kind of service here ? 
(ix). Factoring services with recourse to sellers have not been very successful. These 
services should be provided without recourse to sellers and factors can charge a 
higher commission for these. 
(x). SFC's main clients are SSis. They should be restructured, recapitalised and 
provided with cheaper source of funds so that they can extend working capital 
loans besides term loans also. 
As regards the non-financial assistance by the Financial Institutions, the Committee was 
informed that SSI entrepreneurs have to compete now not only in terms of price but also in 
terms of quality, technology, innovation, adherence to delivery schedules, good management, 
and also to adopt quickly to changed conditions. In this situation, if banks have to play pro­
active role. 
LAGHU UDYOG BHARATI 
The representative of Laghu Udyog Bharati, having deep concern for SSI sector, 
informed the Committee that a number of committees appointed by the Government, have made 
innumerable recommendations for solving the financial problems of this sector, and these 
21 

recommendations have been accepted in principle by the Government of India. However, the 
banks and financial institutions responsible for implementing these recommendations have a 
callous attitude. There has been a decline in outstanding credit for SSI sector as a percentage of 
turn over 8.1% in 1991-92 to 7.7% at present. Timely and adequate credit at lower rate of 
interest should be provided to SSis. 
As regards the financial problems being faced by Small Scale Industries, following 
issues were discussed :-
(i) Nayak Committee report recommended working capital loan to be increased 
from 8% to 20% which was not implemented. 
(ii) 1991 Industrial Policy announced "New Policy Measures for Small Tiny and 
Village Industries". The financial support package for Tiny and Village 
Industries" was announced. The financial support package for Tiny units has not 
yet been implemented. 
(iii) Promised "Limited Partnership Act" and "Delayed Payment Act" never saw the 
light of the day. 
(iv) It is easier to get Rs.l crore loan from a bank but almost impossible to get Rs. 2 
Jakhs for Small/Tiny units. 
(v) High rates of interest makes finance very costly. 
(vi) In the name of the WTO and globalisation items reserved for the SSis are being 
imported. SSis are being asked to complete with the MNCs in the international 
market under most unfavourable conditions. 
(vii) Cost of raw materials and basic inputs in much higher in India as compared to 
the raw materials and inputs available to industries abroad and hence SSis 
become non-competitive. 
(viii) Cost of capital is much higher in our country as compared to the cost at which 
capital is available in other countries. 
(ix) Infrastructure available to Indian SSI is totally inadequate. Power Supply 
shortages and the Inspector Raj are the order of the day. 
The representative suggested the following remedial measures: . 
(i) Items already reserved for SSis should continue and they should not be 
imported. 
(ii) Investment limit in Plant/Machinery for SSI should be maintained at Rs. I 
crore. 
(iii) There is a provision in WTO rules that ifthere is reservation in any country for 
specific items and if there is danger of closing down of industries then that 
country has the right to discourage imports. Likewise we should also put 
restrictions on the items reserved for the SSis. 
(iv) To see that all the policies of the government regarding SSis are promptly 
implemented, there should be effective monitoring of the implementation. 
(v) Medium Scale Industries should not be tagged with SSis. 
(vi) Definition of SSI should be maintained and not changed to SSE. 
(vii) Timely and adequate credit at lower rate of interest should be provided to SSis. 
22 

(viii) Rules and regulations should be simplified and Inspector Raj should be 
removed. 
(ix) Associations and Chambers of SSis must be involved in all decisions making 
and implementing bodies ofthe government. 
(x) SSI Board's meetings have not been held for the last three years. These 
meetings should be held regularly after every six months. 
(xi) A National Commission for SSis, to monitor, and enforce the implementation of 
various government policies should be set up. 
(xii) There is no proper agency to look after sick SSI units similar to BIFR for large 
scale sector. 
(xiii) A separate labour Jaws for the SSis for smooth and a rapid growth of the sector. 
MEETING WITH RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
The Officials of the RBI informed the Committee that Development of the Small Scale 
Sector has been an important plank oflndia's industrial policy. The various promotional policy 
measures adopted by the Government to strengthen the importance of this Sector in the economy 
have enabled SSis to increase their production by more than ten-fold and the employment to 
rise by over four times during the period 1973-74 to 1998-99. At the end of March, 1999, there 
were 31.21 lakhs Small Scale industrial units in the country employing 171.58 lakhs persons. 
The contribution of SSI in terms of capital, employment, value added, output and export is very 
significant. 
The Committee was informed that to improve the credit deli\!ery system to SSI units 
the Finance Minister had announced in the budget for 2000-01, certain initiatives like raising 
the limit for composite loans from Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.1 0 lakhs, raising the borrower limit for 
collateral free loan to tiny sector from Rs.1 lakhs to Rs.5 lakhs, opening of specialised branches 
in each district and at centres where cluster of units are functioning in the districts, etc. The 
computation of working capital requirements of SSis on the basis of simplified method of 
minimum 20% of projected annual turnover upto a limit ofRs.5 crores has been introduced. 
In the aftermath of Prime Minister's announcement of policy/package for the 
Development of SSI sector RBI has initiated action on many of these policy decisions like 
banks framing Schemes for technology upgradation, raising of investment limit of small scale 
enterprises from Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.1 0 lakhs, reiterating provision of working capital at minimum 
20% of the projected annual turnover of SSI units upto a limit of Rs.5 crore, raising the family 
income eligibility limit under PMRY to Rs.40,000/- etc. and banks have been/are being advised 
accordingly. Strengthening and popularizing of factoring service and drawing up of detailed 
transparent and non-discretionary guidelines for rehabilitation of currently sick and potentially 
viable units are under consideration. Undoubtedly, all these measures would go a long way in 
improving the flow of credit to this sector. 
RBI officials has stated that provision of timely and adequate finance to SSI sector is 
central to the banking policy. There has been a steady increase in the flow of credit to SSI 
sector which has gone up considerably from Rs.l6,783 crore in March, 1991 to Rs.45,788 crore 
in March, 2000, constituting about 15.6% of the net bank credit and showing a compound 
growth rate between 11 and 12%. To accelerate credit flow to the SSI sector, the Reserve 
Bank of India has been taking the necessary measures so that banks encourage the units in tiny 
sector. Out of funds available to all the segments of the SSI sector, banks are required to ensure 
that 60% is made available to units in Tiny Sector. Introduction of CGFSI Scheme under 
which collateral free loan is available upto a limit of Rs.1 0 lakhs is expected to increase the flow 
23 

of credit to this segment. With a view to moderating the cost of credit to SSI units, banks have 
been advised to accord SSI units with a good track record the benefit of lower spreads over the 
PLR. 
Companuive analysis of scheduled commercial banks' advances to medium and large 
scale and small scale industries for the lastS years. 
{.Rs. in crores) 
As at the end of March Medium and large scale units Small scale units 
1995 74,672 27638 
1996 93,053 31,884 
1997 1,02,604 35,944 
1998 1,17,530 43,508 
1999 1,30,516 48,483 
The Committee was informed that the banks have operationalised 389 specialised SSI 
branches all over the country as at the end of March, 2000. These specialised branches, 
manned by senior officials having requisite delegated authority, with a special thrust on 
financing micro-enterprises would ensure increased flow of bank credit to the sector. Many of 
the major recommendations of the Kapur Committee have been accepted and commended to 
banks for implementation. 
As regards the issue of delayed payment the RBI informed the Committee that the 
Government has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, many of the SSI units are reluctant to 
pursue cases against major buyers. The Government has amended the said Act in 1998 and it 
has now been made compulsory that the payment of SSI suppliers should be made within 120 
days. 
Apprising the problem ofNPAs in public sector banks, the RBI officials stated that a 
scheme of compromise settlement was introduced in May, 1999. The guidelines have been 
revised and issued to public sector banks in July, 2000 which will provide a simplified, non­
discriminatory and non-discretionary mechanism for recovery of the stock ofNPAs relating to 
all sectors including the small sector. 
,, I 
Position of NPAs in SSI sector for the last 4 years in the books of scheduled 
commercial banks. 
{.Rs. in crores} 
As at the end of March, Amount 
1997 7,614 
1998 9.182 
1999 10,407 
2000 9,952 
24 
I ' 

The Committee was informed about the growing incidence of sickness of SSI. At the 
. end of March, 1999, there were 3,06,221 sick SSI units in the country with outstanding bank 
credit of Rs.4313 crore. Of the total number of sick units only about 60% were identified as 
potentially viable and rehabilitation measures have already been initiated in 68.26 per cent of 
. these viable units. RBI has issued detailed guidelines for identification of sick units. A small 
Scale industrial unit is considered as sick when 
(i) Any of its borrower accounts has become 'doubtful' advance i.e. principal or 
interest in respect of any of its borrower accounts has remained overdue for a 
period exceeding 2 Yz years, and 
(ii) There is erosion in the net worth due to accumulated cash losses to the extent of SO 
per cent or more its peak net worth during the preceding two accounting years. 
Comparative analysis of advances to sick units in medium and large scale and sm..U 
scale industries in the books of scheduled commercial banks for the last 5 years • 
£Rs. in crore.r} 
As at the end Medium and large scale units Small scale units 
of March 
Units Amounts Units Amounts 
1995 2391 10,191.81 268815 3545.16 
1996 2374 10,026.31 262376 3721.94 
1997 2368 10,177.81 235032 3609.20 
1998 2476 11,825.25 221536 3856.64 
1999 2792 15,150.41 306221 4313.48 
A sick unit may be considered potentially viable, if it would be in a position , after 
implementing a relief package spread over period not exceeding five years from the 
commencement of the package from banks, financial institutions, Government (CentraVState) 
and other concerned agencies, as may be necessary, to continue to service its repayment 
obligations as agreed concessions after the aforesaid period. 
The Committee was informed that norms for grant of relief's and concessions which 
can be extended by banks to potentially viable sick SSI units are as under: 
(i) Working capital 1.5% below the prevailing fixed/ prime 
lending rate, wherever applicable 
(ii) Funded interest term loan interest-free 
(iii) Working Capital Term loans 1.5% to 3% below the prevailing 
fixed/prime lending rate, wherever 
applicable 
25 

(iv) Term Loans Not more than 2% (not more than 3% in 
the case of decentralised sector units) 
below the document rate. 
(v) Contingency Loan Assistance At the concessional rate allowed for 
working capital assistance. 
The officials of RBI pointed out that the reliefs/concessions indicated above is to be 
decided by the banks/financial institutions to depending upon the nature and extent of 
concessions necessary/warranted within th• parameters, depending upon the merits of each 
case. In order to speed up the process of preparation and implementation of packages, the banks 
have been given freedom for extension of reliefs/concessions beyond the parameters in cases 
where it is absolutely necessary. With a view to insuring the sick units are provided with the 
timely and adequate assistance by all agencies concerned, there are State level institutional 
committees constituted in each State involving State Government, Fina"cial Institutions, 
Commercial banks and SIDBI. 
MEETING WITH THE OFFICIALS OF SMALL INDUSTRIES BANK OF INDIA 
(SIDBI} 
The Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIOBI) was set up in April 1990 by 
an Act of Parliament viz. Small Industries Development Bank of India Act. 1989 designed to 
function as"....... The principal financial institution for the promotion, financing and 
development of industry in the Small Scale sector and to coordinate the functions of 
institutions engaged in promoting, financing and developing the industry in the small scale 
sector and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto". SIDBI became operational 
on April 2, 1990 as a wholly owned subsidiary of Industrial Development Bank of India 
(lOBI) with an authorized capital of Rs.SOO crore and paid up capital of Rs.250 crore . The 
paid capital of SIDBI was subsequently raised to Rs.450 crore in March,· 1991 which is 
currently subscribed and held by lOBI. In order to equip SIDBI to play its apex role in SSI 
credit provision more effectively. Government oflndia (GOI) amended the SlOB~ Act, 1999. 
the Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2000 came into effect from 
March, 27.2000; The SIDBI (Amendment) Act, 2000. inter alia, has changed the provisions 
relating to capital structure, shareholding management, business, borrowings and acceptance of 
deposit and investments . . · 
The background note on the Status of SSI Credit under the Aegies of SIDBI 
suggest that the aggregate annual sanctions of SIDBI have increased to rs.l 0.265 crore during 
1999-2000 from a level of Rs.2,410 crore during 1990-91, registering a Compound Annual 
Growth Rate (CAGR) of 17.5 per cent over the period. Annual disbursements increased to 
Rs.6.964 crore during 1999-2000 from Rs.1,839 crore in 1990-91, registering CAGR of 15.9 
per cent cumulative assistance, over the decade aggregated to Rs.55,409 crore of sanctions and 
Rs.39.952 crore of disbursements. 
26 
'' I 1 •il' I i II II' 

SIDBI's Assistance sanctioned and Disbaned: 1990-91 to 1999-%000 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Sanctions Growth(%) Disbursements Growth(%) 
1990-91 2410 - 1839 -
1~1-92 2847 18.1 2028 10.3 
1992-93 2989 2.2 2146 S.8 
1993-94 3356 15.4 2673 24.6 
1994-95 47t7 40.3 3390 26.8 
1995-96 6066 28.9 4801 41.6 
1996-97 6415 6.9 4585 -4.5 
1997-98 7414 15.4 5241 14.3 
1998-99 8110 11.7 6285 19.9 
1999-2000 1d6S 15.6 6964 10.8 
Cumulativeupto 55409 CAGil 17.5 39952 CAGR 15.9 
end-March, 2000 (1990-2000) ( 1990-2000) 
The backgrQund note. i'wther points out that the units in the small scale sector .... 
two types of funds i.e.<l'errn •ital or Long Term Funds and Worldll! Capital or Sllort 1lllla 
Funds. The term capitlt Ot'·lttf loq tenn fund$ are required for creation of fixed •••; ·­
land, building, plant & machiftery and other capital assets. Due to weak capital b••41 1W 
limitations on entering in the. capital market, the small scale sector had been having ..... 
reliance on borrowed capital for creation of fixed assets. Working capital is the source of·fiiad 
that an enterprise needs to carry on its day to day business like purchase of raw matlliiW, 
electricity, water and payment of wages and salaries. It denotes total cash required to c~ 
raw materials into finished goods and sales thereof. Working capital needs of a firm tlr; 
generally met from own funds, equity support, sundry creditors, bank borrowings, and ._ 
short term borrowings, sources. · · 
The Committee was apprised that as per the Nayak Committee's estimate, the talb 
credit to SSI sector during the Eighth Five-Year Plan period was placed at Rs.13, 7000 crore, of 
which Rs.9,950 crore was expected to come from SIDBI and the remaining from other 
institutions. SIDBI's actual term credit to the sector during the Eighth Plan Period was over 
Rs.l2,000 crore. Thus, the Bank has been able to surpass the target set for it during the Eighth 
Plan period. The working Group oil SSI for the Ninth Five-Year Plan had estimated the long 
term credit requirements of the sector during Ninth Plan period at Rs.36,000 crore. Keeping in 
view the quantum and growth in disbursements of SIDBI during the first three years of the 
ninth plan period (Rs.l8,490), the Bank is poised to disburse around Rs.34,000 crore to the SSI 
sector during 1997-2000. 
The Committee further apprised that during the Eighth Five Year Plan, while term 
loan requirements of the sector was, by and large met, the availability of working capital 
assistance was reported to be inadequate. The Nayak Committee findings (1991) had put 
27 

working capital availability at 8 per cent level of the sector's aggregate turnover. This position 
does ~not appear to have improved thereafter as could be seen from the Table indicating the 
credit provided to SSis by public sector banks vis-a-vis production of SSI both in terms of 
overall credit and incremental credit. 
Credit to SSis by Public Sector Banks 
March, March, March, March, March, 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 
' 
Net Bank Credit (NBC) 169,038 184,391 189,684 218,219 246,203 
Credit to SSl @ 25,843 29482 31,542 38,109 42,674 
SSI credit at % ofNBC 15,29 15,99 16.63 17.46 17.33 
SSI Qroduction # 293,990 356,213 412,636 465,171 527,515 
SSI credit as % of Qroduction 8.8 8.3 7.6 8.2 8.1 
Incremental SSI credit as % of · 8.2 5.8 3.7 12.5 7.3 
incremental production 
@ RBI report on trend and progress of banking in India 1998-99 #Source DC(SSI) 
It is estimated that of the net bank credit, nearly 80 per cent is for working capital 
finance. The availability of bank fmance has also to be viewed in the context of the findings 
of the Kapur Committee that of the total population of SSis, only 15-20 percent have access 
to bank finance. 
The officials of SIDBI stated that as an apex institution SIDBI is expected to play a 
proactive role and reach out financial and support services to SSis in the remotest corner with 
the help of existing credit delivery structure and support services agencies as also to strengthen 
the existing network of institutions engaged in development of small scale sector. SIDBI 
started off primarily as a refinancing institution providing assistance through state level 
institutions and banks initiatives were taken to identify the gaps in existing credit delivery 
system with a view to devise tailor made schemes for direct lending to SSis so as to supplement 
the efforts of primary Lending Institutions ( PLfs). From a predominantly refinancing institution 
in 1990-91, over a decade, SIDBI has emerged as a purveyor of wide variety of financial 
services to the small scale sector. SIDBI has been, redefining its strategies, a ... oach and policy 
in alignment with the changing industrial and economic scenario at the national level. SIDBI 
has, over the years, expanded the number of eligible primary lending, institutions (PUs) for 
refinance, and as at March, 2000 the list of eligible institutions for refinance consisted of 908 
banks and state level institutions. 
The Committee was further informed that SIDBI co-promoted, along with banks, two 
factoring companies, viz. Canbank Factors Limited and SBI Factors and Commercial Services 
Limited; joined other financial institutions in setting up of North Eastern Development Finance 
Corporation Ltd. (NFDFI); and along with IDBI Co-promoted lOBI Bank Ltd. SIDBI was 
one of the institutional promoters of Indian Institute of Entrepreneurship, Guwahati. In the 
last one and half years, SIDBI has taken initiatives for setting up of state/regional level 
venture capital funds dedicated to small scale units in software/IT industry in participation with 
state level institutions. SIDBI, along with Ministry oflnformation Technology, Government 
of India, set up Rs. 100 crore National Venture Fund for Software and Information 
Technology Industry (NFSIT), which became operational during 1999-2000. SIDBI also set 
28 

up two subsidiaries vis. SIDBI Venture Capital Ltd., to operate as an Asset Management 
Company of NFSIT and SIDBI Trustee Company Ltd. to operate as a Trustee of NFSIT. 
During the current financial year (2000-01), SIDBI and Government of India in the Ministry 
of SSI & ARI have jointly set up a Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries to 
implement the new Credit Guarantee Fund (Scheme) for Small industries as announced by the 
Union Finance Minister in his Budget speeches for the years 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 
The Committee came across the problems of the SSI sector, and the schemes operated 
by SIDBI to mitigate such problems which is as under:-
Sl.No Problem Schemes operated by SIDBI 
1. Delayed • Director Discounting ofBills(Components) Schemes 
payment of bills • Direct Discounting of Bills (Equipment) Scheme 
• Direct Factoring Services 
• Bills Rediscounting Scheme (Equipment) 
• Bills Rediscounting Scheme Against Inland Supply Bills of SSI 
• Invoice Discounting Scheme 
2. Obsolescence • Technology Development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF) 
of Technology Scheme (both direct and indirect assistance) 
• ISO 9000 Scheme (both direct and indirect assistance) 
• Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme for Textile Industries 
(both direct and indirect assistance) 
• Tennery Modernisation Fund Scheme (both direct and indirect 
assistance) 
3. Working • Single Window Scheme) Through PLis 
Capital • Composite Loan Scheme) 
availability • Working Capital Term Loan) Direct assistance 
• Short term Loan ) 
4. Marketing • Scheme for financing activities relating to marketing of SSI 
Inadequacies products. 
5. Lack of suitable • Scheme of Direct Assistance for Development of Industrial 
infrastructure Infrastructure for SSI sector 
• Scheme Integrated Infrastructural Development (liD) 
6. Insufficient • Pre-Shipment Credit in Foreign Currency 
Export credit • Scheme for Export Bills Financing 
• Rupee Pre-Shipment/post-Shipment Credit 
• Foreign Letters of Credit 
7. Venture capital • Venture Capital Scheme 
availability 
8. Human • Entrepreneurship Development Programmes 
Resources • Small Industries Management Programme 
Development • Skill-cum- Technology Upgradation Programme 
9. Co !laterals/third • Credit Guarantee Fund (Sch~me) for Small Industries, 2000 
party 
guarantees 
29 

The Committee was informed that in an effort to channelise funds to the poor, 
especially women, SIDBI had launched a Micro Credit Scheme (MCS) in 1994. Under the 
scheme, soft loan assistance was provided to well managed Non-Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) for on-lending to SHGs I individuals for pursuing non-farm income generating activities 
coupled with grant assistance to help them in institutional capacity building. SIDBI has set up a 
Rs.lOO crore 'SIDBI Foundation for Micro Credit' (SFMC) in November, 1998, with a 
mission to create a national network of strong, viable and sustainable micro financing 
institutions to provide wide ranging micro finance services to the poor. Since the 
commencement of Micro Credit Scheme of SIDBI, assistance of the order of Rs.52.61 
crore has been sanctioned under the programme to 160 Micro Finance Institutions covering 
over 3,13,700 poor, most of which are women. Further, 134 capacity building programmes 
have been supported with an assistance ofRs.881akhs for providing training to 2400 participants 
from NGOs in the areas of credit usage, management, monitoring and administration of credit 
programmes. 
The officials of the SIDBI informed the Committee that SIDBI launched Rural 
Industries Programme (RIP) in the year 1993, which aims at promotion oftiny enterprises in 
rural and semi urban areas. The programme, which was first initiated in select 3 districts of 
Andhra Pradesh on a pilot basis has now been extended to cover states with high 
concentration of poor people. As at the and of March, 2000, the programme was in progress in 
44 districts in 13 states and is being implemented through 23 agencies which have so far set 
up 6,022 enterprises. The programme is gradually being expanded to other parts of the 
country. 
As regards marketing finance, the Committee was informed that SIDBI has emerged 
as a pioneer in providing assistance for intangibles such as marketing research, research and 
development, product upgradation and standardization, advertising, branding, participation in 
trade fairs/exhibition, sales promotion tours, etc. The Bank has sponsored a large number of 
exhibitions in India and abroad at subsidizing participation costs for SSis, tied up with world­
renowned organizations to provide market information to SSI at concessional rates and 
provided credit rating services to SSI units. SIDBI also supported buyer-seller meets, 
Seminars/workshops focusing on marketing aspects for SSis and marketing related skill 
upgradation training programmes. 
The Ban~, while serving the SSI sector, has over the years built-up a reasonably sound 
financial profile. The total assets of the bank have grown from a level of Rs.5,309 crore in 
March, 1991 to Rs.16,561 crore in March, 2000. The income has increased from Rs.425 crores 
in 1990-91 to Rs.1 ,598 crore in 1999-2000 while profit has grown from Rs.36 crore to Rs.459 
crore. The Capital to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) as at end-March, 2000 stood at 27.8 per cent 
and 96.2 per cent of the assets of the Bank were standard assets. The Bank has been paying 
dividend on equity holding to lOBI since inception. The financial performance indicators of 
SIDBI for the year 1990-91 to 1999-2000 are given below:-
30 
I •1l1 II II' II, 

Financial Performance of SIDBI (1990-91- 1999-2000) 
As on March, 31 
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 
Capital 500 500 500 500 500 500 
Authorised 
Paid-up 450 450 450 450 450 450 
Reserves and 45 109 196 301 465 669 
funds 
Networth 480 540 6ll 703 846 1,026 
Outstanding 5,177 6,476 7.253 8.800 9,701 10,872 
Portfolio 
Return on 0.6 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.9 2.4 
Outstanding 
Portfolio(%) 
Standard 96.5 97.7 97.2 
Assets as % 
of Total 
Assets 
Capital to 17 19 21 
RiskAssets 
Ratio(%) 
Total income 425 506 675 852 1,000 1.135 
Profit 36 72 108 135 191 261 
Not assessed 
( Rs. in crores) 
1997 1998 1999 
500 500 500 
450 450 450 
906 1,716 2,057 
1,249 2,029 2,359 
12,185 12,862 14,209 
2.6 3.2 3.2 
95.4 95.9 96.5 
25.7 25.7 26.9 
1.291 1.409 1,579 
316 405 450 
The Committee notes that SIDBI, during its decade of dedicated service to the small 
scale industries sector has transformed itself into a financial institution having effective 
programmes for sub-serving the cause of SSls. The Bank has been adopting a proactive role 
not just to imbibe technological optimism among SSls but also to set in motion the multi­
dimensional process of modernisation, which includes credit, marketing, infrastructure, 
services, management skill development, etc. The changing world-economic order in the WTO 
regime also necessitates SIDBI for adopting new strategies that would facilitate healthier 
growth of SSI sector. 
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (NABARD) 
During the course of interaction the officials ofNABARD informed the committee that 
NABARD was set up in July, 1982 with a mandate to support through credit and other 
development efforts, agriculture, small scale industries, cottage and village industries, rural 
artisans, crafts and rural services sectors so as to promote integrated rural development. 
NABARD is essentially a development financial institution providing refinance to eligible banks 
and is not empowered to provide direct credit support. Accordingly, NABARD has introduced 
various schemes over the years for providing refinance support to Commercial Banks, State Co­
operative Banks (SCBs), State Co-operative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks 
31 
2000 
1000 
450 
2,424 
2,686 
15,194 
3.0 
96.2 
27.8 
1,598 
459 

(SCARDBs) and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) to support investment, production, provision of 
infrastructure linkages, etc. Refinance the package of refinance schemes evolved over the years 
is broad-based and liberal in terms of coverage, components as well as terms and conditions. 
The assistance under the schemes is available to individual artisans and craftsmen, promotional 
organisations, such as government/semi government autonomous agencies, voluntary 
organisations, co-operative societies, registered institutions, State level corporations/societies 
etc. The activities eligible include Handlooms, Handicrafts, rural artisans, cottage/village, tiny 
and small industries, coir, sericulture, Khadi and Village industries, modern industries, services, 
transport sector as also various rural industrial activities covered by various sponsored 
programmes of the Central/State Governments like Prime Minister' Rozgar Yojana.(PMRY}, 
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) etc. 
The Committee was further informed that NABARD's refinance for investment credit 
under Non Farm Sector (excluding Government schemes) increased from Rs. 16 crore in 1986-
87 to Rs. 83 7 crore in 1999-2000 (in addition to Rs. 345 crore for SGSY amd Rs. 116 crore for 
PMRY). The cumulative refinance to eligible banks touched Rs. 4504 crore as on 31 March 
2000. This refinance has been instrumental in setting up of over 13 lakhs units and providing 
employment opportunities to around 45 lakhs persons. Within the SSI sector, NABARD's focus 
is on Tiny Sector i.e., where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed Rs. 25 
lakhs. Refinance under Automatic Refinance Facility is available up to Rs. 15 lakhs so as to 
ensure that the client banks concentrate on smaller units. About 99% of the refinance disbursed 
so far has gone to the small units. NABARD also support good sponsored schemes like SGSY 
(ISB) and PMRY in rural areas. Short term credit limits are also sanctioned for primary weavers 
societies for procurement and marketing. 
The officials of the NABARD informed the Committee that NABARD launched District 
Rural Industries Project (DRIP) in 1993-94 on a pilot basis in 5 select districts, viz., Ganjam 
(Orissa), Kurnool (Andhra Pradesh), Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh), Sawai Madhopur (Rajasthan) 
and Sabarkantha (Gujarat) with the objective of generating sustainable employment 
opportunities on a significant scale in rural areas by providing adequate credit support together 
with promotional measures. The ground level credit for RNFS increased by about four times in 
these districts showing an average annual growth rate of 36%. 
As regards the Cluster Development, NABARD has adopted a multi-pronged strategy 
for development of clusters and other sub-sectors by conducting Product development 
workshops/Integration meets and for evolving suitable action plans covering areas such as credit 
intensification, skill development, technology development, marketing support and raw material 
supply. Consequent to the announcement of the National Programme for Rural Industrialisation 
(NPRI) in budget 1999-2000, NABARD had decided to develop 50 rural clusters on its own by 
involving other local agencies in selected districts during a 5 year period beginning from 1999-
2000. 
As regards the Gender Development, NABARD has been according special attention to 
'gender' issues in credit and support services. Conduct of training/awareness programmes, 
seminars, gender sensitization meets, formulation of exclusive schemes for women, funding 
establishment of Women Development cells in RRBs and Co-operative Banks etc., are some of 
the NABARD initiatives in this regard. 
Regarding the Promotional Initiatives, NABARD recognizes the constraints of rural 
farm and non-farm sector enterprises/entrepreneurs and the need for looking beyond credit. 
Promotion of RNFS is therefore considered as an important and necessary adjunct to its core 
refinancing function. The objective of the promotional programmes is to generate/enhance 
opportunities for employment and income in rural areas in a sustainable, demonstrative and cost 
32 

effective manner by providing grant/assistance to NGOs, Vas, Trusts and Promotional 
organisations. The assistance sanctioned for various promotional programmes by NABARD by 
31 sl March, 2000 was Rs. 35.39 crore, involving over 300 NGOs/Agencies. 
Pertaining to the Rural Entrepreneurship Development Programme (REDP), NABARD 
has been extending grant assistance to capable NGOs/Vasffraining Institutions for conducting 
REDPs for rural youth with a view to motivate and train them to set up their own small 
enterprises. So far 1958 REDPs have been sanctioned involving grant assistance ofRs. 7.38 core 
covering over 45000 trainees. NABARD adopted a comprehensive strategy to cover one lakhs 
potential entrepreneurs under REDPs over a period of 5 years (1999-2000 to 2003-2004). This 
Corporate strategy involves Institutionalisation of REDP through selection of reputed 
institutions and committing long term support to them for facilitating qualitative and quantitative 
expansion of REDPs leading to rural industrialization and economic diversification. 
With a view to strengthening the institutional capabilities of RRBs and Co-operative 
banks in addressing the gender issues in credit and support services and also to step up the flow 
of credit to women, the scheme for setting up of Women Development cells was introduced in 
October, 1995 for setting up of I 00 cells in RRBs/Co-op. Banks. So far 80 Cells have been set 
up in 53 RRBs, 19 CCBs, 5 SCBs and 3 SCARDBs. 
RNFS. 
The officials of the NABARD outlined following constraints in the development of 
(i) Inadequate appreciation of the complexities and technicalities involved in RNFS 
and the lack of adequate response by financing banks to channelise sufficient 
credit to the tiny, cottage an village industries. 
(ii) Lack of systematic extension efforts in the use of new tools and techniques of 
production. 
(iii) Highly diverse nature of activities and markets. 
(iv) Lack of supportive infrastructure. 
(v) Serious infrastructural constraints in the rural areas with highly dispersed and 
decentralized units. 
(vi) Lack of adequate data/information on an ongoing basis. 
(vii) Dearth of professionally equipped, experienced and committed NGOs to take up 
various credit delivery innovations and promotional projects. 
(viii) Incorrect assessment of working capital requirements. 
However, NABARD has adopted various strategies for development of RNFS after 
creating conducive and congenial policy environment for promotion and development of RNFS 
and giving thrust to planning for identification of potential areas/activities in RNFS. NABARD 
is Refining broad basing existing credit packages in coordination with banks identifying the 
credit flow and supporting integrated area/cluster based projects. NABARD has intensified 
linkage of SHGs with banks networking with voluntary promotions and credit institutions and 
demonstrated support for various forward and backward linkages. NABARD has taken efforts 
on modernisation, technology upgradation/transfer, marketing efforts besides undertaking 
dissemination of information, providing guidance, managerial skills and confidence for potential 
entrepreneurs and exploring the possibility of participation of various indigenous/untapped 
institutional agencies in the promotional/credit dispensation endeavour. NABARD supported co­
operative banks/RRBs for setting up of Women Development Cells and provided credit related 
promotional support for promotion/development of rural enterprise and rural entrepreneurship. 
33 

State Bank Of India 
A note on the credit flow to SSI Sector submitted by State Bank of India gives the 
details of advances made to the Small Scale Industries :-
(Rs. in crores) 
Particulars 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 
SBI - Out standings 10014 11525 12441 
Public Sector Banks- Out 38109 42674 45788 
standings 
Market share of SBI 26.27 27.40 27.14 
NPA 2317 2705 2866 
NPA(%) 23.20 23.40 23.60 
Branch Network 
Particulars Number 
Specialised SSI Branches 55 
Branches in Industrial Estates 99 
Branches with SIB Divisions 421 
The officials of the SBI informed the Committee that SBI has set up Technical 
Consultancy Cells at ~I Circle Headquarters and established a Project Uptech Department at 
Central Office in order to assist the Small Scale Industries in the upgradation oftechnology:The 
Project Uptech of the Bank is in operation for over 11 years and has been catalyzing technology 
upgradation in select small and medium enterprise clusters like foundry units, glass industry, 
automobile and diesel engine spare parts and rice milling units. SBI launched Quality Support 
Scheme for clients in SMEs. At the end of March 2000, SBis exposure to small scale industries 
has been of the order of Rs. 12,441 crore. During the current year, SBI plans for a growth of Rs. 
1,550 crore in advances to Small Scale Industries. 
The officials of the SBI further informed that the KVIC Margin Money Scheme is an 
attractive scheme of subsidizing the margin requirements of industries located in rural areas 
(with project cost up toRs. 10 lakhs for individuals and up toRs. 25 lakhs for firms). 
The following schemes of SBI have been specially tailored to meet the requirements of 
SSI units :-
I I 
(i) Liberalised scheme of financing (need based flexible scheme). 
(ii) Entrepreneur scheme of technically qualified entrepreneurs to meet the funding 
of projects at nil or reduced margins with projects up to Rs. 20 lakhs. 
34 

(iii) Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for training first generation 
entrepreneurs. 
(iv) Stree Shakti Package- special scheme for financing women entrepreneur with 
concessions in margins and interest rate (above Rs. 2 lakhs). 
(v) Equity Fund Scheme for extending interest free loans (up toRs. 1 lakhs) to meet 
shortfall in promoters stake with extended repayment period. 
(vi) 55 specialised SSI branches were also created for focused approach to augment 
SSI lending with computerized environment. Progress for SSI lending has been 
continuously monitored at circle level by senior official. 
(vii) Adequate discretionary powers have been delegated to Branch Manager. 
(viii) In order to cut delays committee approach is being followed for sanctioning 
loans. 
(ix) LHOs have been advised to finance term loans as well as working capital to the 
deserving customers and co-ordinate with SFCs and other such institutions in 
their respective areas to the mutual advantage for business growth. 
(x) SBI has extended financial assistance to state level entrepreneur development 
institutes particularly EDP, Ahmedabad for development of entrepreneurship 
among the educated youth. Bank has created an institute named Krishna 
Institute for Training in Self-employment and Rural Development (KITSERD) 
in Kamataka for development of entrepreneurship. SBI has also contributed in 
co-sponsoring of EDP conducted by several state level institutes. 
Central Bank Of India 
During the course of interaction with the officials of Central Bank of India, the 
Committee came across bank's exposures to the SSI sector for the last three years as under:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
Particulars 31.03.1998 31.03.1999 31.03.2000 30.06.2000 
Net Bank Credit 10750 12885 16016 16185 
Priority Sector 4396 . 5595 6975 6961 _£; 
SSI 1974 ~·2113 2286 2175 
% of SSI to total PS advances 54 38 33 31 
Of which credit to tiny Sector 621 642 676 685 
As per RBI norms 40% ofSSI advances should be for units with investment in plant and 
Machinery up to Rs.S lacs, 20% to units with investment in plant and Machinery Rs.5 lakhs and 
Rs.25 lackhs and 40% for others. 
The bank's performance is as under:-
35 

(Rs. in Crores) 
Particulars March 99 %of total March, % to total SSI As per RBI 
Amount SSI 2000 norms 
Investment in P&M 642 30 676 30 40 
up to Rs.S Laks 
Investment in P&M 477 23 948 41 20 
up to Rs.25 Laks 
Advance to others 994 47 662 29 40 
Total SSI advance 2113 - 2286 - -
The officials of the Central Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank has 
accepted the recommendations ofNayak Committee constituted by RBI which inter~alia include 
working capital limits to SSI Units are computed on the basis of turnover method (20% of 
projected annual turnover) for limits up to Rs.S crore; Branches are instructed to dispose-off SSI 
proposals up to Rs.25,000/- within a fortnight and over Rs.25,000/- within 8 to 9 weeks from 
receipt of the proposal; Bank has opened 32 SSI specialised SSI Branches to cater to the needs 
of SSI units. 
Central Bank of India also implemented seven point Action Plan as announced by 
Government of India in the Budget for I 995-96 and as per· directives of RBI. The important 
Action Plan are as under:- · 
(i) Adequate powers have been delegated at the branch and regional levels; 
(ii) Surveys are being conducted by Branches including SSI Branches to find out 
adequacy of flow of credit to SSI Units; 
(iii) To enhance the skills, Training to staff handling SSI portfolio is given regularly at 
our Training Centresffraining Colleges besides training is also given in the 
Programmes conducted by Bankers' Training College and national Institute of Bank 
Management; 
(iv) Regular meetings are held with SSI Entrepreneurs at Controlling Offices to examine 
the needs and problems faced by the entrepreneurs to ensure smooth flow of credit. 
The Committee was further informed that the high level Committee headed by Shri 
S.L.Kapoor made 126 recommendations covering wide range of areas pertaining to financing of 
SSI sector, out of which 46 recommendations were earlier accepted by RBI and out of these 
recommendations some of the recommendations implemented by Central Bank of India are 
introduction of SSI loan application forms in tri-lingual, enhancement of composite loan limit to 
Rs.5 lakhs (now further increase Rs.lO lakhs as on 28/03/2000), raising of the exemption limit 
for obtention of collateral security third party guarantee to Rs.1 lakhs for SSI sector and Rs.S 
lakhs for the tiny sector. Moreover, the Central Bank of India has extended loan of Rs.29.5S 
crore to 775 beneficiaries upto 30.06.2000 under KVIC Margin Money Scheme. This bank has 
also opened 32 SSI specilised branch to boost the flow of credit to SSI sector. 
36 

The performance of the branches is as under:-
(Rs .. in crores) 
Year No. ofSSI Total credit SSI Credit in % ofSSI Total bank's 
Specialised ofSSI SSI Credit to SSI Credit 
Branch Branches Branches total credit 
March'98 32 243 95 39% 1974 
March.99 32 252 117 46% 2113 
March.2000 32 246 106 43% 2286 
June·2ooo 32 248 110 44% 2175 
Credit extended to women entrepreneurs under SSI and Tiny Sectors as of March, 2000 
Sector Total~dvances Advances to Women Entrepreneurs 
No. Amount No. Amount 
SSI 85472 2286 6475 82 
TINY 63461 676 5125 63 
Credit extended to artisans, village and cottage industries as of March,2000 is Rs.199 
crore covering 40,000 beneficiaries and Credit extended to software industry priority sector is 
Rs.S crore as of March,2000. 
Union Bank Of India 
During the course of interaction with the officials of Union Bank of India, the 
Committee came across bank's exposures to the SSI sector vis-a-vis NBC and priority sector 
credit for the last three years the details are as under-
(Rs. in Crore) 
Particulars March 1998 March 1999 March 2000 
Net Bank Credit 9182.94 9939.79 13396.50 
Total Priority Sector Credit 4231.90 4684.16 5410.30 
Credit to SSI sector 1963.45 2073.52 2214.36 
% of SSI sector to total priority sector of which 46% 44% 41% 
Credit to Tiny Sector 618.99 655.11 639.48 
% of Tiny sector to total SSI 32% 32% 29% 
The officials of the Union of Bank of India informed the Committee that the bank is 
implementing the recommendations ofNayak Committee as per the RBI guidelines. Simplified 
procedure as per RBI guidelines is being followed and field functionaries are instructed to 
dispose of SSI proposals upto Rs.25,000/- within a fortnight and over Rs.25,000/- within 8-9 
37 

• 
weeks Lorn receipt thereof. Working capital credit limits upto Rs.S.OO crores to SSI units are 
comput~o on the basis of 20% of their projected annual turnover. 28 specialised SSI branches 
have be"'r opened thro11ghout the length and breadth of the country so as to meet the credit needs 
ofSSI t•uts promptly. 
I ne officials also infonned that the seven point Action Plan announced by Government 
of Indi~; m the Budget for 1995-96 for augmenting flow of credit to SSI sector is being 
monito1 '~' Union Bank of India on a quarterly basis. The important action points of the plans 
are delt !~tion of adequate powers at the branch and regional levels; conducting surveys to find 
out wh~r11er adequate working capital is granted to SSI accounts; conducting training 
programmes having sessions on SSI; Meetings with SSI entrepreneurs at controlling offices in 
order t< lind out their needs/problems and ensure smooth flow of credit to SSI sector. Out of 
126 rec nnmendations made by Kapoor Committee, 48 recommendations accepted by RBI have 
been in .-. !mented by Union Bank of India. Margin Money and interest subsidy schemes of 
KVIC f ·· extending credit to Tiny sector and village industries in rural areas for boosting self­
employ <,:;nt oppor.unities has been implemented by the bank with loan exposure of Rs.l5 .16 
crore. ~ teos have been taken by the bank to ensure that the SSI branches are equipped with the 
state-of 'r. !-art infonnation technology including adequate infrastructural support. The 
controll ";, offices are m constant touch with the field functionaries to understand the ground 
realitie~ also the c:mstraints faced by SSI branch managers. Field functionaries are motivated 
for heaJr ''"/ growth of SSI credit. 
;-,e Committee was further infonned that the recent relaxations announced by the Prime 
Ministe1 will further boost credit to SSI sector, some of which are as under:-
(i) Excise duty exemption limit increased from Rs.50 lakhs to Rs.l crore. 
(ii) Increase in the limit for composite loans from Rs.l 0 lakhs to Rs.25 lakhs. 
(iii) Indu<;try related service and business enterprises with investment upto Rs.l 0 lac :n 
fixed assets, excluding land and building will be eligible for benefits as Small Scale 
Service & Business (Industry related) Enterprises (SSSBE) as against to Rs.3 lakhs 
at present. 
The officials of the Union Bank of India further informed the Committee that a women 
development cell has already been set up at Central office, whereas regional offices have been 
advised to set up women development cells at their end. The field functionaries are being 
advised to assist the women applicants possibly by a well-trained lady staff at the desk. The 
credit extended to women beneficiaries under SSI and Tiny Sector as of March 2000 is furnished 
below:-
(Rs. in Crore) 
Sector Total Advances Advances to women Beneficiaries 
Ale Amount A/c. Amount 
SSI 67269 2214.36 8812 73.42(3%) 
Tiny 54487 639.48 8586 47.78(7%) 
Out of total tiny sector, the bank has financed Rs.297.90 crore to 36769 beneficiaries 
with investment in plant and machinery upto Rs.5.00 lakhs and Rs. 341.58 crore to 5834 
beneficiaries with investment in plant and machinery between Rs.5.00 lakhs and Rs.25.00 lakhs, 
thus agrre~ating to Rs.639.48 crore to 42603 beneficiaries in tiny sector as hereunder:-
38 

I 
Parameters Account 
Upto Rs.5 lakhs 
Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.25 lakhs 
Over to 25 lakhs 
Total SSI sector 
36769 
5834 
24666 
67269 
(Rs ., · Crore) 
.Amount 
-297.90 1 
341.58 
574.88 
.214.36 
The officials of Union Bank of India informed the Committee that in order to t .• oost the 
flow of credit to SSI sector, 28 specialised SSI branches have been opened till <Jale. The 
outstanding advances at these branches stood at Rs.374.90 crore as of June 2000. Tit: overall 
growth pattern of these branches is as under:-
(Rs . 1 Crore) 
-~ Year No. of Total Credit Total Credit Contribution of Per Branch 
Branch by SSI to SSI Sector SSI brancnes to ·: redit 
branches total SSI Credit 1 (Average) 
' 
March 1998 24 269.82 1939.02 13.92% 11.24 
-March 1999 25 317.25 2073.52 15.30% 12.69 
March 2000 28 367.92 2214.36 16.62% I 13.14 
I 
June 2000 28 l 374.90 2087.81 17.96% i 13.39 ! : 
Banks Advance for priority sector advances is 5410.30 crore constituting 40.39% of 
NBC. Ofthis Rs.2214.36 crore is to SSI sector. 
Preferred attention is being paid to support SSI sector which contributes substantially to 
the Indian Economy. 
(i) Under SSls. out of total priority sector advance ofRs.5410 crore, as much as 
Rs.22 I 4 crore is to SSI sector. 
(ii) Bank has implemented in full Navak Committee recommendations and is 
providing finance at 20% of Turnover basis to units enjoying facilities upto 
Rs.5 crore. 
(iii) With a view to boost credit to SSI :..c\..Wr under seven point action plan of the 
Government of India, surveys are being conducted to know the problems faced 
by entrepreneurs. Periodic meetings are also held with entrepreneurs. 
(iv) All 48 recommendations of :he Kaooor Committee accepted by the RBI have 
been implemented by the Bank. Some of the important recommendations 
include raising of composite loan limits to Rs.1 0 lakhs, non obtaining of 
collateral upto advances of Rs.l lakhs for all SSI units and upto Rs.5 lakhs for 
the tiny units, and procedure simplification for grand of advance, etc. 
(v) Margin Money and subsidy schemes of KVIC for extending credit to village 
and cottage industries and tiny sector are being implemented. 
39 

(vi) 28 SSI finance branches are acting as catalysts and contributing towards growth 
of SSis. The share of such branches in Bank's SSI advances is increasing and 
stands at 18% approx. presently. 
(vii) In 11 lead districts, while in one district specialized SSI branch is functioning, 
in other 10 districts, SSI cells are being set up. 
(viii) Sick SSI units are nursed back to health by Technical study of their viability 
and giving them various concessions, fresh funds, etc. 
Bank Of India 
The officials of the Bank of India informed the Committee that the need based credit 
requirements of Bank of India's clientele in SSI sector are met by over 2500 branches including 
29 specialised SSI branches spread all over India. The bank has achieved 45.82% net adjusted 
credit to priority sector as on 31.03.2000 as against 40% stipulated by Government/Reserve 
Bank of India. The achievement for quarter ended June 2000 during the current year is around 
45.31%. Gross credit of the bank to SSI sector was increased by Rs. 271 crore from Rs.2620 
crore as on 3 I 51 March 1999 to Rs.2891 crore by March 2000. 
The Committee was informed that the following measures were undertaken at various 
levels in the bank during the year pertaining to SSI sector:-
(i) Kapoor Committee recommendations accepted by Reserve Bank of India were 
adopted by the board for implementation. 
(ii) A compendium on 'Policies and guidelines in financing SSI' was printed and 
released. 
(iii) Interaction Meetings with SSI borrowers of two large zones, Mumbai (South) 
and Mumbai (North) were held by the General Manager(PS). Apart from 
this 303 such customer meets were held during the year at all zones. 
(iv) Trilingual application form for SSI credit was circulated for the use of zones 
alongwith the check list of documents to be called for. 
(v) specialised SSI branches were opened. 
(vi) Small Scale Sick Industries Task Forces have been formed in all zones/regions 
for review of SSI accounts classified as non-viable for appropriate action. 
(vii) Customer grievances have been redressed with utmost concern. 
(viii) 1465 surveys were conducted during the year in which 788 performing accounts 
were scrutinized to ascertain the adequacy of credit. 
(ix) During the year 201 Orientation Training Programme were held in which 
260 operating level officers participated. 
(x) With approval of Board the bank participated in Government of India 
sponsored· schemes operated through SlOB I such as Technology Upgradation 
Fund for Textile Industry, National Equity Fund etc. 
In adherence to the Seven Point Action Plan of Government of India for enlarging the 
flow of credit to SSI sector, the following activities were reported:-
(i) 131 surveys were conducted covering 190 units to ascertain adequacy of credit 
extended during April-September 2000. 
40 
I I 
I ' I ·Ill I I j~ , II , 

(ii) 112 customer meets were held with SSI entrepreneurs to understand their 
probleJl!S and seek suggestions, during April-September 2000. 
(iii) Eight Orientation Training Programmes were held where 124 participants (Bank 
Officers) participated. 
The Committee was further informed that the magnitude of NPAs and sickness in the 
SSI sector is comparatively large particularly in industries like engineering, textiles and 
chemicals. However the Bank of India have finalised rehabilitation package in viable units with 
the following strategies:-
(i) Arresting slippages by replacement/rescheduling/installments/interest in genuine 
cases affected due to natural calamities/project failure/delay in implementation 
etc. and for reasons beyond the control of the borrowers/entrepreneurs. 
(ii) Intensive drive for recoveries in doubtful accounts. 
(iii) Timely action for revival of units, right at incipient sickness stage and provide 
rehabilitation to such units. 
(iv) Re-examination of the units earlier identified as sick non-viable and to take 
appropriate rehabi I itation/recovery measures. 
Explaining the causes of NPA in the SSI sector the officials attributed to the delay in 
commissioning of projects leading to cost over-run, diversion of funds by small scale enterprises 
in other activities, non-payment of dues by large corporate/MNCs specially during recession 
leading to huge blockage of working capital funds and delay in providing second charge by 
SFCs/Fis. 
However the Bank of India has outlined area specific strategies to be adopted by 
zones/regions to achieve targets, set in SSI financing which inter-alia include identification of 
potential centers in zones for quantum development in SSI business and close monitoring of 
identified branches alongwith specilised SSI branches; arranging workshops/seminars to 
motivate specilised SSI branches and key branches having potential for SSI financing; 
enhancement of credit flow to tiny enterprises, artisans, village and cottage industries; exploring 
possibilities for take over of good rated accounts from other banks; timely review of existing 
accounts and considering additional need based limits to the borrowers; expeditious processing 
of proposals at all levels and quick disbursement of new limits; liaison with chamber of small 
Industries, Federation of Association of Small industries of India (F ASSI), NGOs and SHGs for 
prospective potential business; holding of SSI customers meets regularly by zonal managers 
with display of products of SSI units financed by Bank of India in the zones. 
Bank of Baroda 
The Committee was informed that Bank of Baroda has taken strategic business 
initiatives and maintained the pace of its growth in all vital areas of banking including finance to 
Small Scale Sector against a backdrop of slow industrial growth:-
41 

(Rs.in Crores){Aics in 000 's) 
March, 1998 March, 1999 March, 2000 June 2000 
As of No. of No. of No. No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of 
units Adv. of Adv. units Adv. units Adv. 
units 
1.Net Bank Credit 12,928 13,384 15,549 16,610 
2.Total priority 1,372 6,058 1,216 6,560 1,287 7,671 1,299 7,720 
sector Adv. 
3.Finance to SSI 82 2,592 84 2,703 90 2,988 92 3,040 
sector 
4.Share of SSI 20.05% 20.20% 19.22% 18.30% 
Adv. To Net bank 
credit(3to I) 
5. Share of SSI 42.77% 41.20% 38.95% 39.38% 
advance to priority 
sector adv. (3 to 2) 
Outstanding advance to SSI sector increased by Rs.448 crores during the last three years 
(i.e. from Rs.2592 crores as of March, 1998 to Rs.3040 crores as of June 2000). Share of SSI 
advance to priority sector advance stood at 39.38% as of June, 2000. For ensuring adequate and 
timely credit to SSI clientele BOB has initiated the process of holding regular meetings with SSI 
borrowers, trade associations, representatives of Reserve Bank of India, State Finance 
Corporations, Small Industries Development Bank of India, Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation of India etc. on a common forum to appreciate the problems and find out the 
solutions thereof. 
As regards flow of credit to tiny sector units Committee were given following 
information:-
(Rs. in Crores)(Aics in 000 's) 
March,1998 March,1999 March,2000 June 2000 
No. No. of No. No. of No. No. of No. No. 
of Adv. of Adv. of Adv. of Adv. 
units units units units 
of 
Total SSI Adv. Of the Bank 82 2,592 84 2,703 90 2,988 92 3,040 
out of which: tiny sector 63 527 66 701 71 809 72 856 
1. Units with investment in 
plant & Machinery upto 
Rs.5/- lakhs 
2. Units with investment in 13 709 12 649 13 853 14 735 
Plant & Machinery between 
Rs.5/- to Rs.25 lakhs 
3.Total tiny sector 76 1,236 78 1,350 84 1,662 86 1,591 
Other:- 6 1,356 6 1,353 6 1,326 6 1,449 
4. advance to units with 
investment in plant & 
machi11ery above Rs.25/-
1akhs 
42 

Advance to tiny sector units increased by Rs.355 crores (i.e. from Rs.1236 crores as of 
March, 1998 to Rs.l591 crores as of June,2000). Percentage share of tiny sector advance to 
total SSI advance as of June 2000 is 53.32%. 
As per the guidelines of RBI Bank of Baroda has implemented the recommendations of 
Shri S.L. Kapur Committee on flow of credit to SSI sector which inter-alia include circulation 
of SSI borrowers ·charter' on credit entitlements; providing loan form in trilingual format; 
circulation of the simplified format for "Appraisal-cum-Sanction" of SSI proposals to branch 
manager; opening of 25 specilised SSI branch having branch managers being imparted 
specialised training in credit ; making efforts to obtain ISO 9000 certification for all the 
specialised SSI branches; enhancing lending powers of the branch managers at all levels; fixing 
of interest rates on credit facilities to SSI borrowers on soft terms through liberal credit rating 
mechanism ; evolving customer grievances settlement mechanism . 
Bank of Baroda has so far operationalised 25 specialised SSI branches to cater to the 
SSI clientele in 23 districts. Performance of Specialised SSI branches are as under:-
(&. in Crores) 
As of March, 98 March,99 March,2000 June,2000 
Advance outstanding Rs. 82.24 Rs. 109.85 Rs. 147.79 Rs. 155.75 
Profit making branches 18 17 20 20 
Loss making branches 6 7 4 4 
The officials of Bank of Baroda informed the Committee about the implementation of 
the recommendations made by Nayak Committee through the turnover method in assessing 
working capital requirements of SSI borrowers upto Rs.5 crores and making available need­
based credit limits. The Committee was further informed that BOB has implemented the 
provision of KYIC Margin Money Loan in order to give a fillip to financing tiny units in rural 
areas. The officials of BOB appreciated the credit guarantee fund trust for small industries 
which have been jointly set up by the Government of India and Small Industries Development 
Bank. The officials further appreciated the guarantee scheme as formally launched by Hon'ble 
Prime Minister on 301h August 2000 which has the following features :-
(i) The scheme covers term loan and working capital facilities extended to small scale 
industrial units including IT and Software industries. 
(ii) Credit facilities extended in respect of a single eligible borrower should not be 
below Rs.l lac and not exceeding Rs.25 lakhs. 
{iii) Credit facilities should be extended without any collateral security and/or third 
party guarantees. 
(iv) Interest rate on the credit facility sanctioned by the lending institution should not be 
more than 3% over its PLR. 
The scheme is very useful for tiny sector units (units with investment in plant and 
machinery below Rs.25 lakhs) since no collateral security and/or third party guarantee should be 
insisted, to get coverage under the scheme. BOB has decided to join the Scheme for the benefit 
of the tiny '5ector units. This will go a long way in increasing credit flow to tiny sector units. 
43 

The officials of BOB pointed out that the marketing problems, general recession in the 
industry, delayed realisation of sale proceeds, obsolete technology and infrastructural 
bottlenecks have laid to incidence of sickness in small scale units financed by the bank. Position 
ofNon-Performing Assets (NPAs) in SSI advances of the Bank is given below:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
As of 31.03.1998 31.03.1999 31.03.2000 
Substandard 208.20 310.81 133.96 
Doubtful 313.48 393.80 431.44 
Loss 20.08 52.81 88.38 
TotaiNPA 541.76 757.42 653.78 
%ofNPA 22.22 24.17 21.63 
Bank of Maharashtra 
During the course of interaction with the officials of Bank of Maharashtra the 
Committee came to know the role the bank in encouraging the SSI sector by facilitating its 
contribution to economic development. The Bank has initiated various steps to boost finance to 
this sector in its continuous endeavour in this regard and credit extended by this bank to SSI 
sector is at the level of Rs.818 crores. As lead bank in six districts viz. Pune, Thane, Nasik, 
Satara, Aurangabad and Jalna Bank of Maharastra has operationalised SSI branches in the lead 
districts. 
The Committee was informed that the Bank of Maharashtra is implementing the 
recommendations made by Nayak and Kapoor Committee which inter-alia include delegation 
of more powers to Branch Managers for granting ad-hoc limits; introduction of simplified 
application forms; adoption of simplified procedure for sanctioning limits @ 20% of turnover 
for working capital limits upto Rs.S crores; opening of more specialized'SSI branches; Special 
programmes for training Branch Managers for appraising small projects; making customers 
grievance machinery more transparent and simplification of the complaint redressal procedure; 
the bank has thus been able to step up the effectiveness of its SSI lending. 
The Bank is endeavouring to provide adequate credit facility to SSI sector as is 
evident from the data provided below:-
(Rs. in crores) 
27.3.98 26-3-99 31-3-2000 30-6-2000 
Net credit 3620.46 4061.84 5252.21 5378.97 
Direct SSI 539.15 616.42 656.52 759.60 
Indirect SSI -
Total SSI 539.15 681.42 712.26 817.97 
44 
'' I 
I ,111 II !I II' 

The Bank has also initiated several measures for directing credit flow to the SSI sector:-
( i) Collateral security third party is not insisted upto in the case of viable 
proposals; 
(ii) composite loans which include the term loan and working capital component 
taken together amounting to Rs.J 0 lakhs under Single Window are considered 
by the Bank: 
(iii) training is provided to staff in the area of SSI finance; 
(iv) grievances cells are established at regional Offices and Central Office to 
redress complaints from SSI borrowers; 
(v) simplified loan application forms have been introduced; 
(vi) stipulated cash margin dispensed with for non fund based facilities wherever 
adequate surplus security is available; 
(vii) Branch Managers are provided with higher delegation to consider even ad-hoc 
facilities up to 20% of the sanctioned limits; 
(viii) a growth rate of 30% is considered while deciding disbursement targets 
under lead bank scheme: 
(ix) implementation of 7 point action plan for SSI sector is monitored so as to 
ensure that credit flow is appropriately directed; and 
(x) The Bank has been successfully implementing the KVIC Margin Money 
Scheme and has designated Vice Parle (east) Branch at Mumbai as a nodal 
branch the performance of the bank has been well appreciated by KVIC. 
As Convenor of SLBC for Maharashtra State the Bank has taken steps to improve the 
position of Credit Flow to SSI sector in the state:-
(i) The District Credit plans prepared by all the lead banks in the State have 
separate allocation for SSI/Village and Cottage Industries/Rural artisans. The 
performance of the Banks are reviewed at district level by the lead banks. 
(ii) The State Credit Plan also has SSI component and the performance of banks 
on this score is reviewed district wise bank wise at SLBC meetings; 
(iii) The SSI component in various Government sponsored schemes like PMRY/ 
K VIC Margin Money Scheme etc. are reviewed separately; and 
(iv) Various operational problems faced by banks/financial institutions are discussed 
and sorted out at SLBC level. 
The officials of the Bank of Maharashtra informed the Committee that bank had 
undertaken survey at Nasik on cluster approach focusing upon Grape sector and Diary 
Activity, where processing units were considered as a part of small/tiny sector. The Bank 
has established specialized SSI branches at major centres in Maharashtra and Karnataka. 
The Bank also has plans to expand its portfolio of SSI financing branches to other 
states/center so as to exploit the potential presented and to create opportunities for 
development of SSJ sector. Bank is an active participant in the District Rural Industries 
project being implemented at Akola and Washim in Maharashtra. The bank hs also been 
conducting Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDPs) , Symposia and workshops 
for generating awareness and to promote the growth of SSI sector. 
45 

INTERACTION WITH THE OFFICIALS OF STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATION 
The Committee interacted with the officials of State Financial Corporation in order to 
come across the with the ground realities regarding credit facilities to SSI sector. 
Maharashtra State Financial Corporation 
During the course of interaction the Committee came to know that Maharashtra State 
Financial Corporation (MSFC) was established in /\ugust 1962 under the enactment of State 
Financial Corporations Act, 1951 with the follm\ in g. ubjectives:-
(i) Function as development agency to promote and accelerate industrial growth in 
rural and backward areas of the State. 
(ii) Promote first generation entrepreneurs. 
(iii) Reduce socio-economic imbalance and create employment opportunities. 
The cumulative sanctions of the Corporation as at the end of March 2000 are Rs. 3312 
crores and cumulative disbursements of Rs.2380 crores. The share of the SSI sector in these 
cumulative sanctions works out to about 75% i.e. at around Rs.24 76.81 crores. Further, this 
assistance has created employment opportunities to about 14 lakhs persons. 
The Committee was informed that the initial developmental role played by the 
Corporation has now created certain situational weaknesses in the changed economic scenario. 
The following salient features of post-liberalisation era have largely affected financial position 
of this Corporation:-
(i) Protections like reservation of particular sector allotted to SSI were gradually 
reduced. This ultimately increased sickness and a consequential rise in NPAs of 
MSFC. . 
(ii) Liberalised import policies have suddenly affected competitiveness and 
profitability of SSis and this ultimately resulted in change from good performing 
assets to loss making assets. 
(iii) Narrowing gap between borrowing cost and lending rate of interest (i.e. spread). 
(iv) Cut throat competition from banks in term lending activity, which was initially a 
monopoly of MSFC. 
(v) Reduced financial support from State Government in terms of contribution to 
Share Capital, delay in disbursement of special Capital lncentives(SCI) and 
increase in Government guarantee fees from nil percentage to 2% per annum 
which is unprecedented in financial sector. 
In addition to the above problems, the Corporation is expected to face unequal and 
unyielding competition from other source of funds available to the entrepreneurs:-
'' I 
(i) Until now the Corporation was operating with only a single product, i.e. term 
loan to the SSI & service sector. With the amendment of SFCs Act, the scope of 
activities of the Corporation has widened. However it may take some time to 
implement it; 
(ii) Considering the present status of small scale sector on account of competition 
from the imported goods as well as adverse effect on the large and medium 
sized units on which small scale manufacturers are dependent for supply of 
components, the sickness in the small scale sector has spread at an alarming rate. 
Further, addition of the new small scale sector is also adversely affected. This 
situation has great impact on the recoveries of the Corporation consequently 
46 
-Ill II .11 

leading to generation of Non Performing Assets (NPAs). This situation has 
adversely affected the Corporation's financial position, repayment obligations 
and profitability. Therefore, re-capitalisation of SFCs is inevitable; and 
(iii) The average cost of borrowing of a bank ranges between 8 to I 0% per annum. 
while the average cost of borrowing for the Corporation is at around 13.50% per 
annum. At present, the main source for raising the resources to the Corporation 
is refinance from SIDBI, wherein it charges refinance @ 12% per annum. 
Statement of Sanctions, Disbursements & Recoveries:-
(Rs. in Crores) 
Particulars 95-96 96-97 97-98 98-99 99-2000 April to Sep. 
2000 
Sanctions 569.67 251.91 133.67 61.31 55.99 37.51 
Disbursement 388.73 275.57 129.-+0 66.44 46.66 21.62 
Recovery 199.51 189.03 177.07 158.82 165.96 66.71 
(Principal) 
Recovery 142.33 159.44 163.70 131.52 139.82 46.37 
(Interest) 
Total 341.84 348.4 7 I 340.77 290.34 305.78 113.08 
Recovery i 
The Committee was apprised that with the liberalization of economy and 
implementation of WTO recommendations, the traditional role of the Financial Corporation as 
term lending and developmental banking institution will undergo sea change. In the present 
competitive environment. unless and until the SFCs are in a position to operate the level playing 
field \vith its competitors. their survival would certainly be a danger. The Corporation has until 
now played a dual role of fulfillment of socio-economic objectives and also term· lending as 
commercial activity. 
KARNATAKA STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATION 
The background note furnished to the Committee on the working of Karnataka State 
Financial Corporation (KSFC) points out that (KSFC) was established in 1959 with the objective 
of promoting industrial development in the State of Karnataka. The Corporation provides 
financial assistance for the development of small, tiny and medium scale industries. KSFC has 
carried out its responsibility and has earned the reputation of being a Premier State Level 
development financial institution. The aggregate assistance rendered by the Corporation under 
its various activities since inception upto the end of March 2000 amounted to Rs.5798 crores for 
147336 cases. The cumulative disbursements as on that date amounted to Rs.4638 crores. The 
details of assistance sanctioned and disbursed by the Corporation during the last five years are as 
under:-
47 

(R\·. in C 'ron's) 
Year Total Sanctions Total Disbursements ' 
Amount 
No. Amount 
1995-96 14819 818.81 612.63 
1996-97 13053 859.84 649.46 
1997-98 6970 577.36 469.56 
1998-99 3753 371.96 358.97 
1999-2000 2878 340.26 298.49 
Since inception upto 147336 5797.58 4637.54 
March, 2000 
The Committee was informed that since its inception upto the end of March 2000 the 
Corporation has assisted as many as 96398 cases in the SSI sector for an amount of Rs.3175 
crores constituting 67% in terms of numbers and 62% in terms of amount of the total assistance 
sanctioned (term loans and corporate loans only) by the Corporation. The cumulative 
disbursements to the SSI sector upto the end of March 2000 amounted to Rs.2650 crores, which 
constitutes 63% of the corporate disbursements (term loans and corporate loans only). The 
Corporation is playing a vital role in the development of Small Road Transport Operators 
(SRTOs). The cumulative assistance rendered by the Corporation to the SRTOs as at the end of 
March 2000 amounted to Rs.617 crores for around 3 7000 cases. 
The Committee was further informed that the economic slow down since 1996-97 has 
adversely affected the small scale industries which in turn has affected the growth and recovery 
performance of KSFC. The capital adequacy of KSFC (Ratio of risk adjusted equity to risk 
weighted loan assets) stands at(-)5.56% as on March 31,2000 as against the RBI/IDBI 
stipulation of 8%. The Corporation's income spread has come down from 4.26% in 1995-96 to 
0.80% in 1999-2000. Its non performing assets (NPAs) constitute about 51% ofthe loan assets 
as on 31.03.2000. This has gone up from 19% in 1996-97. The Corporation had to make 
provisioning for non -performing assets totally of the order of Rs.212 crores as of March 
31,2000. 
The officials of the KSFC put forth certain problems being faced by the Corporation 
while helping to the SSI units:-
(i) The economic slowdown has resulted in stiff competition from commercial 
banks and other financial institutions. 
(ii) While the commercial banks have accessibility to low cost funds, SFCs do not 
have such an advantage. 
(iii) The limited equity contribution from the State government and no equity support 
from IDBI since 1991-92, the Corporation has borrowed funds from various 
sources, particularly by way of refinance/line of credit from SIDBI/IDBI with a 
view to keep its mandate of development of small scale industries in the State 
going. 
48 

(iv) The Corporation's ability to raise funds at reasonable cost (including issue of 
statutory liquidity ratio bonds) especially from banks, provident funds and other 
financial organization has substantially weakened. 
(v) To enable the weak banks and RRBs to meet capital adequacy ratio norm, the 
Government of India has recapitalised them by infusing over Rs.20000 crores in 
weak banks and over Rs.660 crores in RRBs. However no such recapitalisation 
of wea~ State Financial Corporations has taken place so far. 
The officials of the KSFC was of the view that the only way out for rescuing the KSFC 
is through recapitalisation and financial restructuring of KSFC. 
GUJARA T STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATION 
During the course of interaction the Committee came across the fact that Gujarat State 
Financial Corporation (GSFC) was established in 1960 under the State Financial Corporation's 
Act. with the objective of promoting the Small and Medium Scale Industries . Since its 
inception GSFC stood for striking a balance between commercial activity. in the present 
global 'free' market and social responsibility of government institutions. Since its inception, 
GSFC has made remarkable progress towards its goal of providing rock solid support to the 
industries of Gujarat and Union territory of Silvassa. The Corporation has sanctioned gross 
cumulative assistance of Rs.3750.07 crore for promotion and development of 45,716 units in 
small and medium scale sector. The aggregate loans disbursed amounted to Rs.2730.42 crore 
since inception of the Corporation . GSFC has financed a large number of units which include 
the Reliance. United Phosporus, Zandu Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Cadila Lab, Himson Industries 
which have grown from small to giants. 
In tandem with the changing economic scenario of the country , GSFC enlarged its 
activities and broad based its resource mix. The Corporation entered into fund based activities 
like leasing, Bill Discounting, Line of Credit and non fund activity like Merchant Banking. It 
also got itself registered as Debenture Trustee with Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI). It provides financial assistance of up to Rs.24 million for acquiring fixed assets like 
land, factory building and machinery of the project. It also provides for technical know-how 
and pre-operative expenses to set up industrial projects in the state of Gujarat. GSFC offers 
term finance for the expansion, diversification or renovation, modernisation, procurement of 
quality co.ntrol equipment, pollution control equipment and energy saving devices. GSFC has 
also framed new schemes for assisting SSI units in obtaining ISO 9000 Certification, Marketing 
& Sales promotion activities along with Gold card line of credit. As the important special 
class of the enterprise sector. the reply on native skill, economic independence and introduce 
new conception models and things. 
With a view to create micro enterprise and rural and semi urban areas, GSFC has taken 
up the tie up with Khadi and Village Industries which would subsidise the capital cost of such 
enterprise. In order to meet these challenges the Corporation has initiated many steps to reach 
out to the potential segment. It is for this purpose earmarked new areas like bio-technology, 
Information Technology and Hi-tech agriculture financing. It has also identified the tourism 
related areas which includes the conversion of places of erstwhile Maharajas into Hotels­
heritage hotels and development of multiplex shopping malls etc. GSFC has also introduced 
various products for efficient use of resources like establishment of prime lending rate, 
calculation of cost of borrowing, budgetary control etc. This has resulted into Corporation is in 
a position to offer financial assistance at the most competitive interest rates, GSFC also offers 
comfort to SSI and medium scale units by extending term finance with a moratorium of 12 to 
18 months. It also give benefit under National equity Fund at 1% interest rate for projects up to 
2.5 millions to small scale units as well as professionals like doctors etc. 
49 

·" 
In order to improve the customer service and keep pace with the speed of the present 
competitive environment, the Corporation embarked on adoption of latest technology which has 
been designed by Tata Consultancy Services:-
(i) Development of Software on ROMS platform i.e. on the latest version of oracle. 
(ii) Governing all the line and staff functions of the Corporation. 
(iii) Integration of all Modules(SSI and A&RI) 
(iv) Online updating of all transactions 
(v) Connection of all Branches and Zonal offices to Head Office through leased lines. 
(vi) Providing of audio, video conferencing facility 
(vii) Replacement of outdated hardware. 
With the recent amendment in the SFCs Act GSFC would be in a position to achieve newer 
height in terms of business corporate governance and increased leveraged capabilities. 
50 
,, I 
II• II .jl, 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee is of the view that although Industry as a whole plays crucial role in the 
process of economic development, employment generation, equitable distribution of national 
income, mobilization of capital and entrepreneurial skills and contribution to export earnings of 
the country but SSI sector occupies an important position in the industrial economy of the 
country because of its advantages in terms of low investment, high potential for employment 
generation and wider dispersal of industries in rural and semi-urban areas. This sector offers a 
method of ensuring a more equitable distribution of national income and facilitates effective 
mobilization of resources of capital and skill which might otherwise remain unutilized. It 
further stimulates the growth of industrial entrepreneurship and promotes and diffuses the 
pattern of ownership and location. SSI sector is one. of the most vibrant and dynamic sectors of 
the Indian Economy. Over 40% of the gross turnover in manufacturing activities as also around 
35% of our exports, are contributed by SSI sector. In the area of employment generation, 
significant contribution is made by SSI sector which accounts for employment of over 1.6 crore 
workers. 
SSI sector has consistently displayed a high growth potential and employment 
generation capacity. Recognising SSI sector as a core area for growth and development of the 
Economy, the Government has from time to time taken steps to remove bottlenecks and pave the 
way for accelerating the growth of this sector by various measures, chief among them being 
streamlining the flow of Bank Credit to this sector. Public Sector Banks, on their part, have also 
made important contribution in ensuring that adequate fund flow is ensured to this sector. 
The SSI sector constitutes a major portion of the priority sector to which almost 40% of 
the bank credit is diverted. Even though no specific benchmarks are stipulated for SSI within the 
priority sector, it is ensured that out of total finance available to SSI sector 40% is granted for 
units with investment in plant and machinery. 
The Committee is happy to note that RBI has done commendable job for ensuring 
smooth credit flow to SSI sector . RBI has set up Nayak Committee in 1991 to deal with the 
aspects of adequacy and timeliness of credit to SSis and the same Committee submitted its 
report in September, 1992 with several recommendations which inter-alia include granting of 
working capital credit to SSI units computed on the basis of a minimum of 20% of their 
projected annual turnover ; giving preference to village industries, tiny industries and other 
small scale units while meeting credit requirement sector; extension of single Window 
Scheme of SIDBI to all districts; avoidance of delay in sanctioning and disbursement of 
credit to SSI sector; non-insistence on compulsory deposit as a quid-pro-quo for sanctioning 
the credit limit; opening of specialised branches; identification of sick units and urgent action 
to put them on the nursing programme; the standardized loan application forms to be used by SSI 
units; imparting of necessary training to Bank staff to handle the SSI clients. As a follow up 
of Nayak Committee recommendations , Finance Minister in the budget speech of 1995-96, 
announced seven point Action Plan for improving the flow of credit to small scale sector 
consisting of time bound action for setting up specialised SSI branches in 85 identified 
districts; at least 100 such dedicated branches to be opened before the end of 1995-96; Adequate 
delegation of powers at the branch and regional levels; Banks to conduct sample surveys of their 
performing SSI accounts to find out whether they are getting adequate credit; steps to be taken 
to see as far as possible that composite loans (covering both term loans and working capital) are 
sanctioned to SSI entrepreneurs; regular meeting by banks at zonal and regional levels with SSI 
entrepreneurs; need to sensitise bank managers and reorient them regarding working of the SSI 
51 

sector; simplification of procedural formalities by banks for SSI entrepreneurs. Accordingly, 
RBI issued instruction to banks for taking appropriate action for effective implementation of the 
seven point action plan and to keep their respective boards, apprised of the progress and also 
forward to RBI a copy of the note put up to the board. 
Concerned with the continuing problem on credit to SSI sector, RBI had set up a High 
Powered Committee in December, 1997 under the Chairmanship of Shri S.L. Kapur, Member, 
BIFR and former Secretary (SSI& ARI) to review the working of credit delivery system for 
SSis. The Committee submitted its report to RBI on 30
1
h June, 1998 and the same report contains 
126 recommendations and some of them are special treatment to smaller among small 
industries; enhancement in the quantum of composite loans; removal of procedural difficulties in 
the path of SSI advances; sorting out issues relating to mortgages of land including removal of 
stamp duty and permitting equitable mortgages; allowing access to low-cost funds to Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) for refinancing SSI loans; Non-obtention of 
collaterals for loans up to Rs.2 lakhs; setting up of a collateral reserve fund to provide support 
to first party guarantees; setting up of a Small Industries Infrastructure Development Fund for 
developing industrial areas in around metropolitan and urban areas; change in the definition of 
sick SSI units; giving statutory powers to State Level Inter Institutional Committee (SLIIC); 
setting up of a separate guarantee organization and opening of 1,000 additional specialised 
branches; and enhancement ofSIDBI'S role and status to match with that of national Bank for 
agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). RBI has accepted 64 recommendations of 
Kapur Committee and advised banks to implement 48 of these recommendations. During the 
course of interaction with the officials and management of various commercial banks the 
Committee was informed that the public sector banks are conforming to the recommendations 
of Nayak Committee and Kapur Committee. 
The Standing Committee on Industry, while endorsing the recommendations of the 
Nayak Committee and Kapur Committee, opines that timely and adequate credit flow to SSI 
units is the need of hour for rapid industrialization and growth of the national economy. While 
a host of issues were raised during the three days meeting at Mumbai, however, at this juncture 
the Committee while taking note of various issues to deal with at appropriate time, decided 
to dwell upon only with the credit related issues. The Committee feels that the Government 
may act promptly on following issues for continued credit flow to SSI units:-
1. MEETING OF WORKING CAPITAL REQUIREMENT 
The Committee notes the recommendations of the Nayak Committee and Kapoor 
Committee and guidelines given by RBI on the issue of the availability of working capital credit 
to SSI and the Committee is pleased to note that Government is working in right direction 
to ensure the smooth credit flow to SSI Units but at the same time the Committee is 
constraint to express in concern over the "credit gap- situation" due to non-availability of 
sufficient working capital requirement . The Committee is unhappy to note that although the· 
SSI production increased by 3.4 times but the credit availability by the banks to the units 
increased by 2.9 times only. The sordid state of affair is that despite the fact of 
recommendations made by various Committees for providing 20% of working capital 
requirement and issuance of necessary guidelines by the RBI to improve the situation in this 
regard, the availability of working capital credit has not shown any significant improvement 
and the same is bottom I ined at 7-8% . Therefore the Committee recommends that steps 
should be taken to ensure credit facilitation to SSI units upto 20% ofSSI production/turnover. 
52 

2. SUSTAIN ABLE RATE OF INTEREST 
Since the SSI units have not only to compfie with medium and Large Scale units 
but also to compete with MNCs due to ongoing liberalization and globalisation process it is 
pertinent on the part of Government to render credit facilities to SSI units at sustainable and 
oompetitive rate. The general impression of SSI associations and entrepreneurs are that 
SSI units have been exposed to phantom MNCs units without taking into account the fact of 
comparatives competitive edge and resilience which is being nurtured and nourished by 
credit facilities. During the course of interaction with SSI association the Committee came 
across that while industrial units in other countries gets credit at the rate of 4-5% per 
annum but in India SSI units is getting loan at the rate of 12 to 13% per annum. The 
Committee understands the problems of commercial banks to extend credit to SSI units at 
such a low rate of interest. Since RBI has given autonomy to Commercial Banks to decide 
their respective rate of interest the Committee feels still there is scope for lowering of rate of 
interest to some extent. The Committee not only hopes that the Commercial Banks will lend 
credit to SSI units at sustainable rate of interest but hopes strongly that Government will 
chalk out adequate measure. Incentive to induce commercial banks for extending loan at 
sustainable rate of interest. 
3. JOINT MECHANISM FOR APPRISING TERM LOANS AND WORKING 
CAPITAL 
The Committee came to know that there is no single agency for lending the term loan and 
\Vorking capital to SSI units requirement exceeding Rs 10 lakhs which leaves the SSI 
entrepreneurs to run from pillar to post. Under the circumstances, the Committee feels that 
situation may improve a lot if there is a mechanism for joint appraisal of term lending and 
working capital loan for higher amount ( about Rs.l 0 lakhs) so that there is no gap in the sanction 
of two types of loans. The measures, if undertaken, not only will save the time but also the 
money of SSI entrepreneurs, the Committee feels. 
4. WIDER ACCESS TO BANK FINANCE 
The Committee is at loss to note that only 15 to 20 percent of SSI units have access to 
Bank finance and the same findings was highlighted by a study conducted by the office of the 
DC (SSI) and Kapur Committee which caste a shadow over the credit facilities available to SSI 
Units in the country. The Committee feels that narrow access to bank finance are due to 
cumbersome procedure to access bank finance and the comprehensive conditions prescribed by 
the bank. Whatever the case may be, prevailing access to Bank finance seems to be 
narrow which must have been affecting the productivity of units engaged in SSI activities. 
Therefore, it is indispensable for credit facilitation to make adequate in conducive 
atmosphere for accessing bank finance. The Committee feels that the Government should 
undertake following measures for enabling SSI units to have access to bank finance::-
(ii) Undertaking of orientation course and adequate training for staff/officers of 
commercial banks for a change in the attitude for lending to SSI sector; 
(ii) Simplification of procedures for obtaining credit from Banks. Arrangement 
may be made for land mortgage instead of stamp duty for enabling SSI units to 
obtain credit from bank against land mortgage ; 
(iii) Government should create conducive climate for development of factoring 
services through appropriate policy prescription/legislative changes to ease 
the problems relating to stamp duty, registration for, assignment of Def'artment. 
53 

(iv) Recapitalisation and revamping of State Financial Corporation (SFCs) with the 
help ofSIDBI and lOBI enabling SFCs to lend fixed capital to SSI units; 
(v) Since Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) are most widespread with branches 
even in rural areas so well-performing RRBs may be encouraged to lend term 
loan and working capital to SSI units. 
5. POPULARISATIONOF VENTURE CAPITALFUND 
The Committee observes that assistance under venture capital fund has assumed 
importance as the liberalized regime has opened the door for a large number of 
entrepreneurs to embark upon setting up of ventures with innovative technologies and their 
commercial applications being a high-risk-high-return profile. In this regard the Committee 
would like to congratulate SlOB I for being the first financial institutions to set up a Rs.l 00 
crore National Venture Fund as a three tier strategy for development of SSis in software/IT 
industry (NFSIT) in collaboration with Ministry of Information Technology and Government 
of India. The Committee feels that the Commercial Banks should come forward in launching 
venture capital funds in all its comprehensiveness so as to effectively integrate and enhance the 
opportunities for Small Scale Industries in domestic and international market. The banks 
should endeavour to set up more and more such venture capital fund not only in software/IT 
industry but also for high growth sectors such as bio-technology and food processing. 
6. SETTING UP OF TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
BANKS 
The Committee observes that of obsolescence of Technology is one of the major 
problems of Small Scale Industries which has not only affected the manufacturing system and 
quality standard but also the economies of scale. Although SIDBI has come forward with 
technology development and Modernisation Fund (TDMF) Scheme in order to assist SSis at its 
prime lending rates but the Committee, taking into account the magnitude of the problem of 
technological obsolescence in SSI sector, feels that Government should come forward to set 
up Technology Upgradation and Development Banks to take stock of ground realities of 
sickness of SSI units due to obsolescence of technology and assist the units by ensuring 
credit facilitation at appropriate time and thus save the sick but potentially viable SSI units 
before dying out. 
7. EXTENSION OF NON-FINANCIAL SERVICES 
The Committee is of the view that banks have to take on a proactive role in extending 
non-financial services in the areas of technology upgradation, management training, skills 
upgradation, quality improvement, environment management, information about markets, 
regulations and clients, etc. Commercial banks and SFCs can study the package of non-financial 
services offered by the Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC), SIDBI etc., and adopt 
them with such modifications as are considered appropriate. The Committee is of the view that a 
loan application should be given along with "Small Business Growth Kit" with a guide to prepare 
business plans and a series of financial ratio calculators followed by a free consulting session of 
personalized solutions to meet the needs of small and medium sized business at every stage in 
their development including export solutions and quality solutions. Moreover, banks should come 
forward for finding foreign buyers by identifying possible export markets, undertaking market 
research projects, identifying the barriers to entry and to promote products to trade fairs and 
foreign missions. Financial Institution should also facilitate the product for the foreign market and 
outlining the national logistics such as transportation, shipping, insurance and documentation and 
developing the network of physical distribution of the product besides arranging to provide the 
legal and accounting service in the target market. Not only this, financial institution should also 
54 

provide assistance to small scale entrepreneurs in risk management by obtaining credit 
information on foreign buyers. helping insurance against commercial and political risk of non­
payment. helping finance foreign receivable and providing assistance when the small business has 
to issue a bond or a performance guarantee. That is to say, banks need to play the role of a friend, 
philosopher and guide to their SSI clients. 
8. PRIME MINISTER'S ANNOUNCEMENT OF PACKAGE FOR SSI SECTOR 
The Committee observes that the Government is really serious about removing the 
problem . specially credit related, of SSI Sector . The Committee feels that the Composite 
Loans Scheme wherein the loan limit has been raised from Rs.l 0 lakh to Rs.25 lakhs will go a 
long way in meeting the credit requirements of tiny units through single financing agency. 
Similarly, the enhancement in investment limit. of industry related services and business 
enterprises from Rs.S lakhs to Rs.l 0 lakhs will enable large number of enterprises to have 
access to priority sector credit. Moreover the Committee is happy to note that the Government 
is taking required steps for technology upgradation and therefore announced a Capital subsidy 
of 12% for investment in technology upgradation. Presently, the Government has given the 
capital subsidy in select sectors. The Committee feels that the Ministry of SSI and A&RI 
should examine whether such capital subsidy is required in other sectors of SSI for technology 
upgradation and if so, the Ministry should take up the issue at the appropriate level. The 
Committee is happy to observe the enhancement of project limit under National Equity Fund 
of SIDBI from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs.SO lakhs which will further help the tiny sector because 30% 
of investment under NEF Scheme has been bracketed for tiny sector . The Committee is 
also pleased to observe the announcement of Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme, operated by 
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Small Industries (GIS!) jointly set up by the Government of 
India and SIDBI, with the corpus of Rs.125 crore (contributed Rs.l 00 crores by 
Government of India and Rs.25 crores by SIDBI) and hopes that SSI units will have access to 
bank credit without collateral fee and third party guarantee. 
The Committee would like to extend its congratulation to SIDBI & NSIC for their 
continuance to give concessional rate of refinance/finance to tiny sectors. The Committee 
feels that Government would take urgent steps to revitalize/restructure State Finance 
Corporation enabling them to lend term loan to SSI units. The Committee also hopes that RBI 
would take concrete steps to strengthen and popularize factoring services to encourage bill 
culture in order to remove the problems of delayed payment ofSSI units. Once the problem of 
delayed payment is solved SSI units would be in a better position to recycle their profit into 
capital and in a way solve the problem • of working capital, the Committee feels . The 
Committee further observes that since sickness of SSI units is a chronic problem, a serious 
thought and timely action is required for rehabilitation of currently sick but potentially viable 
SSI units . The Committee hopes that RBI will be successful in its current efforts to draw a 
detailed , transparent and non-discretionary guidelines and same will be issued for effective 
implementation before the sick but potentially viable SSI units go beyond the point of no 
return. 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Government and feels that 
policy/package which have been envisaged/extending to SSI sector will not suffer the problem 
of implementation gap. While appreciating the steps taken by the Government to ensure the 
smooth credit flow to SSI sector, the Committee hopes that all the policy and programme 
will see the light of the day and the Government and its machinery should be equally 
enthusiastic in implementing the package . In this regard the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry of SSI and A&RI while furnishing the Action Taken Note on the 
recommendations contained in the present Report will give detailed note with regard to 
55 

Action taken and its impact of each and every scheme under the present package for SSI 
units. 
9. SHRIMAHILAGRIHUDYOG LIJJAT PAPAD 
The Committee is highly impressed with the activities of Shri Mahila Udyog Lijjat 
Papad - a cooperative society which is engaged in various activities thereby not only giving 
employment to 40 thousand women workers but also serving the society in more than one 
way. The Committee feels that this model organisation should act as catalyst for further 
proliferation of such non-government organisations. The Committee feels that the 
Government should come forward and encourage such organisations and the banks and 
financial institution should extend the requisite credit. The Government should also help such 
organisation by extending tax concessions. 
I 0. KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION (KVIC) 
While appreciating the role of KVIC in general the Committee feels that the KVIC 
should play more active role for promotion. and encouragement of Khadi and Village 
Industries:-
\ ''(f~-~ 
(i) The Ministry of SSI &Jd A&RI in tandem with KVIC should take up the 
issue of seeking cou'Qter gua~antee with the Governments of Assam and Bihar 
so that subsidy may b'e·provided by the KVIC to these States for the general 
benefit of the people; \ 
(ii) The Committee is of the view that the Government should allocate maximum 
budgetary support to th~ ~ec,tor of SSI which have the maximum potential 
for employment generation ; · · 
(iii) The Committee while expressing serious concern over accumulation of 
inventory to the tune of Rs.750 crore recommends that KVIC should take an 
all out efforts for clearing all the inventory in the minimum possible time . 
KVIC should sketch effective marketing strategy for clearing the stocks which 
has piled up over the years.; and 
(iv) The Committee feels that KVIC should also enhance the R&D efforts for 
better designing and quality of Khadi products and undertake measures for 
popularization of Khadi products on the lines of the slogan " Use Khadi 
products and be a proud Indian" . 
The Committee hopes that in the light of the observations and recommendations in this 
Report the Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries should activate 
itself to meet the challenges ahead of it which has emerged due to on going liberalisation 
and globalisation processes and feel encouraged to approach the Ministry of Finance for 
ensured credit flow to small scale industries. 
56 
'' I " I I 111 II, ·II 

MINUTES 
l 

I Ill II if' 

XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 25
1
h September, 2000 in Room No. 
63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Ramdas Agarwal -Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri J ibon Roy 
4. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
5. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
6. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
7. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
8. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOKSABHA 
9. Shri Pon Radhakrishnan 
10. Shri Ramanand Singh 
II. Shri Tarachand Sahu 
12. Shri Anant Nayak 
13. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
14. Shri A. Narendra 
15. Shri A.C. Jose 
16. Shri P. Rajendran 
17. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
18. Shri Manjay Lal 
19. Shri Ram Sajivan 
20. Shri Nagmani 
21. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
22. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
23. Shri G.J. Javiya 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
59 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members present and briefed them about the 
purpose ofthe meeting. In his brief he highlighted the role of Small Scale Sector and stated that 
the Committee should assess the credit flow to this Sector in the aftermath of the policy 
announced by the Hon 'ble Prime Minister in the First National Conference of SSI Sector on the 
301h August, 2000 . The Chairman proposed that the Committee should meet the representatives 
of Small Scale Industries Associations, NGOs and Officials of RBI,Banks/Financial Institutions 
and KVIC at Mumbai to take stock of the matter and the Committee may visit Mumbai from s•h 
to 1 J 111 October, 2000 as per the tentative tour programme. 
3. Shri A.C. Jose, Convenor, Sub-Committee-11 while welcoming the announcement made 
by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on the 30111 August, 2000, expressed displeasure over the fact that 
the Members of the Standing Committee on Industry were not invited to the function. He added 
that assuming if it was not possible to invite all the members at least the Members of the Sub­
Committee for Small Scale Industries should have been invited. Responding to Shri A.C. Jose, 
Chairman informed that the Minister had informed him that as it was not possible to 
accommodate all the Members, invitations were sent to Chairman and the two Convenors. He 
also assured Members present that he will convey the feelings of the Committee to the Minister. 
4. Thereafter, Members present expressed their views on the problems and issues 
confronting Small Scale Industries in the context of liberalisation and globalisation. Taking part 
in the discussion Shri A.C. Jose, Prof. M.M. Aggarwal ,Shri P.K. Maheshwari, Smt. Saroj Dubey, 
Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi, Shri P. Rajendran, Shri Jibon Roy, Dr. B.B. Ramaiah, Shri Ramdas 
Athawale, Shri Tarachand Sahu, Shri Manjay Lal, Shri Ram Singh Kaswan and Shri Nagmani 
highlighted the negative impact the liberalisation and globalisation processes is having on the 
Small Scale Sector as the import of cheaper goods from China and Korea is killing indigenous 
Small Scale Industries. The main concern of the Members for Small Scale Industries was as 
under:-
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv} 
(v) 
(vi} 
(vii) 
(viii} 
(ix) 
Import 
of cheaper goods from abroad; 
Lack of adequate and sufficient credit facilities to Small Scale Entrepreneurs; 
Reluctance on the part of banks for financing without collateral security; 
Problems caused by middlemen in getting loans from banks; 
Inadequate marketing facilities for products of Small Scale Industries; 
High rate of interest; 
Import of Palmoline causing damage to oil industry in India: 
Increase in unemployment due to closure of Small Scale Industries; and 
Lack of encouragement to women entrepreneurs in this sector etc. 
60 

5. Members were of the view that unless the Government undertakes adequate and 
immediate action for the protection and promotion of Small Scale Industries the negative impact 
of liberalisation and globalisation could be disastrous. 
6. The Chairman while associating himself with the concern expressed by the Members 
stated that the Government is equally concerned about the SSI Sector and that's why Hon'ble 
Prime Minister himself announced the enriched package for the SSI Sector. The Chairman 
assured the Members that the Committee will take up the issues of Small Scale Sector at 
appropriate level and will do everything possible from time to time within the parameters 
assigned to the Committee. Every efforts will be made to remove the problems of Small Scale 
Sector. The Chairman also requested the Members to collect information regarding Credit 
facilities by the Banking Sector to SSI units in their respective constituencies in order to have 
fruitful interaction with the Bank Officials at Mumbai during the proposed tour. 
7. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 P.M. on 4th 
October, 2000. 
61 

XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P .. M. on Wednesday, the 4'" October, 2000 in Room 
No. 63. First Floor, Parliament House. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah -Convenor- In the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3. Shri Jibon Roy 
4. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
5. Shri S. Sivasubramanian 
6. Dr. Faguni Ram 
7. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
8. Prof. M.M. Aggarwal 
LOKSABHA 
9. Shri Chunnilal Thakur 
I 0. Shri Ramanand Singh 
II. Shri G. Mallikarjunappa 
12. Shri Anant Nayak 
13. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
14. Shri A.C. Jose 
15. Shri Uttamarao Deorao Patil 
16. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
17. Shri Thomas Hansda 
18. Shri Ram Raghunath Chaudhary 
19. Shri Sunil Khan 
20. Shri M. Rajaiah 
21. Kunwar Sarv Raj Singh 
22. Shri Manjay Lal 
23. Shri An ant Mahadeoappa Gudhe 
24. Shri Ram Sajivan 
25. Shri K. Malaisamy 
26. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
27. Shri G.J. Javiya 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
62 

,., In the absence of Chairman, Dr. B.B. Ramaiah. M.P. Lok Sabha and Convenor 
of Sub-Committee-Ill for Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises presided 
over the meeting . 
3. At the outset the Convenor welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
thereafter commenced the agenda for the meeting. The Members present discussed the 
proposed tour programme to Mumbai from 8'" to II'" October, 2000. The Convenor 
requested the Members present to give the filled up journey Performa for making 
necessary arrangements by the Secretariat. 
4. Thereafter. the Convenor, directed the Secretariat to circulate to the 
Members the list of liaison officers and place of stay during the said visit. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 I'M 
63 

XXI 
TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday, the 18th December, 2000 in Committee 
Room 'A ' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faguni Ram 
3. Shri P .K. Maheshwari 
LOKSABHA 
4. Shri Anant Nayak 
5. Shri Ram Singh Kaswan 
6. Shri A.C. Jose 
7. Shri K.P. Singh Deo 
8. Shri Nepal Chandra Das 
9. Dr. B.B. Ramaiah 
10. Shri M. Rajaiah 
11. Shri Manjay Lal 
12. Shri Ram Sajivan 
13. Shri K. Malaisamy 
14. Shri Ramdas Athawale 
15. Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
16. Shri G.J. Javiya 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Tapas Das Gupta, Director 
Shri P.C. Paikray, Under Secretary 
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Committee Officer 
2. At outset the Chairman welcomed and briefed the Members of the Committee of the 
Agenda for the meeting. 
3. Thereafter, the 43rd Draft Report on Credit Flow to Small Scale Industries was taken up 
for consideration. Certain modification suggested by the Chairman and some Members were 
incorporated and the Report was unanimously adopted by the Committee. 
4. * * * 
4.1 The Committee authorised the Chairman to make necessary editorial changes in the 
two Reports, as considered appropriate and necessary. 
*** Relates to other matter. 
64 
'' II, 1o 

5. • • • 
6. • • • 
7. The Committee then decided to present/lay 43rd and 44th Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on Thursday, the 21st December, 2000 . For this, the Chairman nominated the 
following Members to present/lay the Reports as shown against their names:-
( 1) Nomination of Members for the presentation of Reports to the Rajya Sabha 
(i) The Chairman and in his absence Dr. Faguni Ram will present 43rd Report to 
the Rajya Sabha. 
(ii) The Chairman and in his absence Shri P.K. Maheshwari will present 44th Report 
to the Lok Sabha 
(2) Nomination of Members for the laying of Reports to the Lok Sabha 
8. 
(i) Shri A.C. JOSE and in his absence Shri M. Rajaiah will lay 43rd Report to the 
Lok Sabha 
(ii) Dr. B.B. Ramaiah, and his absence Shri Sunil Khan will lay 44th Report to the 
Lok Sabha. 
• • • • 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
* * * Relates to other matter. 
65 

1, II• llh •·If 

j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 
j 