STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
13 


THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT& 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.07.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 


CRD No. 204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 12 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
17 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
18 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
25 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 01.07.2025……………………………………... 
26 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj………………………………………………………….. 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Shri Vaiko 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Executive Officer 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 13th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj'. 
2.  The Third Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 15.03.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
01.07.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(2024-25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for 
Grants’ (2024-25) pertaining to Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
1.2 The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12th December 2024 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12th December 2024. The Report contained 09 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6 
 Total: 04 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8 & 9 
Total: 05 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for 
any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that Final Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
I.      Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
e-GramSwaraj 
1.6 With regard to e-GramSwaraj, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The committee is of the view that e-GramSwaraj application has been 
developed under e-panchayat Mission Mode Project (MMP) with an aim for 
tracking every expenditure incurred for each of the activities proposed under the 
Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). During the evidence, the Ministry 
apprised the Committee that two apps viz. Meri Panchayat Application and 
Panchayat NIRNAY, respectively, have already been launched. The Meri 
Panchayat Application app provides updates on demography, elected 
representatives, panchayat officials, funds received, income and expenditure, 
bank accounts and bank statements etc. Whereas the Panchayat NIRNAY is a 
user- friendly app to record meetings of Gram Sabha, scheduled meetings, 
uploading of meeting agenda, capture meeting photos and uploading, GPS 
location of venue etc. The Committee further note that so far more than 50 lakh 
downloads have been made from Meri Panchayat app. The committee feel that 
this is a useful app to obtain real time information on the various aspects of the 
functioning of PRIs, but at the same time the Committee are of the view that 
unless and until all villages have Panchayat Bhawans with internet facilities, the 
e-GramSwaraj application would not serve its purpose being implemented by the 
Government. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that Government 
should make adequate budgetary provisions for construction of Panchayat 
Bhawan in such villages with internet facilities working on ground with complete 
gadgets and adequate staff to run them.”  
II.      Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Shortage of Panchayat Bhawans and Computers 
1.7 Regarding Shortage of Panchayat Bhawans and Computers, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe the significant progress made in the construction of 
Panchayat Bhawans and equipping Gram Panchayats with computers, but the 
Committee also noted that out of a total of 2,68,938 Gram Panchayats (GPs) and 

3 
 
Traditional Local Bodies (TLBs), only 2,29,958 have Panchayat Bhawans, 
leaving a considerable gap. Additionally, while 2,13,140 Panchayats are 
equipped with computers, several States still lack sufficient digital infrastructure, 
which could hinder the implementation of e-Governance initiatives and real-time 
monitoring systems such as e-GramSwaraj. This variation impacts the overall 
efficiency and digital enablement of Panchayats. The Committee strongly 
recommend that MoPR should introduce targeted schemes and adequate 
financial assistance for lagging States to accelerate the construction of 
Panchayat Bhawans and digitalization projects.”  
1.8 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1. Panchayat being State subject, providing Panchayat infrastructure viz. Gram 
Panchayat Bhawan and procurement of computer is primarily the responsibility of 
States. However, under the revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), 
Ministry supplements the efforts of States/UTs with focus on NE States, by 
providing construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawan, co-location of Common 
Service Centre (CSC) and procurement of computer as proposed by States/UTs 
in their Annual Action Plan and approved by Central Empowered Committee 
(CEC) on a limited scale.  
2. Almost all the Panchayats have internet facility, being provided by BSNL and 
other private internet service providers, as all the Gram Panchayats have been 
using eGramSwaraj Portal for fund management and also for preparation of 
plans. Panchayats can utilize the XVFC grant or any other source of revenue 
available with them for payment for internet services. 
3. Further, it is important to highlight that the Ministry has already taken 
significant steps during the current financial year for improving infrastructure in 
GPs. To ensure that all GPs with a population of more than 3000 persons have a 
Gram Panchayat building, the Ministry has provided funds for construction of 
3301 Gram Panchayat Bhawan (GPB) along with CSC Co-location in Gram 
Panchayats. A total of 3,929 Gram Panchayat Bhawans and the procurement of 
15,454 computers have been approved, as proposed by the States/ UTs in their 
respective Annual Action Plans of RGSA. Also, procurement of 20164 computers 
has been approved for 7 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, 
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) to saturate the requirement of 
computers in the Gram Panchayat in these States and also approved 2000 
computers to the State of Bihar. In addition to above, the eGramSwaraj portal of 
this Ministry has been integrated with the BSNL portal to facilitate panchayats 
across the nation to apply for a new internet connection and payment of monthly 
bills.”  
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.9 The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply have stated that providing 
Panchayats infrastructure like Panchayats Bhawan and procurement of computers is 
primary responsibility of States/UTs. The Committee in their recommendations have 

4 
 
emphasized the need for accelerating construction of Panchayats Bhawans in every 
Gram Panchayats and equipped them with computers/internet facilities by making 
adequate budgetary provisions and also introducing targeted scheme and additional 
financial assistance for lagging States. The Committee are also seriously concerned 
about shortage of 38,980 Panchayats Bhawans and 55798 Computers in GPs in the 
country. The Ministry in its reply have stated that a total of 3929 GP Bhawans and the 
procurement of 15,454 computers have been approved. Further, the Ministry stated that 
20164 computers have also been approved for 7 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) and 2000 computers for Bihar to 
meet the requirement of computers in these States. However, the Committee note that 
the Ministry have not outlined any specific time bound roadmap for construction of 
Panchayat Bhawans and providing computers and internet facilities to all the GPs in the 
Country. The Committee opine that computers are pre-requisites even for using e-Gram 
Swaraj application launched by the Ministry and for uploading of Gram Panchayat 
Development Plans. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendations that the 
Ministry in coordination with States Governments/UTs should prepare a roadmap and 
take sincere and concrete steps for speedy construction of Panchayat Bhawans 
equipped with computers and internet facilities in all GPs in the country in a time bound 
manner. The progress of the said work may also be assessed from time to time and 
Committee be informed accordingly. The Committee also desire that the status of 
construction of 3929 GP Bhawans and 35618 computers already approved for 
procurement and installation be furnished to the Committee for information. Further, 
Government must chalk out concrete plan for providing Panchayat Bhawans and 
Computers in all Panchayats in a fixed time frame work so as to provide benefits to all 
residents living in rural areas. 

5 
 
III.      (Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Implementation of PESA Rules 
1.10 Regarding Implementation of PESA Rules, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that despite the enactment of the Panchayats 
Extension to the Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act in 1996, it has not been fully 
implemented in States like Jharkhand and Odisha. Meanwhile the Ministry has 
developed seven training manuals on the PESA subjects for the first time to 
support action-oriented capacity building but there are challenges in 
operationalizing these training manuals in other states. The Committee note that 
the Ministry has already conducted a series of trainings of State Level Master 
Trainers on each trainings manual and further 7 trainings have been conducted 
in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Telangana, but the seven PESA states of 
North-East have been left out. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should intensify its advocacy for implementation of these training 
modules to all PESA States with special focus on seven PESA States of North-
East so that the primary goal of ensuring guaranteed delivery of services directly 
to the doorsteps of rural people in a timely and effective manner.” 
1.11 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1. The Parliament enacted “The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996” (PESA), for applicability of provisions of Part-IX of 
the Constitution with certain exceptions and modifications to Fifth Schedule 
Areas as per article 243M (4) (b) of the Constitution. 
 
2. “Scheduled Areas”, mentioned in the PESA Act, are those areas which are 
referred to in clause (1) of Article 244, read with Fifth Schedule, of the 
Constitution of India. Article 244(1) of the Constitution makes special provisions 
for the administration of certain areas called “Scheduled Areas” in States other 
than Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.  
 
3. Para-6 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India provides that 
“Scheduled Areas” means such areas as the President may by order declare to 
be Scheduled Areas. 
 
4. As per data available with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the President has 
declared certain areas as “Scheduled Areas” which falls only in the 10 States viz. 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana. Further, the President 
has so far not declared any area in the North-Eastern States as “Scheduled 
Areas”, therefore, the PESA Act and the seven training modules are not 
applicable to any of the North-Eastern States.” 
 
 
  

6 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.12 With a view to ensure guaranteed delivery of services directly to the doorsteps of 
rural people in a timely and effective manner, the Committee had recommended to the 
Ministry to intensify its advocacy and implementation of training modules to all PESA 
states and with special focus on seven PESA states of North-East. However, the Ministry 
in its reply has stated that the PESA Act, 1996 is applicable only in “Schedule Areas” in 
10 States which is declared by the President of India under Para-6 of the 5th Schedule of 
the Constitution of India. The 10 States having “Schedules Areas” under the 5th Schedule 
of the Constitution are Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Telangana but in the 
two States of Jharkhand and Odisha the PESA Act, 1996 has not been fully implemented. 
Further, it has been stated that the President of India has so far not declared any area as 
“Scheduled Areas” in the North Eastern States and therefore the PESA Act and the seven 
training modules are not applicable in North-East States. Inspite of this stated position, 
the Committee noted that the Ministry did not state any information/plan/strategy in place 
to expedite the implementation of the training modules in all PESA States. The 
Committee, therefore reiterate its recommendation that the Ministry should intensify its 
advocacy for implementation of these training modules charting out a proper strategy 
and by organising extensive series of such trainings for State Level Master Trainers on 
each training manual on key PESA subjects for effective implementation of PESA Act, 
1996 in all “Scheduled Areas” of PESA States including Jharkhand and Odisha, where 
PESA Act is not fully implemented. The Committee would like to have a separate self- 
contained note explaining the reasons for not fully implementing the PESA Act in 
Jharkhand and Odisha States. The Ministry should also set achievable milestones to 
track the progress in this regard. 

7 
 
IV.     Non-utilization of Tied and Untied Grant  
(Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.13 With regard to non-utilization of tied and untied grant, the Committee had recommended 
as under: 
“The Committee observe there are substantial unspent balances under tied and 
untied grants in various States like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and 
Maharashtra despite large allocations. Non-utilization of allocated funds 
exacerbates these issues, hindering timely local development projects. States 
with weaker faulty planning systems face non-implementation and low fund 
absorption, reflected high unspent balances. The Committee raise concerns 
about the diversion of funds to non-priority areas, delay in disbursal of funds, lack 
of transparency, and inadequate planning that undermine the potential of untied 
grants to address local needs effectively. The Committee recommend 
streamlining the process for timely fund disbursal and expenditure plans should 
be aligned with local development priorities. A strong monitoring mechanism 
should be established to review plans before fund release. Further the 
Committee also recommend a comprehensive policy framework by the Ministry 
of Finance and Ministry of Panchayati Raj, with performance-linked incentives 
and penalties to promote efficient fund utilization wherein States demonstrating 
effective utilization should be rewarded with additional grants or flexible terms in 
future allocations.” 
1.14 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1. Panchayat as a state subject comes within the purview of State Government. 
However, various initiatives have been taken and various tools have been 
developed for adequately monitor the functioning of Gram Panchayat. 
Panchayats / Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) in the States are provided with financial 
devolution recommended by the Central Finance Commissions. Article 280 of the 
Constitution of India provides the basis for the Central Finance Commissions to 
assess the status of finances of the Union, States and their respective local 
bodies and recommend sharing of taxes as well as grants for various purposes to 
the States and Local Bodies. 
 
2. MoPR while recommending XV FC untied grants to the RLBs in a State follow 
the guidelines stipulated by Ministry of Finance (MoF) enumerated as under:  
1. RLBs shall be deemed to be eligible for the grants, if they are duly 
constituted i.e. if duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas 
where Part IX of the Constitution does not apply. In case, all the bodies 
are not duly constituted grants shall be released to the State on actual 
allocation / pro-rata basis for duly constituted only. 
2. Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs of the RLBs for FY under 
consideration, as the case may be in eGramSwaraj. 
3. RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC 
Grants’ transactions. 
4. All RLBs (100%) of RLB’s audit of annual accounts for year before 
previous year are completed on AuditOnline. 

8 
 
5. All RLBs (100%) of RLB’s provisional accounts for previous year are 
available in eGramSwaraj. 
6. Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more 
than 10 % of the installment under consideration. 
7. At least 50 % of the Untied grants released during the previous year have 
been utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
8. All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance 
Commission (SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the 
explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon before the State 
legislature on or before March 2024. After March 2024, no grants shall be 
released to State that has not complied with the Constitutional provisions 
in respect of the SFC and these conditions. 
3. Further, the following measures help in strengthening the functioning of 3-tier 
PRIs: 
(i) Timely Fund Disbursal: On receipt of the XV-FC recommended 
grants from the Union Government the State Governments are 
required to transfer the same to the panchayats/traditional bodies 
concerned within 10 working days. Any delay beyond 10 working 
days the State Government is required to release the grant with 
interest for the period of delay as per the average effective rate of 
interest on market borrowings/State Development Loans for the 
previous year. 
(ii) Expenditure Plans aligned with the local development priorities: 
The Untied grants will be utilized by RLBs for location-specific felt 
needs, under the twenty-nine subjects enshrined in the Eleventh 
Schedule of the Constitution, except for salaries and other 
establishment costs. The tied grants can be used for the basic 
services of (a) sanitation and maintenance of ODF status, and this 
should include management and treatment of household waste, 
and human excreta and fecal sludge management in particular 
and (b) supply of drinking water, rainwater harvesting and water 
recycling. 
(iii) Review of plan before release of funds: As per the MoF guidelines 
for release of grants under the FC-XV, MoPR ensures the 
mandatory condition uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs on e-
Gramswaraj for respective year for which grants is to be released 
by RLBs failing which the grant is released on pro-rata basis only 
to those RLBs which have uploaded the plans on e-Gramswaraj. 
e-Gramswaraj Portal facilitates States and Panchayati Raj 
Institutions effectively monitor and evaluate the use of Panchayat 
funds, including Central Finance Commission grants, the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj launched the eGramSwaraj application in 2020. 
This application enables monitoring of various aspects of 
Panchayat functioning, such as planning, budgeting, accounting 
and audit.  
The Planning module allows states to track how PRIs incorporate 
identified needs into their development plans, ensuring alignment 
with budget allocations. Subsequently, the Progress Reporting 
module facilitates the monitoring of physical and financial progress 

9 
 
related to activities funded by Untied Grants, while the accounting 
module enables detailed tracking of financial transactions and 
expenditure patterns.  
Ministry has also integrated eGramSwaraj with Public Financial 
Management System (PFMS)for Gram Panchayats (GPs) to make 
real-time payments to vendors/service providers. Further, an 
application ‘AuditOnline’ has been developed for online audits of 
Panchayat accounts and their financial management. AuditOnline, 
launched in April 2020, facilitates transparent auditing of Central 
Finance Commission funds utilization and strengthens financial 
management of Panchayats.  
(iv) Policy framework for performance linked incentive and penalty to 
promote efficient fund utilization: During the presentation made 
before XVI Finance Commission and Finance Commission 
conclave held in November 2024 under the chairmanship of 
Hon’ble Chairman, XVI FC, the CFC has been duly apprised 
about these issues. The CFC may consider and take a call on the 
same and recommend accordingly.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is the nodal Ministry for 
the financial devolution recommended by the Central Finance Commission to 
Panchayats/Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) in the States. As per the Action Taken Replies, 
Ministry follows the guidelines stipulated by the Ministry of Finance for releasing the 
grants to RLBs in the States. Further, the Ministry stated that it has integrated two online 
platform i.e. eGramswaraj with Public Financial Management System (PFMS) for Gram 
Panchayats to make real-time payments to vendors/service providers. Further an 
application ‘Audit online’ has been developed to facilitate transparent auditing of Central 
Finance Commission funds utilization and strengthen financial management of 
Panchayats. The Committee note that despite taking so many novel steps the desired 
results have not been actually achieved on the ground. Being the nodal Ministry for 
releasing grants of FFC to States, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj to rigorously follow-up the issue with the States on the inevitability of strict 
compliance of prerequisite condition for the release of funds. Moreover, Central and the 
State Governments should exert substantial pressure on the local Administration/ bodies 

10 
 
to prioritise the effective implementation of various programmes and achieve their 
targets leading to full utilisation of the available/allocated funds. 
V.      (Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Accountability for non-utilization of funds/non-keeping of financial records 
1.16 Regarding accountability for non-utilization of funds/non-keeping of financial records, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“Based on the data from the eGramSwaraj “Observation Count Report,” the 
committee observe that the critical lapses in grant management, non-utilization of 
funds, financial reporting and record-keeping across various States such as 
Gujarat (10,127 cases), Madhya Pradesh (4,215 cases), and Uttar Pradesh 
(4,995 cases) and Odisha (3097 cases) show alarmingly high instances of non-
utilization of grants, highlighting inefficiencies in fund deployment and diversion 
of tied and untied grants are particularly concerning in Chhattisgarh (6,156 
cases), Madhya Pradesh (1,902 cases), and Telangana (1,120 cases), indicating 
that funds earmarked for essential services such as water and sanitation are 
being used for unintended purposes. Further the Committee note that the non-
production of records by the various States like Madhya Pradesh (41,281 cases), 
Uttar Pradesh (19,732 cases), and Telangana (12,129 cases) undermines 
transparency and complicates audits. The Committee also note that the 
significant variations in account figures, as seen in Rajasthan (21,243 cases), 
Uttar Pradesh (13,210 cases), and Chhattisgarh (10,940 cases), Bihar (4747 
cases) and suggest deficiencies in financial reporting and training of panchayat-
level personnel. The committee recommend the MoPR take corrective measures 
in consultation with State Governments/UTs in order to utilize fund allocated 
under various scheme, enhancing accountability mechanisms, improving staff 
training, and leveraging technology for better fund tracking and management.” 
 
1.17 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
”Given the substantial amount of funds allocated to the 3-tier of Panchayats, 
system have been put in place to ensure robust mechanisms for monitoring of 
public expenditure. Accordingly audits of accounts of all the panchayats are 
mandated every year to ensure effective utilization of funds released to them. In 
this regard, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has rolled out an application called 
"AuditOnline" for carrying out online audits of Panchayat accounts of all the 3-
tiers of PRIs. This application strengthens financial management, accountability, 
and transparency in overall functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
Accordingly, audits have been completed for 84% of PRI accounts for the audit 
period 2020-21, 97% for 2021-22, 97% for 2022-23, and 80% for 2023-24 
(ongoing). Subsequent to completion of audits, these audit reports are generated 
online which are shared with local PRIs as well as State Governments for their 
compliance.  
 

11 
 
Further, in order to monitor compliance of these recorded audit observations, 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has introduced an Action Taken Report (ATR) Module 
in the AuditOnline, providing a more structured conclusion to online audit 
process. This module will also assist in tracking compliance effectively. The aim 
of such an ATR Module is to bring in better accountability through visibility on the 
actions taken by the Panchayats against the audit observations. The ATR 
module on Audit Observations will reinforce transparency and accountability at 
the grassroots level and will also ensure that public funds are utilized for their 
intended purpose.  
 
Further, in order to ensure that allocated funds are utilised under the various 
schemes for which they are meant, specialised trainings are being conducted 
under RGSA particularly relating to thematic subjects as well as financial 
management. Further Technology has been leveraged to a large extent through 
e-GramSwaraj portal which is a user-friendly web-based portal and aims to bring 
in transparency in decentralized planning, progress reporting and work-based 
accounting. The mobile applications namely ‘Panchayat Nirnay’ and ‘Meri 
Panchayat’ further help in streamlining activities of the panchayat as well as in 
improving visibility of activities and funds available with panchayats to ensure 
transparency for fund tracking and management. 
 
All the above initiatives have substantially improved utilisation of fund, accounts 
keeping & financial management, proper and timely closing of Panchayat 
accounts, submission of utilisation certificate, Auditing of all the expenses 
incurred by them, thematic planning & monitoring etc. “ 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj have launched an 
application “Audit Online” for carrying out online audits of Panchayats accounts of all 
the 3-tier of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and it is compulsory every year to ensure 
effective utilization of funds released to them. In this regard, the Committee note that 
despite high audit percentages only 97% of audits were completed for 2021-22 and 2022-
23 and the audit of 2023-24 (80%) is still ongoing. This delay in auditing process allows 
room for unmonitored fund utilization and financial mismanagement in unaudited 
Panchayats. As the auditing is essential for financial accuracy, transparency and 
compliance, therefore, the Committee urge the MoPR to devise a proper machinery to 
ensure timely completion of audit process fully and also develop a dashboard based real 
time monitoring systems to track ATR submissions and the status of each audit 
observations.  

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1  It has been observed from the data provided for Budget Estimates/Revised Estimates for 
last three years (2021-24) that the Ministry has consistently utilized approximately 100% of 
Revised Estimates (RE) during the last three years whereas the unspent balances and delays in 
fund release by States have inhibited timely implementation of activities. During the Current 
Financial year 2024-25 only ₹402.64 Crore (on 30.09.2024) had been utilized from the allocated 
₹916.50 Crore under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) due to delays caused by General 
Elections and State-level issues. The Ministry is confident of utilizing the balance funds well 
before the end of the current Financial Year. The Committee hope that Ministry will utilise the 
available fund fully as done in the past three years. The Committee, recommend that the 
Ministry should adopt a stringent timeline for release of funds and utilization and thereby 
ensuring that States comply with mandatory prerequisites like releasing matching shares and 
submitting utilization certificates on time. The Committee, further recommend that fund 
utilization should be closely monitored through tools like e-Gram Swaraj and expedite utilisation 
of funds within the same financial year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 “1. Ministry has already utilized Rs. 605 crore under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA) as against an RE of Rs. 674 crore as on 28.02.2025 which comes to 88.8%. The 
remaining unspent balance will also be fully utilized by the end of this Financial Year. Ministry is 
making all efforts through stringent timelines for release and utilization of funds under RGSA 
through following interventions:  
1. Monitoring of release and expenditure under RGSA on daily basis based on the reports 
generated from PFMS. 
2. Monthly meeting through virtual mode by senior officers to review the expenditure and 
progress under different components of the scheme.  
3. Analysis of Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) submitted by the States/UTs and 
writing to the States/UTs based on the findings for specific interventions of the competent 
authority.  
4. Follow-up with the States/UTs for compliance of orders issued by Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for release of funds under Centrally Sponsored Scheme. 
5. Regular communication with the States for releasing their matching State share, 
liquidate unspent balances and submit the requisite documents viz. UCs etc. for timely 
release of funds. 

13 
 
6. Physical and financial progress is reviewed by Central Empowered Committee of the 
scheme before approval of Annual Action Plan of next financial year. 
 
2. Further, it is mandatory to release funds through Public Finance Management System 
(PFMS) till last level of Executing Agency to track the status of expenditure done by States/ 
UTs.” 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.3 The Committee observe that drone surveys for property demarcation under the 
SVAMITVA scheme have progressed, but achieving full coverage by the 2025 target may face 
delays and approximately 30,000 villages across the States/UTs are yet to be surveyed. As of 
July 2024, ₹20.00 Crore out of the ₹70 crore allocated had been utilized, reflecting slower than 
anticipated progress. The Committee recommend that the Ministry accelerate drone surveys 
and issuance of property cards by providing targeted technical and logistic support to lagging 
States. Moreover, comprehensive timeline/milestones should be fixed and published State-wise 
with the consultation of respective State Government along with its progress monitored regularly 
to ensure timely completion. The Committee feel that pace of implementation of SVAMITVA is 
very slow and also funds provided by the Government are not sufficient. Committee also 
observe that in rural areas there are so many complications on the title of the property due to 
joint/undivided families and common/community land ownership by the tribal society. As the 
legal action is a State subject. These issues need due thought by the Government to resolve 
them in a systematic and within the legal framework. For the purpose they need to deploy 
adequately trained, technically and legally qualified persons, adequate funds for implementation 
of the same. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made by the Government in 
this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 “1. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has set targets for the successful implementation 
of the SVAMITVA (Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village 
Areas) Scheme. As per the timeline, States and Union Territories (UTs) are expected to 
complete the drone survey by March 2025 and the preparation of property cards for the rural 
Abadi areas by March 2026. The SVAMITVA scheme aims to provide legal ownership of 
property to rural inhabited areas, particularly in villages, through precise mapping and the 
issuance of property cards.  
 
2.  The SVAMITVA Scheme has made significant progress nationwide, with drone surveys 
completed in nearly 3.18 lakh villages against 3.46 lakh villages which comes to 91%. Also 2.38 
crores property cards have been issued in nearly 1.59 lakh villages. The State-wise progress is 

14 
 
at Annexure-I. Work in the remaining villages are in progress and will be completed by the end 
of FY 2025-26. 
 
3. Weekly review meetings are being conducted with the states, Union Territories, and the 
Survey of India, to monitor progress against the targets and ensuring that any challenges are 
identified and addressed promptly. This proactive approach ensures that the scheme’s 
implementation stays on track and any bottlenecks are resolved in a timely manner. The 
Ministry has also placed special emphasis on areas that are traditionally more challenging in 
terms of implementation, such as the 6th Scheduled areas in states like Mizoram. These 
regions have shown little progress in the SVAMITVA scheme due to unique challenges such as 
land ownership laws and customary practices. The Ministry is engaging with 6th Scheduled 
areas in Mizoram namely, Lai, Chakma and Mara ADC offering handholding support to 
overcome these challenges and facilitate the smooth rollout of the scheme.  
 
4.  A significant milestone in the implementation of the SVAMITVA scheme was achieved 
by the national event organized on January 18, 2025, when the Hon’ble Prime Minister e-
distributed 65 lakh property cards in 50,000 villages across the country. This event was a pivotal 
moment in the scheme, reflecting the scale and success of the initiative. The virtual event was 
attended by dignitaries from across the country and showcased the widespread impact of the 
SVAMITVA scheme in providing property cards to rural households.  
 
5.  In addition to the property card distribution, the Ministry has been actively involved in 
building the capacity of local governments to implement the scheme. In over 33,000 Gram 
Panchayats, various stakeholders have been sensitized, oriented and trained about the benefits 
of the SVAMITVA scheme, ensuring that local leaders are well-equipped to support the initiative 
and guide the rural population through the process. Through these capacity-building efforts, the 
Ministry is not only advancing the implementation of the scheme but also fostering greater 
awareness and ownership at the grassroots level.  
 
6.  Ministry has sufficient budget allocation for completion of the scheme. The EFC has 
approved Rs. 566.23 crores for the Scheme. The total expenditure will remain within the 
approved Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) limit of Rs. 566.23 crores. The BE 2025-26 of 
Rs. 70 crore for the SVAMITVA scheme is within this limit. The Ministry does not require any 
further funds beyond this amount. 
 7.  The following tables outline the component-wise and year-wise allocation and 
expenditure of funds under the scheme: - 
 
EFC Approved Component-Wise Budget Allocation and Expenditure 
(in Rs. crores) 
Component EFC Approved Actual Expenditure 
as on 31.12.2024 
CORS 136.08 116.54 
LSM 346.03 249.53 
IEC and SPMU 40.40 6.76 
NICSI 40.22 30.23 
Workshop 3.50 0.33 
Total 566.23 403.39 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
  

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that Panchayats from 14 States/UTs were awarded by National 
Panchayat Awards in 2023, highlighting geographical diversity. However, low-performing 
Panchayats were identified, and their challenges shared with States/UTs, alongside suggested 
interventions like planning and thematic training. The Committee recommend that the MoPR 
should collaborate with States/UTs and prioritize targeted capacity-building initiatives for low-
performing Panchayats provide tailored support, including resources for planning and thematic 
training of elected representatives. Moreover, Ministry should vigorously monitor the progress of 
above efforts so that more Panchayats should be awarded by National Panchayat Awards in 
future.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 “1.  Under RGSA, States have been conducting training programme for elected 
representatives and PRI officials for development of GPDP. Further in order to provide capacity 
building for low performing panchayats a Special Model Cluster Gram Panchayat Development 
programme has been taken up to support weak Gram Panchayats for their effective functioning. 
In addition, in order to track the progress under various SDG themes special survey through 
Panchayat Advancement Index (PAI) is done every year.  
2.  A number of thematic trainings have been designed for training PRIs. A special training 
programme for women elected representatives have been launched on 8thMarch, 2025 to build 
leadership skills in them. 
3.  Subsequent to the recently concluded National Panchayat Awards 2024, Ministry has 
shared the performance status with States and advised them for (i) effective awareness on 
Awards among Panchayats through regular workshops and training, (ii) regular performance 
monitoring of Panchayats on key performance indicators relevant to awards, (iii) sharing 
success stories of award-winning Panchayats to inspire other Panchayats to work and apply for 
awards and (iv) create a dedicated support team from existing resources at State level to guide 
and support Panchayats in preparing their entries for the awards.”  
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
2.7 The Committee appreciate that approximately 40 lakh Elected Representatives, 
Panchayat Functionaries and other stakeholders have been imparted training on Capacity 
Building & Training (CB&T) of Panchayati Raj Institutions in FY 2023-24. However, the 
Committee feel that the training programs need to address gaps in thematic areas like digital 
literacy, local planning for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and development of sector- 
specific expertise. The Ministry has also highlighted challenges in creating awareness about 
SDG localization among PRIs. The Capacity Building and Training of PRIs being one of the 
major activities of Revamped RGSA Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should take appropriate steps to prioritize diversified capacity-building programs with special 

16 
 
emphasis on SDG- linked thematic training. The Committee further desire that innovative 
methods like virtual training modules and exposure visits should be resorted to more vigorously 
so as to ensure uniform and wider outreach across all Panchayats.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 “1.  The scheme of Revamped RGSA is being implemented for strengthening of 
Panchayats, which endeavours for graduated capacity building of Elected Representatives 
(ERs), Panchayat Functionaries and other stakeholders. As a fresh approach to capacity 
building of Panchayats, leveraging of technology for greater outreach amongst the elected 
representatives of Panchayats by distant mode through IP based technology, utilizing short films 
on best practices for wide reach, training on 9 themes viz. Poverty Free and Enhanced 
Livelihoods in Panchayats, Healthy Panchayat, Child-Friendly Panchayat, Water Sufficient 
Panchayat, Clean & Green Panchayat, Self-Panchayat with Sufficient Infrastructure; Socially 
Just and Socially Secured Panchayat, Panchayat with Good Governance; and Women Friendly 
Panchayat are being promoted. 
 
2.  The scheme mandates the orientation training of newly elected PRI Representatives 
(ERs) within six months of their election, followed by refresher courses within two years. 
Further, the scheme also supports for exposure visit within and outside the State for cross State 
learning, partnership and networking with Institutions of Excellence/ Universities/ Colleges, for 
preparation of quality training modules and developing pool of Master Trainers for PRIs from 
academics/faculties etc.  
3.  Ministry has recently launched a unique training programme, designed to provide 
capacity building for elected women representatives. All the 14 lakh women PRIs are going to 
be trained through a 03 days training module. Special primer has been developed for training 
PRI members on ‘gender-based violence’ with the help of UNFPA. 
4.  Ministry has taken initiatives to strengthen the training of Panchayat elected members 
and has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indian Institute of Management – 
Ahmedabad (IIM-A), IIM- Bodh Gaya, IIM-Jammu, IIM- Amritsar, IIM- Rohtak, IIM-Shillong, 
Institute of Rural Management –Anand (IRMA) and IIT Dhanbad for conducting Leadership/ 
Management Development Program (MDP). Under the scheme of RGSA, the States/UTs can 
also sign MoU with the Institutes of Excellence (IoE) in their own States or nearby States to 
develop such kind of programmes for the Capacity Building & Training of Elected 
Representatives and Functionaries of Panchayat.” 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
 
  
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.1 The committee is of the view that e-GramSwaraj application has been developed under 
e-panchayat Mission Mode Project (MMP) with an aim for tracking every expenditure incurred 
for each of the activities proposed under the Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). 
During the evidence, the Ministry apprised the Committee that two apps viz. Meri Panchayat 
Application and Panchayat NIRNAY, respectively, have already been launched. The Meri 
Panchayat Application app provides updates on demography, elected representatives, 
panchayat officials, funds received, income and expenditure, bank accounts and bank 
statements etc. Whereas the Panchayat NIRNAY is a user-friendly app to record meetings of 
Gram Sabha, scheduled meetings, uploading of meeting agenda, capture meeting photos and 
uploading, GPS location of venue etc. The Committee further note that so far more than 50 lakh 
downloads have been made from Meri Panchayat app. The committee feel that this is a useful 
app to obtain real time information on the various aspects of the functioning of PRIs, but at the 
same time the Committee are of the view that unless and until all villages have Panchayat 
Bhawans with internet facilities, the e-GramSwaraj application would not serve its purpose being 
implemented by the Government. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that 
Government should make adequate budgetary provisions for construction of Panchayat Bhawan 
in such villages with internet facilities working on ground with complete gadgets and adequate 
staff to run them.”  
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.2 The Committee observe the significant progress made in the construction of Panchayat 
Bhawans and equipping Gram Panchayats with computers, but the Committee also noted that 
out of a total of 2,68,938 Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Traditional Local Bodies (TLBs), only 
2,29,958 have Panchayat Bhawans, leaving a considerable gap. Additionally, while 2,13,140 
Panchayats are equipped with computers, several States still lack sufficient digital infrastructure, 
which could hinder the implementation of e-Governance initiatives and real-time monitoring 
systems such as e-GramSwaraj. This variation impacts the overall efficiency and digital 
enablement of Panchayats. The Committee strongly recommend that MoPR should introduce 
targeted schemes and adequate financial assistance for lagging States to accelerate the 
construction of Panchayat Bhawans and digitalization projects.”  

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.3 “1. Panchayat being State subject, providing Panchayat infrastructure viz. Gram 
Panchayat Bhawan and procurement of computer is primarily the responsibility of States. 
However, under the revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), Ministry supplements 
the efforts of States/UTs with focus on NE States, by providing construction of Gram Panchayat 
Bhawan, co-location of Common Service Centre (CSC) and procurement of computer as 
proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action Plan and approved by Central Empowered 
Committee (CEC) on a limited scale.  
2. Almost all the Panchayats have internet facility, being provided by BSNL and other private 
internet service providers, as all the Gram Panchayats have been using e-GramSwaraj Portal 
for fund management and also for preparation of plans. Panchayats can utilize the XVFC grant 
or any other source of revenue available with them for payment for internet services. 
3. Further, it is important to highlight that the Ministry has already taken significant steps during 
the current financial year for improving infrastructure in GPs. To ensure that all GPs with a 
population of more than 3000 persons have a Gram Panchayat building, the Ministry has 
provided funds for construction of 3301 Gram Panchayat Bhawan (GPB) along with CSC Co-
location in Gram Panchayats. A total of 3,929 Gram Panchayat Bhawans and the procurement 
of 15,454 computers have been approved, as proposed by the States/ UTs in their respective 
Annual Action Plans of RGSA. Also, procurement of 20164 computers has been approved for 7 
States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) 
to saturate the requirement of computers in the Gram Panchayat in these States and also 
approved 2000 computers to the State of Bihar. In addition to above, the e-GramSwaraj portal 
of this Ministry has been integrated with the BSNL portal to facilitate panchayats across the 
nation to apply for a new internet connection and payment of monthly bills.”  
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.4 The Committee observe that despite the enactment of the Panchayats Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act in 1996, it has not been fully implemented in States like 
Jharkhand and Odisha. Meanwhile the Ministry has developed seven training manuals on the 
PESA subjects for the first time to support action-oriented capacity building but there are 
challenges in operationalizing these training manuals in other states. The Committee note that 
the Ministry has already conducted a series of trainings of State Level Master Trainers on each 
trainings manual and further 7 trainings have been conducted in the states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Telangana, but 
the seven PESA states of North-East have been left out. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should intensify its advocacy for implementation of these training modules to all 

20 
 
PESA States with special focus on seven PESA States of North-East so that the primary goal of 
ensuring guaranteed delivery of services directly to the doorsteps of rural people in a timely and 
effective manner. 
Reply of the Government 
4.5 “1. The Parliament enacted “The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the 
Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996” (PESA), for applicability of provisions of Part-IX of the Constitution 
with certain exceptions and modifications to Fifth Schedule Areas as per article 243M (4) (b) of 
the Constitution. 
 
2. “Scheduled Areas”, mentioned in the PESA Act, are those areas which are referred to in 
clause (1) of Article 244, read with Fifth Schedule, of the Constitution of India. Article 244(1) of 
the Constitution makes special provisions for the administration of certain areas called 
“Scheduled Areas” in States other than Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.  
 
3. Para-6 of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India provides that “Scheduled Areas” 
means such areas as the President may by order declare to be Scheduled Areas. 
 
4. As per data available with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, the President has declared certain 
areas as “Scheduled Areas” which falls only in the 10 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and 
Telangana. Further, the President has so far not declared any area in the North-Eastern States 
as “Scheduled Areas”, therefore, the PESA Act and the seven training modules are not 
applicable to any of the North-Eastern States.” 
 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.6 The Committee observe there are substantial unspent balances under tied and untied 
grants in various States like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra despite large 
allocations. Non-utilization of allocated funds exacerbates these issues, hindering timely local 
development projects. States with weaker faulty planning systems face non-implementation and 
low fund absorption, reflected high unspent balances. The Committee raise concerns about the 
diversion of funds to non-priority areas, delay in disbursal of funds, lack of transparency, and 
inadequate planning that undermine the potential of untied grants to address local needs 
effectively. The Committee recommend streamlining the process for timely fund disbursal and 
expenditure plans should be aligned with local development priorities. A strong monitoring 
mechanism should be established to review plans before fund release. Further the Committee 
also recommend a comprehensive policy framework by the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 

21 
 
Panchayati Raj, with performance-linked incentives and penalties to promote efficient fund 
utilization wherein States demonstrating effective utilization should be rewarded with additional 
grants or flexible terms in future allocations.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.7 “1. Panchayat as a state subject comes within the purview of State Government. 
However, various initiatives have been taken and various tools have been developed for 
adequately monitor the functioning of Gram Panchayat. Panchayats / Rural Local Bodies 
(RLBs) in the States are provided with financial devolution recommended by the Central 
Finance Commissions. Article 280 of the Constitution of India provides the basis for the Central 
Finance Commissions to assess the status of finances of the Union, States and their respective 
local bodies and recommend sharing of taxes as well as grants for various purposes to the 
States and Local Bodies. 
 
2. MoPR while recommending XV FC untied grants to the RLBs in a State follow the guidelines 
stipulated by Ministry of Finance (MoF) enumerated as under: 
  
1. RLBs shall be deemed to be eligible for the grants, if they are duly constituted i.e. if 
duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas where Part IX of the 
Constitution does not apply. In case, all the bodies are not duly constituted grants 
shall be released to the State on actual allocation / pro-rata basis for duly 
constituted only. 
2. Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs of the RLBs for FY under consideration, as 
the case may be in eGramSwaraj. 
3. RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC Grants’ 
transactions. 
4. All RLBs (100%) of RLB’s audit of annual accounts for year before previous year are 
completed on AuditOnline. 
5. All RLBs (100%) of RLB’s provisional accounts for previous year are available in 
eGramSwaraj. 
6. Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more than 10 % of 
the installment under consideration. 
7. At least 50 % of the Untied grants released during the previous year have been 
utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
8. All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance Commission 
(SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the explanatory memorandum as to 
the action taken thereon before the State legislature on or before March 2024. After 
March 2024, no grants shall be released to State that has not complied with the 
Constitutional provisions in respect of the SFC and these conditions. 
3. Further, the following measures help in strengthening the functioning of 3-tier PRIs: 
(i) Timely Fund Disbursal: On receipt of the XV-FC recommended grants from the 
Union Government the State Governments are required to transfer the same to the 
panchayats/traditional bodies concerned within 10 working days. Any delay beyond 
10 working days the State Government is required to release the grant with interest 
for the period of delay as per the average effective rate of interest on market 
borrowings/State Development Loans for the previous year. 
(ii) Expenditure Plans aligned with the local development priorities: The Untied grants 

22 
 
will be utilized by RLBs for location-specific felt needs, under the twenty-nine 
subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution, except for salaries 
and other establishment costs. The tied grants can be used for the basic services of 
(a) sanitation and maintenance of ODF status, and this should include management 
and treatment of household waste, and human excreta and fecal sludge 
management in particular and (b) supply of drinking water, rainwater harvesting and 
water recycling. 
(iii) Review of plan before release of funds: As per the MoF guidelines for release of 
grants under the FC-XV, MoPR ensures the mandatory condition uploading of 
GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs on e-Gramswaraj for respective year for which grants is to 
be released by RLBs failing which the grant is released on pro-rata basis only to 
those RLBs which have uploaded the plans on e-Gramswaraj. e-Gramswaraj Portal 
facilitates States and Panchayati Raj Institutions effectively monitor and evaluate the 
use of Panchayat funds, including Central Finance Commission grants, the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj launched the eGramSwaraj application in 2020. This application 
enables monitoring of various aspects of Panchayat functioning, such as planning, 
budgeting, accounting and audit.  
The Planning module allows states to track how PRIs incorporate identified needs 
into their development plans, ensuring alignment with budget allocations. 
Subsequently, the Progress Reporting module facilitates the monitoring of physical 
and financial progress related to activities funded by Untied Grants, while the 
accounting module enables detailed tracking of financial transactions and 
expenditure patterns.  
Ministry has also integrated eGramSwaraj with Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS)for Gram Panchayats (GPs) to make real-time payments to 
vendors/service providers. Further, an application ‘AuditOnline’ has been developed 
for online audits of Panchayat accounts and their financial management. 
AuditOnline, launched in April 2020, facilitates transparent auditing of Central 
Finance Commission funds utilization and strengthens financial management of 
Panchayats.  
(iv) Policy framework for performance linked incentive and penalty to promote efficient 
fund utilization: During the presentation made before XVI Finance Commission and 
Finance Commission conclave held in November 2024 under the chairmanship of 
Hon’ble Chairman, XVI FC, the CFC has been duly apprised about these issues. 
The CFC may consider and take a call on the same and recommend accordingly. 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
(Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.8 Based on the data from the e-GramSwaraj “Observation Count Report,” the committee 
observe that the critical lapses in grant management, non-utilization of funds, financial reporting 
and record-keeping across various States such as Gujarat (10,127 cases), Madhya Pradesh 
(4,215 cases), and Uttar Pradesh (4,995 cases) and Odisha (3097 cases) show alarmingly high 

23 
 
instances of non-utilization of grants, highlighting inefficiencies in fund deployment and diversion 
of tied and untied grants are particularly concerning in Chhattisgarh (6,156 cases), Madhya 
Pradesh (1,902 cases), and Telangana (1,120 cases), indicating that funds earmarked for 
essential services such as water and sanitation are being used for unintended purposes. 
Further the Committee note that the non-production of records by the various States like 
Madhya Pradesh (41,281 cases), Uttar Pradesh (19,732 cases), and Telangana (12,129 cases) 
undermines transparency and complicates audits. The Committee also note that the significant 
variations in account figures, as seen in Rajasthan (21,243 cases), Uttar Pradesh (13,210 
cases), and Chhattisgarh (10,940 cases), Bihar (4747 cases) and suggest deficiencies in 
financial reporting and training of panchayat-level personnel. The committee recommend the 
MoPR take corrective measures in consultation with State Governments/UTs in order to utilize 
fund allocated under various scheme, enhancing accountability mechanisms, improving staff 
training, and leveraging technology for better fund tracking and management.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.9 Given the substantial amount of funds allocated to the 3-tier of Panchayats, system have 
been put in place to ensure robust mechanisms for monitoring of public expenditure. 
Accordingly audits of accounts of all the panchayats are mandated every year to ensure 
effective utilization of funds released to them. In this regard, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
rolled out an application called "AuditOnline" for carrying out online audits of Panchayat 
accounts of all the 3-tiers of PRIs. This application strengthens financial management, 
accountability, and transparency in overall functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions. 
Accordingly, audits have been completed for 84% of PRI accounts for the audit period 2020-21, 
97% for 2021-22, 97% for 2022-23, and 80% for 2023-24 (ongoing). Subsequent to completion 
of audits, these audit reports are generated online which are shared with local PRIs as well as 
State Governments for their compliance.  
 
Further, in order to monitor compliance of these recorded audit observations, Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj has introduced an Action Taken Report (ATR) Module in the AuditOnline, 
providing a more structured conclusion to online audit process. This module will also assist in 
tracking compliance effectively. The aim of such an ATR Module is to bring in better 
accountability through visibility on the actions taken by the Panchayats against the audit 
observations. The ATR module on Audit Observations will reinforce transparency and 
accountability at the grassroots level and will also ensure that public funds are utilized for their 
intended purpose.  
 
Further, in order to ensure that allocated funds are utilised under the various schemes for which 
they are meant, specialised trainings are being conducted under RGSA particularly relating to 
thematic subjects as well as financial management. Further Technology has been leveraged to 
a large extent through e-GramSwaraj portal which is a user-friendly web-based portal and aims 
to bring in transparency in decentralized planning, progress reporting and work-based 
accounting. The mobile applications namely ‘Panchayat Nirnay’ and ‘Meri Panchayat’ further 
help in streamlining activities of the panchayat as well as in improving visibility of activities and 
funds available with panchayats to ensure transparency for fund tracking and management. 

24 
 
 
All the above initiatives have substantially improved utilisation of fund, accounts keeping & 
financial management, proper and timely closing of Panchayat accounts, submission of 
utilisation certificate, Auditing of all the expenses incurred by them, thematic planning & 
monitoring etc. 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11024/1/2025-Parl. Dated: 15th March, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

26 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 1st JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1150 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri K. Radhakrishnan  
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha       
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
1. At the outset, after introductory speech of the Chairperson, the Committee considered 
and adopted the following two Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2024-25):  
i. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
ii. Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 3rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
2. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 

27 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 [Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  09  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6 
 
 
 
Total: 04 
Percentage: 44% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8 & 9 
 
 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 56% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 