STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
14 


FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT& 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.07.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 


CRD No. 205 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 20 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
25 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
26 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
35 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of Minutes of the Thirty-First Sitting of the Committee 
held on 24.07.2025……………………………………………………... 
36 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI 
RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. ---Vacant--- 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Executive Officer 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (2024-
2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 14th 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
2.  The Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 11.06.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
24.07.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2025 
3 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (2024-25) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
their Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants’ (2025-26) pertaining to Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj'. 
1.2 The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12th March 2025 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 12th March 2025. The Report contained 11 Observations/ Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 6, 7, 9 & 11 
 Total: 05 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 & 10 
Total: 06 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 
 
  

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of the 
recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for any reasons 
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Effective Implementation and Monitoring of PESA ACT, 1996 
1.6 In respect of Effective Implementation and Monitoring of PESA Act, 1996, the Committee had 
recommended as under 
“The Panchayat Extension to the Scheduled Area (PESA) Act, 1996 was enacted to empower 
tribal communities. However, the Committee observed that despite the efforts of the Ministry the 
PESA Act, 1996 has not been implemented effectively in the country. The Ministry has taken 
various steps like developing and launching seven training manuals on key PESA subjects and 
conducted seven training sessions for State Level Master Trainers (SLMTs) across the country. 
To institutionalize the efforts to implement multi-pronged strategy to realize the objective of 
PESA, the Ministry has also decided to form Center of Excellence (CoE) in Central Universities. 
In this regard it has been informed to the Committee that the Ministry has approved the 
establishment of CoE for PESA in Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, 
Madhya Pradesh. The Committee note these efforts made by the Ministry for the 
implementation of PESA in the Fifth Schedule Areas (FSA). The Committee feel that we are still 
a long way from achieving the objectives of the Act despite its enactment nearly two decades 
ago. There is still lack of public awareness about the provisions of the PESA Act, 1996 and 
sensitization of tribal communities about their rights. To address these issues the Committee 
are of the view that the Ministry should give more focus on action-oriented capacity building, 
organize more workshops and conferences and urge the concerned States to conduct training 
at the district level to train Gram Panchayat Pradhan and Secretaries on the important subject 
Laws/functions/powers endowed to Gram Sabha. Besides this a robust monitoring framework 
should be established to ensure that State Governments implement the PESA provisions in 
letter and spirit to empower the tribal communities with their rights and to preserve their culture 
heritage.“ 
 
1.7 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
 
“Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part of State List of Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up and operate through the respective 
State Panchayati Raj Acts which may vary from State to State, subject to the provisions of the 

 
 
3 
 
Constitution. Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats fall within the purview of State 
Government. 
  
However, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has taken continuous steps for the effective 
implementation of the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 
1996 (PESA). The important steps taken by Ministry for monitoring and implementation of 
PESA Act are as under: 
  
 Implementation status of PESA in the States: 
  
1. Nine PESA states, except Rajasthan, have incorporated the provisions of PESA 1996 in their 
respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. The tenth State, Rajasthan, has notified “The Rajasthan 
Panchayat Raj (Modification of Provisions in their Application to the Scheduled Areas) Act 
1999.”  
  
At present, eight PESA states namely Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Telangana have framed their PESA 
Rules and two states namely Orissa and Jharkhand have framed their draft PESA Rules. 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been regularly following up with these two States to finalize their 
PESA Rules. 
  
  
2. The Ministry is continuously requesting all PESA States to ensure compliance of ‘key subject 
laws’ with PESA Act. In this regard, the Ministry has also requested all PESA States to furnish 
the updated status in respect of each of the ‘PESA key subject laws’ to the Ministry.  
  
3. The Ministry has also established PESA Cell in order to adequately address issues to 
oversee training, implementation of PESA, PESA dashboard management and policy aspects 
relating to PESA and Article 243 of the Constitution etc. 
  
4. The Ministry has upgraded Planning Module of eGramSwaraj portal for integration of (Gram 
Panchayat Development Plans) GPDPs of Panchayats falling under PESA Areas. This is to 
ensure inclusion of developmental needs of all villages/hamlets falling within the Gram 
Panchayat in PESA areas. The village/hamlet wise plans, duly approved respectively by their 
Gram Sabhas, can be aggregated into integrated GPDP and thereby reflecting developmental 
plans of all hamlets/Village in a particular GP. 
Besides the 9 themes of Localized Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs) into which 
planning process takes place, the subject wise additional activities specific to PESA such as 
Strengthening of PESA Gram Sabha, Customary Dispute Resolution, Prevention of Land 
Alienation, Enforcement of Prohibition and Intoxicant, Sale Management of Minor Forest 
Produce, Minor Minerals and Control over Money Lending, will also be part of GPDP for PESA 
area Gram Panchayats.  
The important issue in hamlet/village wise planning will be the hamlet/village wise resource 
allocation in PESA GPs, which will comprise of funds received under Central Finance 
Commission, State Finance Commission grants, resource envelope under Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes and State schemes entrusted to Panchayats, voluntary contributions, income of Gram 
Sabha from management of Minor Forest Produce (MFPs) and village markets, tribal sub-plan, 
own Source of revenue, etc. The availability of financial resources are to be computed for each 
village/ hamlet wise Gram Sabha and further calibrated for the PESA gram panchayat.  

 
 
4 
 
  
5. Other recent Initiatives of MoPR: 
  
(i) Regional Conferences on PESA 
  
This Ministry has organised two Regional Conferences on PESA on 11th and 12th January, 
2024 at Pune, Maharashtra and on 4th and 5th March 2024 at Ranchi, Jharkhand with a view to 
assess the progress made by the States in implementing the PESA Act and to develop a 
common vision on its impact at the grassroots level. It has emerged from these two recent 
Regional Conferences that a training manual on each key PESA Subject is pre-requisite to 
implement PESA Act in letter and spirit. In response to the identified need for action-oriented 
capacity building, the Ministry did constitute seven Committees of Officers to focus on key 
PESA subjects. Further, the Ministry has prepared, in collaboration of PESA States & Civil 
Society Organisations, seven training manuals on key PESA subjects - Strengthening of Gram 
Sabha; Minor Forest Produce; Minor Minerals; Customary Mode of Dispute Resolution; Control 
over Money Lending; Enforcement of Prohibition & Regulating/Restricting the Sales & 
Consumption of Intoxicants; and Prevention of Alienation of Land. 
  
(ii) National Conference on PESA 
  
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has organized a ‘National Conference on PESA Act’ on 26th 
September, 2024 at New Delhi which saw the active participation of Minister of State for 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministers of Departments of Panchayat and Rural Development for 
Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, and Himachal Pradesh along with several Non Government 
Organisations, 35 Elected Representatives from each of ten PESA States across the three tiers, 
officers from the concerned line departments implementing PESA at the ground level, in 
addition to the senior and ground-level officials of the State Panchayati Raj Departments from 
ten PESA States. 
  
In this conference, the Ministry has launched seven training manuals on key PESA subjects and 
PESA–GPDP Portal to develop PESA village development plan. PESA–GPDP portal enables 
hamlet/village wise resource allocation of Central Finance Commission, State Finance 
Commission, Centrally Sponsored Schemes, State Schemes and other funds in PESA GPs, 
which they can use to plan village wise activities.  
  
Subject wise additional activities specific to PESA such as Strengthening of PESA Gram 
Sabha, Customary Dispute Resolution, Prevention of Land Alienation, Enforcement of 
Prohibition and Intoxicant, Sale Management of Minor Forest Produce, Minor Minerals and 
Control over Money Lending, are also part of GPDP for PESA area Gram Panchayats. GPs 
have begun planning their GPDP at village level for financial year 2025-26 in accordance with 
this after the national workshop.  
  
  
(iii) Trainings of State Level Master Trainers on seven training manuals on key PESA 
subjects:  
  
The Ministry, in collaboration with the State Governments, has conducted seven trainings of 
State Level Master Trainers on each training manual on key PESA Subjects. The details of 
trainings are as under: 
  

 
 
5 
 
S. No Anchor State Date PESA training/ Manual 
1. Maharashtra 22-23 August 2024 Strengthening of PESA Gram 
Sabha 
2. Andhra Pradesh 29-30 August 2024 Minor Forest Produce 
3. Chhattisgarh 2-3 September, 2024 Minor Minerals 
4. Telangana 18-19 September, 2024 Prevention of Alienation of land 
5. Madhya Pradesh 8-9 October, 2024 Control over Money Lending 
6. Himachal Pradesh 15 October 2024 Enforcement of Prohibition and 
Sales and Consumption of 
Intoxicant 
7. Odisha 22-23 October, 2024 Customary Mode of Dispute 
Resolution 
  
(iv) PESA Day celebration on 24th December 2024 
The Ministry had requested all ten PESA States to celebrate 24th December 2024 as PESA 
Day with the objective to enhance awareness about the PESA Act and build capacity of the 
stakeholders for better governance, with a special focus on empowering Gram Sabhas and 
improving the functioning of Gram Panchayats in Scheduled Areas. 
The National Level event was Chaired by the Secretary, Panchayati Raj at Ranchi, where the 
local elected representatives from Schedule V areas, experts from Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh spent a day deliberating over the various facets of the Act 
and the actions needed to fill the gaps between the ideal and the real situations. Jharkhand 
pledged to promulgate its PESA rules within 1-2 months as the draft is already in circulation. 
(v) National PESA Writeshop held at YASHADA, Pune on 13 and 14 May 2025  
  
The Ministry has organized a two days write-shop on 13th & 14th May, 2025 at Yashwantrao 
Chavan Academy of Development Administration (YASHADA) Pune, Maharashtra. This event 
was hosted by Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Govt. of India and YASHADA along with the support 
of Transform Rural India (TRI). The two-day event brought together experts, PESA officials and 
the representatives in the domain of Panchayati Raj Institutions across Chhattisgarh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Telangana and 
Rajasthan. The objectives of the write shop were: 
  
Opportunity for Collaboration and Knowledge Sharing: To provide a platform for the States 
to come together and exchange best practices, enhancing mutual learning and collaboration. 
Recognizing State-Level Efforts and Innovations: Acknowledging the efforts and practices 
implemented by the states and highlighting the practices which can be replicated in other states 
Developing a Comprehensive Resource Document: Compile and create a reference booklet 
that consolidates valuable practices and insights from across the States for future use and 

 
 
6 
 
guidance. The documented best practices of PESA geographies then can be widely 
disseminated through various platforms including social media. 
  
More than 30 best-practices from all 10 PESA states have been received by the Ministry which 
are being processed so as to publish them in the form of a booklet.  
  
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee note the reply of the MoPR on the steps taken for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(PESA). The Committee appreciate the efforts/step taken like holding conferences, trainings of 
State Level Master Trainers, preparing manuals, and including PESA in village development 
plans etc.  However, the Committee is surprised to note that even after almost 30 years of 
passing the PESA Act, its implementation has not been completed yet.  Many States still lack 
the necessary rules and important laws related to land, forests, and minerals which are not fully 
aligned with PESA. The Committee observe that the Ministry have not shared any data or 
results showing whether these activities have made any impact on the ground like, whether 
Gram Sabhas have become stronger and violations of land rights have been reduced.  
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that MoPR should not only 
focus on action-oriented capacity building, organising conferences and workshops etc. but 
should also resort to active and practical approach with clear goals and measurable results to 
achieve and also gather regular feedback from tribal communities so as to assess that PESA is 
properly implemented in all Fifth Schedule areas.  Further, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
conduct training at district and village level and organise awareness programmes for tribal 
communities and setting up a system to monitor the progress. 
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Non-Release of Funds to States under RGSA 
 
1.9 With regard to non-release of funds to States under RGSA, the Committee had recommended 
as under: 
 
“Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is the flagship scheme of the Ministry. According to 
the Ministry, funds under RGSA are released to the States/UTs primarily for Capacity Building & 
Training of Elected Representatives, Functionaries and other Stakeholders of the Panchayats. 
Further, funds are also provided for other admissible activities relating to strengthening of 
Panchayats as approved under Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the States/UTs under the scheme. 
However, the Committee note that 14 out of 34 States/UTs have not received any funds under 
the scheme for the financial year 2024-25 (as on 31.12.2024). In this regard, the Ministry 
submitted that timely non-submission of Annual Action Plan by the States/UTs, requisite 
documents, Utilization Certificates, Audited Statements, non-compliance of instructions 
stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, inter alia, are the reasons for non-release of funds to 
these 14 States/UTs. The Committee feel that stopping funds in such a manner to many States 
will hamper the progress of implementation of this important scheme which aims to strengthen 
the PRIs. In this context, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take all efficacious 
efforts for timely submission of requisite documents by the States/UTs and if necessary, the 
matters should be pursued at the highest level with the States/UTs so that funds are released to 
all the States/UTs on time and to ensure steady progress of the implementation of the schemes 
without paucity of funds.”  
 
1.10 In respect of the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
 
“Under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the following 
multipronged roadmap has been adopted for proper utilization of allocated funds under the 
scheme and timely release of funds to the States/UTs: 
i.Provided checklist and handholding support to States for formulation of Annual Action Plan 
(AAPs).  
ii. During 2025-26, AAPs of 24 States/ UTs, so far, have been approved by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC) to ensure timely commencement of activities during current 
financial year. 
iii.Funds to 8 States/UTs have been released so far. 
iv.Regular interaction with States/UTs through VCs, telephonic calls and field visit are being 
carried out for monitoring the progress and expediting the approved activities. Necessary 
advice/clarifications as and when required are also issued.  
v. Region/State-specific VCs are also being undertaken on frequent interval. 
vi.Mandatory release of funds through PFMS till last level of Executing Agency. 
vii.Effectively taking up with the States for release of their matching share, liquidate unspent 
balances and submit the requisite documents viz. UCs etc. for release of funds to the 
maximum extent.  

 
 
8 
 
viii. Letters to the senior authorities of States/UTs, as and when required, including Chief 
Secretaries, to seek their intervention. 
Through the above multipronged approach, it is expected that allocated funds will be fully 
utilized.” 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11 The Committee appreciate the several steps have been taken by the MoPR to ensure 
proper utilization and timely release of funds to States/UTs under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Abhiya (RGSA) like support to States/UTs for preparation of Annual Action Plans (AAPs), 
regular communication with States/UTs through video/phone calls, continuous follow-ups for 
releasing their share, clear unspent balances and submit Utilization Certificates for further fund 
release etc.  The Committee note that similar steps were presented by the representative of 
MoPR before the Committee during the evidence.  The Committee observe that despite taking 
all these steps, desired results are not being achieved at the ground level.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that MoPR provide strengthen training and digital skills to local officials 
for better use of PFMS and other online tools and improve the quality of AAPs. To motivate the 
States/UTs, incentives/rewards should be provided for timely submission of requisite 
documents, matching share and liquidate unspent balances for release of funds to the 
maximum extent.  Further, the Committee recommend that MoPR should form a special team in 
collaboration with the States/UTs to keep everything on track to avoid delays. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Capacity Building and Shortage of Trained Manpower 
1.12 Regarding Capacity Building and Shortage of Trained Manpower, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Revamped RGSA scheme focuses on strengthening Panchayats by building the capacity 
of Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders. Training uses modern technology, 
including IP-based systems, smart phone apps, and social media. The scheme includes 
partnerships with prestigious institutions like IIMs and IITs for leadership development 

 
 
9 
 
programs. Over 10.3 million ERs and stakeholders have been trained since the scheme's 
implementation. During the course of evidence, the Committee are given to understand that the 
support staff availability in GPs is extremely low and the situation is worst where only one 
official is managing as many as 5 to 6 GPs approximately in some States particularly in Bihar. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoPR should expand partnerships with more 
Institutes of Excellence and encourage States/UTs to sign MoUs with local or nearby institutions 
for making availability of trained manpower to GPs. The Committee also recommend that the 
aspect of Capacity Building of trained manpower should focus on increasing use of digital 
platforms and mobile applications to ensure continuous learning for ERs, conducting 
specialized sectoral training for Panchayat members to enhance their role and establishing a 
feedback mechanism to assess the effectiveness of training programs and identify areas for 
improvement. The Committee also strongly recommend the Ministry to urge the States for filling 
all vacant positions of panchayat secretaries etc. Digital governance initiatives should be 
introduced to reduce the burden on panchayat officials and improve service delivery along with 
the Special assistance should be provided to low-capacity gram panchayats in backward 
districts. The Committee also strongly recommended the Ministry to urge the States for filling all 
vacant positions of Panchayat Secretaries, etc required for the smooth functioning of a Gram 
Panchayat. Digital governance initiatives should be introduced to reduce the burden on 
panchayat officials and improve service delivery along with the special assistance should be 
provided to low-capacity gram panchayats in backward districts.”  
1.13 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA), the Ministry aims at developing governance capabilities at the grassroots through 
continuous capacity building activities of the Elected Representatives (ERs) and other 
Stakeholders of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs).  
To further amplify the scope of the leadership training, the Ministry has started Management 
Development Program (MDP) with Institutes of Excellence (IoE), aimed at bolstering the 
leadership capabilities of ERs and officials of PRIs. The program is designed to serve as a 
transformative tool in enriching the skill sets and knowledge base of the community leaders at 
the grassroots level. Ministry has been conducting training under MDP centrally and has 
advised the States to expand partnerships with more IoE to sign MoUs with local or nearby 
institutions to amplify the efforts of the Ministry for the training under MDP. Accordingly, the 
States/UTs have signed MoUs with local or nearby institutions like Assam, Tripura and 
Arunachal Pradesh have signed MoUs with IIM-Shillong. Many other States are in the process 
of signing of MoUs with their local institutions.  
The MDP has significantly contributed to enhancing the effectiveness of local governance and 
rural development through practical and technological hands-on skills and expertise. The 
participants have been trained on essential leadership, management and financial 
accountability skills and other critical issues like effective team building, conflict management, 
community mobilization etc. The structured feedback through pre- and post-assessments, along 
with digital monitoring via the Training Management Portal (TMP), indicates ratings for both 
content of the training and quality of trainers. However, as the programme is at its’ nascent 
stage with a limited number of participants trained so far, its actual impact on governance will 
take time. Further, provision has also been made to include training of ERs and Functionaries of 
Panchayat with IoE under State component of AAP of revamped RGSA to expand the 
programme. 

 
 
10 
 
Under the Digital India initiative, the Ministry is implementing the e-Panchayat Mission Mode 
Project (MMP), which has significantly enhanced transparency, efficiency, and governance at 
the grassroots level. The eGramSwaraj application, developed as part of the e-Panchayat 
MMP, has facilitated digital planning, accounting, monitoring, and online payments at the 
Panchayat level. The integration of eGramSwaraj with the Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS) enables real-time payments to vendors and service providers, ensuring 
seamless fund flow and reducing delays. In FY 2024-25, 2.55 lakh Gram Panchayats uploaded 
their Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs), and over ₹61,032 crores have been 
transferred through the eGramSwaraj-PFMS interface. 
Additionally, the Ministry has integrated eGramSwaraj with the Government e-Marketplace 
(GeM) to bring transparency to Panchayat procurement. This integration allows Panchayats to 
procure goods and services through GeM via the eGramSwaraj platform, promoting the “Vocal 
for Local” initiative. Further, applications developed by the Ministry like Meri Panchayat has 
endeavoured to bring transparency in Panchayat Governance by making information on 
planning, activities and progress of works in Panchayat accessible to public. Similarly, 
Panchayat NIRNAY is an online application aims at bringing transparency and better 
management in conduct of Gram Sabhas by Panchayats.  
Further, an application of ‘AuditOnline’ has been developed for online audits of Panchayat 
accounts and their financial management. AuditOnline for transparent auditing of Central 
Finance Commission funds utilization for strengthening financial management of Panchayats 
launched in April 2020. For audit year 2023-24, 2.47 lakh Audit Plans have been created and 
2.29 lakh Audit Report have been generated by PRIs. 
In order to establish a service quality paradigm, with an intent to standardise the delivery of 
Services across the Panchayats, setting service standards, the time limit that the people can 
expect to be served, mechanisms for redressing grievances, and a provision for unbiased 
scrutiny by citizens, a Model Citizen charter was released by Hon’ble Minister, Panchayati Raj, 
Rural Development & Agriculture and Farmer Welfare on 4th June, 2021. 
Subsequently, Citizen Charter campaign under the aegis of Meri Panchayat, Mera Adhikaar- 
Jan Sevaayein Hamare Dwaar was carried out from 01st July - 30th September, 2021 to define 
the role of Panchayats in Service Delivery. 2,15,628 Gram Panchayats across 27 States/ UTs 
have now finalised their Citizen Charter, offering 954 Services spanning various sectors viz. 
Health & Family Welfare, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Public Welfare, Employment etc. 
However, only 50% of such services where Panchayats are the service owners are being 
delivered online by the Panchayats.  
Since most of the services relate to State List, the Ministry is persuading the States to provide 
online delivery of the Basic services by the Panchayats in a time-bound manner;  
(a) Water supply & sanitation services such as individual household waste collection & 
transportation; maintenance of drinking water (minor repairs); repair of handpumps; repair/ 
maintenance of community toilets; cleanliness of rainwater harvesting structures in community; 
sanitisation of public places viz. roads, drains, marketplaces, etc.  
(b) Social welfare & administrative services such as issuance of Birth Certificate; 
Issuance of Death Certificate; Issuance of Residence Certificate; Construction Permit; 
Assessment of Property Tax; Application for sanction of IHHL; Issue of MGNREGA Job card.”  

 
 
11 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14  The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj under the Revamped Rashtriya 
Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) has started Management Development Program (MDP) with 
Institutes of Excellence (IoE) and IIMs aimed at bolstering the leadership capabilities of Elected 
Representatives (ERs) and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). The programme is designed to 
serve as a transformative tool in enriching the skill sets and knowledge base of the community 
leaders at the grassroots level. Further to enhance transparency, efficiency and governance at 
the grassroots level the eGramSwaraj has been developed as part of the e-Panchayat Mission 
Mode Project (MMP) to facilitate digital planning, accounting, monitoring and online payments 
at the Panchayat level. The Ministry have also developed applications like ‘Meri Panchayat’ and 
‘Panchayat NIRNAY’ to bring transparency and making information on planning, activities and 
progress of works in Panchayats accessible to public and better management in conduct of 
Gram Sabhas by Panchayats. An online audit system called ‘AuditOnline’ is being developed 
for better financial audits and financial management and for audit year 2023-24. over 2.47 lakh 
Audit plans have been created and 2.29 lakh Audit Reports have been generated by PRIs. The 
committee appreciate the steps taken by the MoPR; however, it is yet to be assessed that how 
much these services are implemented and available online. Moreover, the important issue of 
filling up of all vacant posts of Panchayat Secretaries have not been addressed by the Ministry. 
The Committee note that MDP has trained only a limited number of ERs and PRI functionaries 
so far and many States have not signed MoUs with IoE due to non-availability and easy access 
of high-quality trainers. The Committee also note that in the FY 2024-25, 2.55 lakh GPs have 
uploaded their Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDP) and over Rs.61,032 crores have 
been transferred through the eGramSwaraj-PFMS interface but the status of the other GPs are 

 
 
12 
 
not been shown. Further, for the Audit year 2023-24 out of 2.47 lakhs Audit Plans created only 
2.29 lakh Audit Reports have been generated by PRIs and the status of the remaining Audit 
Plans is not mentioned. In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Ministry should take appropriate steps/measures to fill all vacant 
posts of Panchayat Secretaries at the earliest for the smooth functioning of the GPs as 
insufficient personnel affects adversely the intended goal and objectives. The Committee 
further urge the Ministry that necessary steps should be taken to increase the number of 
personnel/participants imparted training under MDP to enhance the effectiveness of local 
governance. As far as the transfer of funds in FY 2024-25 for GPDPs through eGramSwaraj-
PFMS interface is concerned necessary steps should be taken to ensure that the remaining GPs 
also avail funds through the same method. The Committee also desire to know the reason as to 
why only 2.29 lakh Audit Report have been generated by PRIs despite 2.47 lakh Audit Plans 
created in Audit Year 2023-24. 
(Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Panchayat Bhawans 
1.15 Regarding construction of Panchayat Bhawans, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The construction of Panchayat Bhawans is being undertaken under Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). For the year 2024-25, 4420 Panchayat Bhawans were 
approved, however only 661 were constructed. States like Chhattisgarh, Kerala and 
Odisha have full coverage with all Gram Panchayats (GPs) having Panchayat Bhawan 
while a significant number of GPs do not have Panchayat Bhawans in States like Bihar 
(6607 GPs), Haryana (3135 GPs) and Manipur (3678 GPs) etc. During the course of 
evidence, the representative of the Ministry stated that there is a shortage of 32,000 
approximately Panchayat Bhawans in the country and Rs.20 lakh is allocated for 
construction of a Panchayat Bhawan. The Committee are well aware of the importance 
of Panchayat Bhawans as centres for local governance, facilitating meetings, grievance 
redressal and community programs etc. The Committee therefore, urge that the MoPR 
to expedite pending constructions by streamlining tender process and ensuring proper 
fund utilization and establishing a real-time monitoring dashboard to track the status of 
approved and progress of under construction Panchayat Bhawans. Further, the 
Committee are of the view that Rs.20 Lakh allocated for construction of a Panchayat 
Bhawan is too less in the present situation in view of escalating inflation rate. In view of 
mounting costs of building materials and other construction costs, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should review that amount allocated for construction of 
Panchayat Bhawans and appropriately increase the same and if need be, to provide 

 
 
13 
 
additional fund for those States having large number of GPs without Panchayat 
Bhawans. The Committee have further been informed by the Ministry that the work of 
the creation of network to connect all GPs (approximately 255000 GPs) in the country is 
being undertaken under Bharat Net Project. And so far, 218347 GPs have been made 
service ready. Besides this the GPs with computer is also steadily rising. However, there 
are some States where more than 50 percent GPs do not have computers. The 
Committee feel that the creation of network connectivity and provision of computers to 
Panchayats needs to pick up pace for the success of the Mission Mode project on e-
Panchayat that seeks to transform the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions to make 
them more transparent, accountable and effective as last mile cutting edge organs of 
decentralized local self-government’s.” 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“(i) Panchayat being State subject, providing Panchayat infrastructure viz. Gram 
Panchayat Bhawan and procurement of computer is primarily the responsibility of 
States. In addition, the Untied Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) can 
be utilized for all felt needs under the 29 subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of 
the Constitution and thus it would also cover repair of Gram Panchayat Bhawans in the 
rural areas under the subject: Maintenance of Community assets, as one of the 
permissible activities for XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local Bodies (RLBs). With 
a view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was issued on 
18.01.2021 to States / UTs by Secretary of MoPR and that of Ministry of Rural 
Development inter-alia requesting for construction of GP buildings utilizing various 
resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 14th Finance Commission, FFC 
grants, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and other funds from 
State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own Source Revenue (OSR) etc. Under the 
revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), Ministry supplements the efforts of 
States/UTs with focus on NE States, by providing construction of Gram Panchayat 
Bhawan, co-location of Common Service Centre (CSC) and procurement of computer 
as proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action Plan and approved by Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC) on a limited scale.  
(ii) Almost all the Panchayats have internet facility, being provided by BSNL and 
other private internet service providers, as all the Gram Panchayats have been using 
eGramSwaraj Portal for fund management and also for preparation of plans. Panchayats 
can utilize the XVFC grant or any other source of revenue available with them for 
payment for internet services. 
(iii) Further, it is important to highlight that the Ministry had taken significant steps 
during the financial year 2024-25 for improving infrastructure in GPs. To ensure that all 
GPs with a population of more than 3000 persons have a Gram Panchayat building, the 
Ministry has provided funds for construction of 3301 Gram Panchayat Bhawan (GPB) 
along with CSC Co-location in Gram Panchayats. Apart from this a total of 9609 Gram 
Panchayat Bhawans and the procurement of 28032 computers have been approved, as 
proposed by the States/ UTs in their respective Annual Action Plans of revamped RGSA 
since 2022-23 to 2025-26 (as on date 9th May, 2025). Also, during 2024-25, 
procurement of additional 20164 computers has been approved for 7 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) to 

 
 
14 
 
saturate the requirement of computers in the Gram Panchayat in these States and also 
approved 2000 computers to the State of Bihar. In addition to above, the eGramSwaraj 
portal of this Ministry has been integrated with the BSNL portal to facilitate panchayats 
across the nation to apply for a new internet connection and payment of monthly bills.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that providing panchayats 
infrastructure like construction of Panchayat Bhawan and procurement of computer is the 
primary responsibility of States/UTs. The MoPR supports States/UTs through the Rashtriya 
Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) by providing fund for construction and repair of Panchayat 
Bhawans, Common Service Centres and procurement of computers. The 15th Finance 
Commission’s untied grants along with other funds can be used for maintenance and repair of 
GP Bhawans. The Ministry in its reply have stated that 3301 Gram Panchayat (GP) Bhawan were 
sanctioned in 2024-25 for GP having more than 3000 population. Apart from this a total of 9609 
GP Bhawans and the procurement of 28032 computers have been approved since 2022-23 to 
2025-26 (as on date 9th May, 2025). The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that 
20164 computers have also been approved for 7 States (Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) and 2000 computers for Bihar to meet 
the requirement of computers in these States. However, the Committee observe that the 
Ministry have not provided a clear, time-bound plan to build Panchayat Bhawans and provide 
computers with internet service to all Gram Panchayats across the country. Further, GPs with a 
population of less than 3000 have been neglected despite the need for infrastructure and it is 
not clear that construction of proposed 9609 GP Bhawan will meet overall national demand. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPR should develop a national convergence 
framework for providing funds for GP infrastructure and prepare a roadmap along with the 
priority list of GPs lacking buildings/digital assets and implement it nation-wide to have facility 
of GP Bhawan in each village of the country. Further, MoPR should conduct third party 

 
 
15 
 
evaluation and social audit of infrastructure projects to ensure transparency and accountability 
to achieve the targets. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
SWAMITVA 
1.18 With regard to non-utilization of tied and untied grant, the Committee had recommended as 
under: 
“SVAMITVA (Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village 
Areas) scheme aims at providing the “Record of Rights‟ to rural residential property 
owners in inhabited rural areas in villages and issuance of property cards to the 
property owners. The scheme has been extended beyond FY 2024-2025 to FY 2025-
2026. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry could not achieve its 
physical targets since it inception FY 2020-21. Approximately 30,000 villages across 
various villages required surveying. A target by March 2025 for completing drone flying 
operations in all designated villages has been set. The Ministry in its reply have 
submitted that the targets could not be achieved due to certain States not implementing 
the scheme, adverse weather conditions challenges in assessing scattered villages, 
logistical hurdles, delays in deploying drone teams etc. The Committee also observe 
that no work has been done under SVAMITVA Scheme in State like Bihar or pace of 
work has been very slow in various States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should prepare a concrete action plan to ensure that the scheme is 
implemented all over the country and set realistic targets, so that the scheme can 
achieve its targets by 2025-26.” 
1.19 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“SVAMITVA Scheme was launched in April 2020 by the Hon’ble Prime Minister to 
provide record of rights in inhabited areas of rural India.31 States and UTs have been 
onboarded on SVAMITVA Scheme. Out of a total of 3.45 lakh notiﬁed villages to be 
covered, drone survey has been completed in 3.21 lakh villages and 2.44 Cr property 
cards have been prepared in 1.64 Lakh villages. Drone ﬂying has been saturated in 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Delhi and Ladakh. 
Scheme has been saturated in Haryana, Uttarakhand, Goa, Dadra Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu, A&N Island and Puducherry. Bihar had not signed MoU for 
implementation of SVAMITVA Scheme and hence, the scheme is not being 
implemented in the State.  
  
As far as performance of States/UT is concerned, the Ministry has taken following 
measures for Monitoring and Control over the performance of SVAMITVA Scheme and 
timely achievement of targets: 
  
(i) Weekly progress review with States and Survey of India to review the 
implementation of the SVAMITVA Scheme, address the challenges and support 
in the resolution of issues. States/UTs have been advised to provide ground-
verified maps in a time bound manner and generate property cards  

 
 
16 
 
(ii) Central SVAMITVA Scheme dashboard developed (svamitva.nic.in) to review 
and monitor for Key performance indicators. 
 
(iii) Regular interaction with Survey of India to assess the drone requirements for 
various states and plan the pipeline of drone deployment and augmentation of 
necessary infrastructure viz. data processing labs, GIS digitizers, drone pilots, 
other resources 
  
State/UT wise progress regarding property cards 
S. 
No. 
States/UT’s Notified Drone 
Flying 
Number of 
villages for which 
property card 
prepared 
Number of 
property cards 
prepared 
Number of 
property cards 
distributed 
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
186 186 141 7409 7,409 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13321 13321 0 0 0 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 5596 3610 0 0 0 
4 Assam 1074 946 0 0 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 15791  15791 1202 70307 67751 
6 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
and Diu 
80 80 75 4397 4,397 
7 Delhi 31 31 0 0 0 
8 Goa 410 410 410 672646 672,646 
9 Gujarat 15052 14166 7798 1309457 1228586 
10 Haryana 6260 6260 6260 2515646 2,515,646 
11 Himachal Pradesh 15196 13903 238 5395 5395 
12 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4431 4404 1237 39204 39204 
13 Jharkhand 757 240 0 0 0 
14 Karnataka 30757 19530 3947 1013177 326,069 
15 Kerala 1550 597 0 0 0 
16 Ladakh 230 230 148 15623 15623 
17 Lakshadweep 
Islands 
10 10 0 0 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 43014 43014 35127 3994343 3994343 
19 Maharashtra 37819  37609 17696 2791582 2791582 
20 Manipur 2555 209 0 0 0 
21 Mizoram 550 319 27 2909 1,155 
22 Odisha 3054 2724 43 1716 1,716 
23 Puducherry 96 96 92 2801 2,801 
24 Punjab 12083 10458 178 24089 285 
25 Rajasthan 36,352 35771 13,733 994332 994332 
26 Sikkim 1 1 0 0 0 
27 Tamil Nadu 3 3 0 0 0 
28 Telangana 5 5 0 0 0 
29 Tripura 898 19 893 571783 571783 

 
 
17 
 
30 Uttar Pradesh 90573 90573 67516 10181864 10131232 
31 Uttarakhand 7441 7441 7441 278229 278,229 
  Total 345176 321957 164202 24496909 23650184 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.20 The Ministry in its reply have stated that SWAMITVA scheme covers 3.45 villages in 31 
States/UTs excluding Bihar. Drone surveys have been completed in 3.21 lakh villages and 2.44 
crore property cards have been prepared in 1.64 lakh villages. More than 2.36 crore property 
cards have been given to land owners, which helps them to prove their land ownership rights 
and get loans or government benefits easily. Further Committee note that some states like 
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh have finished drone surveys, while others 
like Haryana, Uttarakhand, and Goa have completed the whole process, including giving out 
property cards. The MoPR actively monitors progress through weekly reviews, central 
dashboard and close coordination with the Survey of India to ensure timely completion and 
address challenges. The Committee note that some States show significant gap between 
notified villages and drone flying completed and many States have not started preparation of 
property cards while drone survey have been completed or likely to be completed. Further, 
some States have prepared property cards but distributed in a small fraction. The Committee 
are concerned of the uneven implementation of SWAMITVA scheme in States especially in 
Bihar which has not signed the MoU till so far, which stalls national goals of modernization of 
land records and rural empowerment. The Committee recommend the MoPR should speed up 
distribution of property cards especially in those States where drone survey has been 
completed. Further there is an imperative need to impress the State Government of Bihar to 
sign the MoU to be part of national goal of demarcation of proper land and to provide 
ownership to the legitimate persons under SWAMITVA. The Committee further recommend for 
upgraded drone technology, data processing infrastructure and using Geographic Information 

 
 
18 
 
System (GIS) tools for improving the quality and speed of surveys to increase efficacy and 
effectiveness of the scheme to meet its targets by 2025-26. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Addressing Non-Utilization of Funds and Poor Record-Keeping 
 
1.21  Regarding addressing Non-utilization of funds and poor record keeping, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“Based on the data from the eGramSwaraj “Observation Count Report,” the committee 
observe that the critical lapses in grant management, non-utilization of funds, financial 
reporting and record-keeping across various States indicating that funds earmarked for 
essential services such as water and sanitation are being used for unintended purposes. 
The Committee also find that a significant portion of funds allocated to panchayats 
remains unutilized due to bureaucratic hurdles, lack of technical knowledge, and weak 
financial management. Therefore, the Committee stressed upon the need for strict 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure timely and effective expenditure. The Committee 
further recommend that Panchayats should be mandated to maintain proper financial 
records, conduct regular audits, and submit utilization certificates. Digital record-keeping 
systems should also be expanded to improve accountability and prevent fund leakages.” 
  
1.22 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj in 
their action taken reply have stated as below: 
(i) To strengthen the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj launched eGramSwaraj on 24th April 2020 under the e-Panchayat 
Mission Mode Project. This integrated digital platform supports key aspects of 
Panchayat operations such as planning, budgeting, accounting, monitoring, asset 
management, and online payments, ensuring a streamlined and transparent workflow. 
(ii) Given the significant devolution of funds to Panchayats, the eGramSwaraj–PFMS 
Interface (eGSPI) was developed to enable real-time financial transactions. By 
integrating eGramSwaraj with the Public Financial Management System (PFMS), this 
interface allows secure payments to vendors and service providers using Digital 
Signature Certificates (DSCs) and two-factor authentication. It also ensures that 
payments cannot proceed without sufficient funds, reducing errors and enhancing 
financial discipline. 
(iii) To further promote transparency, the Ministry introduced Audit Online, a dedicated 
web-based platform for auditing Panchayat accounts. This tool facilitates the preparation 
of audit records, inquiries, draft audit reports, and paras, thereby ensuring timely audits 
and improved accountability in Panchayat financial management. 
(iv) The PRIs today have an excellent record in book-keeping as all accounts are closed 
in time. Moreover, statutory audit is also completed timely. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 

 
 
19 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Government have launched the 
eGramSwaraj platform in April 2020 to help Panchayats in respect of planning, budgeting, 
accounting, and online payments more easily and transparently. The eGramSwaraj–PFMS 
Interface (eGSPI) was developed to enable real-time payments using digital signatures with two-
factor security and payment cannot proceed, if funds are insufficient. Further to promote 
transparency the MoPR has introduced Audit Online platform for auditing Panchayat accounts 
on time. The Committee observe that these tools have improved panchayat works but there are 
still some loopholes and challenges in their implementation like lack of digital literacy and 
proper training among Panchayat staff, especially in rural areas, which can lead to mistakes or 
underutilization of these platforms.  Poor internet connectivity and limited infrastructure in 
many villages affect the smooth functioning of these online systems.  The Committee urge the 
MoPR to provide regular training and digital skill to panchayat officials for effectively use of 
digital tools, enhance cybersecurity awareness, improve internet connectivity and digital 
infrastructure in rural areas.  Further the Committee reiterate their recommendations that 
Panchayats should keep good financial records, conduct regular audits and submit requisite 
certificates of funds utilization. Ensure maximum use of digital record systems for 
accountability and make sure that funds are properly utilized and not wasted. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Decline in Allocation at RE Stage 
2.1  The Committee observe that there is a nominal increase of an amount of Rs.1.36 crore in the 
BE allocation for 2025-26 in comparison to 2024-25. The Committee further note that there is 
continuous trend of revising the BE at RE stage during 2023-24 and 2024-25. During the evidence, the 
representatives of the Ministry has stated that RGSA is a demand driven scheme and that it is for 
States to demand funds from the Central Government for their training and capacity building needs. It 
was further stated that many-a-times States have unspent balances from the previous year to which 
they are not able to access their first installment of the next year. Hence, that the expenditure in these 
first six months is usually lower and not commensurate resulting in RE becoming less. The Committee 
also do not rule out that accentuating the situation are lapses on the part of the States such as late 
submission of proposal by the States, non- furnishing/discrepancies in documents like Utilization 
Certificates, physical and financial reports along with audit reports etc. However, it is the bounden duty 
of the Ministry these unwarranted situations are best avoided in every possible way. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in spite of the reasons for reduction in RE stage, the Ministry should make 
sincere and concerted efforts to ensure that States are able to submit their demand funds from the 
Government to fully absorb the allocated budget so as to avoid reduction of budget at RE stage in 
future for the purpose, if necessary, Ministry may take up matter with the Chief Secretary of the 
concerned States and also issue advisory to them to resolve the issue by taking prompt decision in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 “One of the major reasons for revising the BE at RE stage during 2023-24 and 2024-25 was the 
general elections held during April-June 2024 which significantly affected the pace of fund utilization by 
States and Union Territories (UTs) during the first quarter of the financial year. Another contributing 
factor was the availability of unspent balances with the States/UTs from previous allocations, which 
further slowed down the release and expenditure of funds in the initial months. However, the Ministry 
has worked to expedite fund releases and utilization and almost 100% of RE allocation has been 
utilized by the Ministry. 
  
Under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme a total no. of 26 
States/ UTs out of 34 States/ UTs have received the funds during the FY 2024-25. Further, the 
following multipronged roadmap has been adopted for proper utilization of allocated funds under the 
scheme and timely release of funds to the States/UTs: 

 
 
21 
 
  
i. Provided checklist and handholding support to States for formulation of Annual Action Plan 
(AAPs).  
ii. During 2025-26, AAPs of 24 States/ UTs, so far, have been approved by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC) to ensure timely commencement of activities during current 
financial year. 
iii. Funds to 8 States/UTs have been released so far. 
iv. Regular interaction with States/UTs through VCs, telephonic calls and field visit are being 
carried out for monitoring the progress and expediting the approved activities. Necessary 
advice/clarifications as and when required are also issued.  
v. Region/State-specific VCs are also being undertaken on frequent interval. 
vi. Mandatory release of funds through PFMS till last level of Executing Agency. 
vii. Effectively taking up with the States for release of their matching share, liquidate unspent 
balances and submit the requisite documents viz. UCs etc. for release of funds to the maximum 
extent.  
viii. Letters to the senior authorities of States/UTs, as and when required, including Chief 
Secretaries, to seek their intervention. 
  
Through the above multipronged approach, it is expected that allocated funds will be fully 
utilized and higher allocation can be sought from the Ministry of Finance.” 
 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Merger of Tied and United Grant 
 
2.3 “The Committee observe that the Grants of Rs. 60,750 crore for the FY 2020- 21 and 
Rs.2,36,805 Crore were allocated for the period FY 2021-26 to Panchayats as per recommendations of 
15th Finance Commission (interim and final report) accepted by the Union Government. The above 
grants are provided to Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) as Tied Grants (60% of allocation) and Untied Grants 
(40% of allocation). Untied grant can be used for location-specific felt needs, under the 29 subjects 
enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Whereas, Tied grants can be used for drinking 
water supply, rainwater harvesting and sanitation works. During the course of evidence, the Committee 
observe that a lot of work relating to drinking water supply, rainwater harvesting and sanitation has 
been done in the villages under the scheme “Har Ghar Jal”. The Committee note that in some villages 
the above said works has been completed and balance Tied grant cannot be used for 29 subjects 
which comes under Untied grant. The Committee feel that the concept of Tied and Untied grants with 
more budgetary allocation for Tied Grants (60%) and specially to be used for drinking water supply, 
rain harvesting and sanitation works only will lead to deprivation of funds to local specific needs of the 
villages and villagers where much more activities are taking place as they can only spend from Untied 

 
 
22 
 
grant (40%). In view of the above, the committee recommend that concept of the Tied and Untied grant 
should be merged and the funds should be used by the RLBs as per the requirement of villages and 
villagers for the maximum and fruitful utilization of allocated funds.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 “(i) In accordance with the Article 280 (3) of the Constitution, the XV Finance Commission made 
recommendations for devolution of grants to Rural Local Bodies and categorized the grants as Tied 
Grants (60% of allocation) and Untied Grants (40% of allocation), for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26.  
  
(ii) Currently, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is preparing a detailed Memorandum to the XVI Finance 
Commission for its consideration to highlight the key issues faced by Panchayati Raj Institutions across 
the country. A State consultation was also held on 16th April 2025, to deliberate on matters such as 
nature of grants i.e. Tied and Untied Grants.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Delay in Panchayat Elections 
 
 
2.5 The 73rd constitutional amendment made it compulsory for the all the States to hold elections 
for panchayats in every five years at the village level. Further, Article 243E (3) of the Constitution 
provides that elections to constitute a panchayat shall be completed before the expiry of its duration 
and before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution. Therefore, the timely 
conduct of panchayat elections in a State is a Constitutional requirement to be strictly complied by the 
all States/UTs. During the course of evidence, the Committee observe that Panchayat elections could 
not be held due to various reasons in a number of States/UTs like Puducherry (2011), Karnataka (2021 
for BP & ZP), Maharashtra (2022 for BP & ZP), Manipur (2022), Lakshadweep (2022), Assam (2023), 
Jammu & Kashmir (2023), Ladakh (2023). In this regard direction has been issued by the High Court of 
the concerned State and Election Commission to State Election Commission for conducting Panchayat 
elections as early as possible. The delay in conducting panchayat elections has resulted in nearly 
crores of Union government grants for village development projects/ schemes being kept on hold. 
There is a need to have a duly elected local rural bodies to release these grants/funds to the 
Panchayat and utilize these funds in various ongoing welfare schemes for the villagers. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that during its recent Study Visits undertaken to UT of 
Lakshadweep condition of the people is not well due to non-availability of fund in the absence of duly 
elected local bodies. In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of MoPR 

 
 
23 
 
should take up this matter at the highest level to ensure that purpose of 73rd Constitutional 
Amendment Bill may not be defeated by non-holding of Panchayat election by the State Government.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 Article 243E(1) of the Constitution of India provides holding of elections to the Panchayats 
every five years. Further Article 243E(3) of the Constitution states that elections to constitute a 
Panchayat shall be completed before the expiry of its duration of five years or before the expiration of a 
period of six months from the date of its dissolution. Therefore, the timely holding of Panchayat 
elections in a State or Union Territory is a Constitutional requirement. Accordingly, the States and 
Union Territories have made provisions in their State Panchayati Raj laws relating to holding of 
elections to the Panchayats. The Ministry has issued advisories to the States/UTs, where election is 
due, to take all possible steps to hold the delayed Panchayat elections in conformity with the 
Constitutional provisions. Recently, Ministry has issued advisories to the States of Assam, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Telangana, Uttarakhand and Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry on 18.12.2024 and to the States of Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu on 
03.06.2025. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
Enhancing Revenue Generation for Panchayats 
 
2.7 The Committee note that Panchayats currently rely heavily on grants from government, limiting 
their ability to respond to local needs and priorities. Stressing upon the need for enhancing revenue 
generation and their financial independence, the Committee recommend that Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) should be empowered to generate their own revenues through property taxes, user 
fees, and other local levies. Capacity-building programs should be introduced to help panchayats 
develop sustainable revenue models, reducing their dependency on state and central grants. 
Incentives should be provided for self-sufficient panchayats that effectively mobilize local resources.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 (i) The Ministry of Panchayati Raj acknowledges the challenge of own source revenue 
   generation in Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
(ii) The Ministry is in the process of developing Model OSR rules, which would enable the 
States which do not have such rules in formulating their OSR rules. 
(iii) The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in collaboration with Indian Institute of Ahmedabad, has 
developed training modules this year for Panchayati Raj Institutions on OSR augmentation. 
(iv) The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has this year for the first time introduced ‘Atmanirbhar 

 
 
24 
 
Panchayat Special Award’ – as a part of National Panchayat Awards – which is conferred to 3 
Gram Panchayats every year, for their efforts towards mobilization and augmentation of OSR 
(v) Ministry is developing Samarth Portal as an online system for monitoring and 
broadening tax and non-tax revenue coverage. It enables PRIs to assess, levy and collect 
revenues. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
Better co-ordination amongst different departments in construction/repair works in the 
Panchayat area 
  
2.9 The Committee is concerned that regular construction/ repair work under various 
schemes/programs such as the Jal Jeevan Mission are being carried out where roads are often dug up 
for pipeline installations but left unrepaired, resulting in damage to existing infrastructure, financial 
losses, and significant inconvenience to villagers. This unplanned approach not only deteriorates rural 
connectivity but also leads to additional costs for reconstruction. To prevent this, the Committee 
recommend to establish a comprehensive coordination mechanism between all agencies to ensuring 
that:  
(i) Pre-construction assessments are conducted to plan pipeline routes with minimal disruption.  
(ii) Mandatory post-construction road restoration is carried out within a fixed timeframe.  
(iii) A dedicated repair fund is allocated to promptly restore damaged roads.  
(iv) Real-time monitoring and accountability measures are implemented to track restoration progress.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 Panchayat, being “Local Government”, is a State subject in terms of the State list of Seventh 
Schedule of Constitution of India. Mandate for setting up of Panchayats is provided by Article 243 in 
Part IX of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, the Panchayats are setup and operate through the 
respective State Panchayati Raj Acts. Panchayat being a State subject, it is for the concerned State 
Government to endow Panchayats with such powers and authority to enable to function as institutions 
of self-governance, and plan and implement schemes for economic development and social justice 
including the basic facilities. Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) supplements the efforts of the States 
through Central Finance Commission Grants and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
  
  

 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.1 The Panchayat Extension to the Scheduled Area (PESA) Act, 1996 was enacted to empower 
tribal communities. However, the Committee observed that despite the efforts of the Ministry the PESA 
Act, 1996 has not been implemented effectively in the country. The Ministry has taken various steps 
like developing and launching seven training manuals on key PESA subjects and conducted seven 
training sessions for State Level Master Trainers (SLMTs) across the country. To institutionalize the 
efforts to implement multi-pronged strategy to realize the objective of PESA, the Ministry has also 
decided to form Center of Excellence (CoE) in Central Universities. In this regard it has been informed 
to the Committee that the Ministry has approved the establishment of CoE for PESA in Indira Gandhi 
National Tribal University, Amarkantak, Madhya Pradesh. The Committee note these efforts made by 
the Ministry for the implementation of PESA in the Fifth Schedule Areas (FSA). The Committee feel 
that we are still a long way from achieving the objectives of the Act despite its enactment nearly two 
decades ago. There is still lack of public awareness about the provisions of the PESA Act, 1996 and 
sensitization of tribal communities about their rights. To address these issues the Committee are of the 
view that the Ministry should give more focus on action-oriented capacity building, organize more 
workshops and conferences and urge the concerned States to conduct training at the district level to 
train Gram Panchayat Pradhan and Secretaries on the important subject Laws/functions/powers 
endowed to Gram Sabha. Besides this a robust monitoring framework should be established to ensure 
that State Governments implement the PESA provisions in letter and spirit to empower the tribal 
communities with their rights and to preserve their culture heritage.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 ““Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part of State List of Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up and operate through the respective State 
Panchayati Raj Acts which may vary from State to State, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. 
Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats fall within the purview of State Government. 
  
However, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has taken continuous steps for the effective 
implementation of the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 
(PESA). The important steps taken by Ministry for monitoring and implementation of PESA Act are 
annexed as ANNEXURE-I.  
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 

 
 
27 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
4.3 Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) is the flagship scheme of the Ministry. According to 
the Ministry, funds under RGSA are released to the States/UTs primarily for Capacity Building & 
Training of Elected Representatives, Functionaries and other Stakeholders of the Panchayats. Further, 
funds are also provided for other admissible activities relating to strengthening of Panchayats as 
approved under Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the States/UTs under the scheme. However, the 
Committee note that 14 out of 34 States/UTs have not received any funds under the scheme for the 
financial year 2024-25 (as on 31.12.2024). In this regard, the Ministry submitted that timely non-
submission of Annual Action Plan by the States/UTs, requisite documents, Utilization Certificates, 
Audited Statements, non-compliance of instructions stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, inter alia, are 
the reasons for non-release of funds to these 14 States/UTs. The Committee feel that stopping funds in 
such a manner to many States will hamper the progress of implementation of this important scheme 
which aims to strengthen the PRIs. In this context, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
take all efficacious efforts for timely submission of requisite documents by the States/UTs and if 
necessary, the matters should be pursued at the highest level with the States/UTs so that funds are 
released to all the States/UTs on time and to ensure steady progress of the implementation of the 
schemes without paucity of funds.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 Under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, the following 
multipronged roadmap has been adopted for proper utilization of allocated funds under the scheme 
and timely release of funds to the States/UTs: 
i. Provided checklist and handholding support to States for formulation of Annual Action Plan 
(AAPs).  
ii. During 2025-26, AAPs of 24 States/ UTs, so far, have been approved by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC) to ensure timely commencement of activities during current 
financial year. 
iii. Funds to 8 States/UTs have been released so far. 
iv. Regular interaction with States/UTs through VCs, telephonic calls and field visit are being 
carried out for monitoring the progress and expediting the approved activities. Necessary 
advice/clarifications as and when required are also issued.  
v. Region/State-specific VCs are also being undertaken on frequent interval. 
vi. Mandatory release of funds through PFMS till last level of Executing Agency. 
vii. Effectively taking up with the States for release of their matching share, liquidate unspent 
balances and submit the requisite documents viz. UCs etc. for release of funds to the maximum 
extent.  

 
 
28 
 
viii. Letters to the senior authorities of States/UTs, as and when required, including Chief 
Secretaries, to seek their intervention. 
  
Through the above multipronged approach, it is expected that allocated funds will be fully 
utilized. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.5 The Revamped RGSA scheme focuses on strengthening Panchayats by building the capacity 
of Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders. Training uses modern technology, including 
IP-based systems, smart phone apps, and social media. The scheme includes partnerships with 
prestigious institutions like IIMs and IITs for leadership development programs. Over 10.3 million ERs 
and stakeholders have been trained since the scheme's implementation. During the course of 
evidence, the Committee are given to understand that the support staff availability in GPs is extremely 
low and the situation is worst where only one official is managing as many as 5 to 6 GPs approximately 
in some States particularly in Bihar. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoPR should 
expand partnerships with more Institutes of Excellence and encourage States/UTs to sign MoUs with 
local or nearby institutions for making availability of trained manpower to GPs. The Committee also 
recommend that the aspect of Capacity Building of trained manpower should focus on increasing use 
of digital platforms and mobile applications to ensure continuous learning for ERs, conducting 
specialized sectoral training for Panchayat members to enhance their role and establishing a feedback 
mechanism to assess the effectiveness of training programs and identify areas for improvement. The 
Committee also strongly recommend the Ministry to urge the States for filling all vacant positions of 
panchayat secretaries etc. Digital governance initiatives should be introduced to reduce the burden on 
panchayat officials and improve service delivery along with the Special assistance should be provided 
to low-capacity gram panchayats in backward districts. The Committee also strongly recommended the 
Ministry to urge the States for filling all vacant positions of Panchayat Secretaries, etc required for the 
smooth functioning of a Gram Panchayat. Digital governance initiatives should be introduced to reduce 
the burden on panchayat officials and improve service delivery along with the special assistance 
should be provided to low-capacity gram panchayats in backward districts.”  
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
29 
 
4.6 “Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA), the Ministry aims at developing governance capabilities at the grassroots through continuous 
capacity building activities of the Elected Representatives (ERs) and other Stakeholders of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs).  
To further amplify the scope of the leadership training, the Ministry has started Management 
Development Program (MDP) with Institutes of Excellence (IoE), aimed at bolstering the leadership 
capabilities of ERs and officials of PRIs. The program is designed to serve as a transformative tool in 
enriching the skill sets and knowledge base of the community leaders at the grassroots level. Ministry 
has been conducting training under MDP centrally and has advised the States to expand partnerships 
with more IoE to sign MoUs with local or nearby institutions to amplify the efforts of the Ministry for the 
training under MDP. Accordingly, the States/UTs have signed MoUs with local or nearby institutions 
like Assam, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh have signed MoUs with IIM-Shillong. Many other States 
are in the process of signing of MoUs with their local institutions.  
The MDP has significantly contributed to enhancing the effectiveness of local governance and rural 
development through practical and technological hands-on skills and expertise. The participants have 
been trained on essential leadership, management and financial accountability skills and other critical 
issues like effective team building, conflict management, community mobilization etc. The structured 
feedback through pre- and post-assessments, along with digital monitoring via the Training 
Management Portal (TMP), indicates ratings for both content of the training and quality of trainers. 
However, as the programme is at its’ nascent stage with a limited number of participants trained so far, 
its actual impact on governance will take time. Further, provision has also been made to include 
training of ERs and Functionaries of Panchayat with IoE under State component of AAP of revamped 
RGSA to expand the programme. 
Under the Digital India initiative, the Ministry is implementing the e-Panchayat Mission Mode Project 
(MMP), which has significantly enhanced transparency, efficiency, and governance at the grassroots 
level. The eGramSwaraj application, developed as part of the e-Panchayat MMP, has facilitated digital 
planning, accounting, monitoring, and online payments at the Panchayat level. The integration of 
eGramSwaraj with the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) enables real-time payments to 
vendors and service providers, ensuring seamless fund flow and reducing delays. In FY 2024-25, 2.55 
lakh Gram Panchayats uploaded their Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs), and over 
₹61,032 crores have been transferred through the eGramSwaraj-PFMS interface. 
Additionally, the Ministry has integrated eGramSwaraj with the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) to 
bring transparency to Panchayat procurement. This integration allows Panchayats to procure goods 
and services through GeM via the eGramSwaraj platform, promoting the “Vocal for Local” initiative. 
Further, applications developed by the Ministry like Meri Panchayat has endeavoured to bring 
transparency in Panchayat Governance by making information on planning, activities and progress of 
works in Panchayat accessible to public. Similarly, Panchayat NIRNAY is an online application aims at 
bringing transparency and better management in conduct of Gram Sabhas by Panchayats.  
Further, an application of ‘AuditOnline’ has been developed for online audits of Panchayat accounts 
and their financial management. AuditOnline for transparent auditing of Central Finance Commission 
funds utilization for strengthening financial management of Panchayats launched in April 2020. For 
audit year 2023-24, 2.47 lakh Audit Plans have been created and 2.29 lakh Audit Report have been 
generated by PRIs. 
In order to establish a service quality paradigm, with an intent to standardise the delivery of Services 
across the Panchayats, setting service standards, the time limit that the people can expect to be 
served, mechanisms for redressing grievances, and a provision for unbiased scrutiny by citizens, a 

 
 
30 
 
Model Citizen charter was released by Hon’ble Minister, Panchayati Raj, Rural Development & 
Agriculture and Farmer Welfare on 4th June, 2021. 
Subsequently, Citizen Charter campaign under the aegis of Meri Panchayat, Mera Adhikaar- Jan 
Sevaayein Hamare Dwaar was carried out from 01st July - 30th September, 2021 to define the role of 
Panchayats in Service Delivery. 2,15,628 Gram Panchayats across 27 States/ UTs have now finalised 
their Citizen Charter, offering 954 Services spanning various sectors viz. Health & Family Welfare, 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Public Welfare, Employment etc. However, only 50% of such services 
where Panchayats are the service owners are being delivered online by the Panchayats.  
Since most of the services relate to State List, the Ministry is persuading the States to provide online 
delivery of the Basic services by the Panchayats in a time-bound manner;  
(a) Water supply & sanitation services such as individual household waste collection & 
transportation; maintenance of drinking water (minor repairs); repair of handpumps; repair/ 
maintenance of community toilets; cleanliness of rainwater harvesting structures in community; 
sanitisation of public places viz. roads, drains, marketplaces, etc.  
(b) Social welfare & administrative services such as issuance of Birth Certificate; Issuance of 
Death Certificate; Issuance of Residence Certificate; Construction Permit; Assessment of 
Property Tax; Application for sanction of IHHL; Issue of MGNREGA Job card.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.7 “The construction of Panchayat Bhawans is being undertaken under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Abhiyan (RGSA). For the year 2024-25, 4420 Panchayat Bhawans were approved, however only 661 
were constructed. States like Chhattisgarh, Kerala and Odisha have full coverage with all Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) having Panchayat Bhawan while a significant number of GPs do not have 
Panchayat Bhawans in States like Bihar (6607 GPs), Haryana (3135 GPs) and Manipur (3678 GPs) 
etc. During the course of evidence, the representative of the Ministry stated that there is a shortage of 
32,000 approximately Panchayat Bhawans in the country and Rs.20 lakh is allocated for construction 
of a Panchayat Bhawan. The Committee are well aware of the importance of Panchayat Bhawans as 
centres for local governance, facilitating meetings, grievance redressal and community programs etc. 
The Committee therefore, urge that the MoPR to expedite pending constructions by streamlining tender 
process and ensuring proper fund utilization and establishing a real-time monitoring dashboard to track 
the status of approved and progress of under construction Panchayat Bhawans. Further, the 
Committee are of the view that Rs.20 Lakh allocated for construction of a Panchayat Bhawan is too 
less in the present situation in view of escalating inflation rate. In view of mounting costs of building 
materials and other construction costs, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should review that 

 
 
31 
 
amount allocated for construction of Panchayat Bhawans and appropriately increase the same and if 
need be, to provide additional fund for those States having large number of GPs without Panchayat 
Bhawans. The Committee have further been informed by the Ministry that the work of the creation of 
network to connect all GPs (approximately 255000 GPs) in the country is being undertaken under 
Bharat Net Project. And so far, 218347 GPs have been made service ready. Besides this the GPs with 
computer is also steadily rising. However, there are some States where more than 50 percent GPs do 
not have computers. The Committee feel that the creation of network connectivity and provision of 
computers to Panchayats needs to pick up pace for the success of the Mission Mode project on e-
Panchayat that seeks to transform the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions to make them more 
transparent, accountable and effective as last mile cutting edge organs of decentralized local self-
government’s.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 “(i) Panchayat being State subject, providing Panchayat infrastructure viz. Gram Panchayat 
Bhawan and procurement of computer is primarily the responsibility of States. In addition, the Untied 
Grants of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) can be utilized for all felt needs under the 29 
subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution and thus it would also cover repair of 
Gram Panchayat Bhawans in the rural areas under the subject: Maintenance of Community assets, as 
one of the permissible activities for XV FC mandated activities by Rural Local Bodies (RLBs). With a 
view to expedite saturation in this direction, a Joint Advisory was issued on 18.01.2021 to States / UTs 
by Secretary of MoPR and that of Ministry of Rural Development inter-alia requesting for construction 
of GP buildings utilizing various resources under convergence mode viz. Unspent 14th Finance 
Commission, FFC grants, 15th Finance Commission untied grants, MGNREGS funds and other funds 
from State Finance Commission (SFC) / Own Source Revenue (OSR) etc. Under the revamped 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), Ministry supplements the efforts of States/UTs with focus on 
NE States, by providing construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawan, co-location of Common Service 
Centre (CSC) and procurement of computer as proposed by States/UTs in their Annual Action Plan 
and approved by Central Empowered Committee (CEC) on a limited scale.  
(ii) Almost all the Panchayats have internet facility, being provided by BSNL and other private 
internet service providers, as all the Gram Panchayats have been using eGramSwaraj Portal for fund 
management and also for preparation of plans. Panchayats can utilize the XVFC grant or any other 
source of revenue available with them for payment for internet services. 
(iii) Further, it is important to highlight that the Ministry had taken significant steps during the 
financial year 2024-25 for improving infrastructure in GPs. To ensure that all GPs with a population of 
more than 3000 persons have a Gram Panchayat building, the Ministry has provided funds for 
construction of 3301 Gram Panchayat Bhawan (GPB) along with CSC Co-location in Gram 
Panchayats. Apart from this a total of 9609 Gram Panchayat Bhawans and the procurement of 28032 
computers have been approved, as proposed by the States/ UTs in their respective Annual Action 
Plans of revamped RGSA since 2022-23 to 2025-26 (as on date 9th May, 2025). Also, during 2024-25, 
procurement of additional 20164 computers has been approved for 7 States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand) to saturate the requirement of 
computers in the Gram Panchayat in these States and also approved 2000 computers to the State of 

 
 
32 
 
Bihar. In addition to above, the eGramSwaraj portal of this Ministry has been integrated with the BSNL 
portal to facilitate panchayats across the nation to apply for a new internet connection and payment of 
monthly bills.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.11 “SVAMITVA (Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas) 
scheme aims at providing the “Record of Rights‟ to rural residential property owners in inhabited rural 
areas in villages and issuance of property cards to the property owners. The scheme has been 
extended beyond FY 2024-2025 to FY 2025-2026. The Committee are constrained to note that the 
Ministry could not achieve its physical targets since it inception FY 2020-21. Approximately 30,000 
villages across various villages required surveying. A target by March 2025 for completing drone flying 
operations in all designated villages has been set. The Ministry in its reply have submitted that the 
targets could not be achieved due to certain States not implementing the scheme, adverse weather 
conditions challenges in assessing scattered villages, logistical hurdles, delays in deploying drone 
teams etc. The Committee also observe that no work has been done under SVAMITVA Scheme in 
State like Bihar or pace of work has been very slow in various States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should prepare a concrete action plan to ensure that the scheme is 
implemented all over the country and set realistic targets, so that the scheme can achieve its targets by 
2025-26.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 “SVAMITVA Scheme was launched in April 2020 by the Hon’ble Prime Minister to provide 
record of rights in inhabited areas of rural India.31 States and UTs have been onboarded on 
SVAMITVA Scheme. Out of a total of 3.45 lakh notiﬁed villages to be covered, drone survey has been 
completed in 3.21 lakh villages and 2.44 Cr property cards have been prepared in 1.64 Lakh villages. 
Drone ﬂying has been saturated in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Lakshadweep, 
Delhi and Ladakh. Scheme has been saturated in Haryana, Uttarakhand, Goa, Dadra Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu, A&N Island and Puducherry. Bihar had not signed MoU for implementation of 
SVAMITVA Scheme and hence, the scheme is not being implemented in the State.  
  
As far as performance of States/UT is concerned, the Ministry has taken following measures for 
Monitoring and Control over the performance of SVAMITVA Scheme and timely achievement of 
targets: 
  
(iv) Weekly progress review with States and Survey of India to review the implementation of the 
SVAMITVA Scheme, address the challenges and support in the resolution of issues. 
States/UTs have been advised to provide ground-verified maps in a time bound manner and 
generate property cards  

 
 
33 
 
(v) Central SVAMITVA Scheme dashboard developed (svamitva.nic.in) to review and monitor for 
Key performance indicators. 
 
(vi) Regular interaction with Survey of India to assess the drone requirements for various states 
and plan the pipeline of drone deployment and augmentation of necessary infrastructure viz. 
data processing labs, GIS digitizers, drone pilots, other resources 
 
State/UT wise progress regarding property cards 
 
S. 
No. 
States/UT’s Notified Drone 
Flying 
Number of 
villages for which 
property card 
prepared 
Number of 
property cards 
prepared 
Number of 
property cards 
distributed 
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
186 186 141 7409 7,409 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13321 13321 0 0 0 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 5596 3610 0 0 0 
4 Assam 1074 946 0 0 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 15791 15791 1202 70307 67751 
6 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
and Diu 
80 80 75 4397 4,397 
7 Delhi 31 31 0 0 0 
8 Goa 410 410 410 672646 672,646 
9 Gujarat 15052 14166 7798 1309457 1228586 
10 Haryana 6260 6260 6260 2515646 2,515,646 
11 Himachal Pradesh 15196 13903 238 5395 5395 
12 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4431 4404 1237 39204 39204 
13 Jharkhand 757 240 0 0 0 
14 Karnataka 30757 19530 3947 1013177 326,069 
15 Kerala 1550 597 0 0 0 
16 Ladakh 230 230 148 15623 15623 
17 Lakshadweep 
Islands 
10 10 0 0 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 43014 43014 35127 3994343 3994343 
19 Maharashtra 37819 37609 17696 2791582 2791582 
20 Manipur 2555 209 0 0 0 
21 Mizoram 550 319 27 2909 1,155 
22 Odisha 3054 2724 43 1716 1,716 
23 Puducherry 96 96 92 2801 2,801 
24 Punjab 12083 10458 178 24089 285 
25 Rajasthan 36,352  35771 13,733 994332 994332 
26 Sikkim 1 1 0 0 0 
27 Tamil Nadu 3 3 0 0 0 
28 Telangana 5 5 0 0 0 
29 Tripura 898 19 893 571783 571783 
30 Uttar Pradesh 90573 90573 67516 10181864 10131232 

 
 
34 
 
31 Uttarakhand 7441 7441 7441 278229 278,229 
  Total 345176 321957 164202 24496909 23650184 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.13 Based on the data from the eGramSwaraj “Observation Count Report,” the committee observe 
that the critical lapses in grant management, non-utilization of funds, financial reporting and record-
keeping across various States indicating that funds earmarked for essential services such as water and 
sanitation are being used for unintended purposes. The Committee also find that a significant portion of 
funds allocated to panchayats remains unutilized due to bureaucratic hurdles, lack of technical 
knowledge, and weak financial management. Therefore, the Committee stressed upon the need for 
strict monitoring mechanisms to ensure timely and effective expenditure. The Committee further 
recommend that Panchayats should be mandated to maintain proper financial records, conduct regular 
audits, and submit utilization certificates. Digital record-keeping systems should also be expanded to 
improve accountability and prevent fund leakages. 
 Reply of the Government 
4.14 (i) To strengthen the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj launched eGramSwaraj on 24th April 2020 under the e-Panchayat Mission Mode 
Project. This integrated digital platform supports key aspects of Panchayat operations such as 
planning, budgeting, accounting, monitoring, asset management, and online payments, ensuring a 
streamlined and transparent workflow. 
(ii) Given the significant devolution of funds to Panchayats, the eGramSwaraj–PFMS Interface (eGSPI) 
was developed to enable real-time financial transactions. By integrating eGramSwaraj with the Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS), this interface allows secure payments to vendors and service 
providers using Digital Signature Certificates (DSCs) and two-factor authentication. It also ensures that 
payments cannot proceed without sufficient funds, reducing errors and enhancing financial discipline. 
 
(iii) To further promote transparency, the Ministry introduced Audit Online, a dedicated web-based 
platform for auditing Panchayat accounts. This tool facilitates the preparation of audit records, inquiries, 
draft audit reports, and paras, thereby ensuring timely audits and improved accountability in Panchayat 
financial management. 
(iv) The PRIs today have an excellent record in book-keeping as all accounts are closed in time. 
Moreover, statutory audit is also completed timely. 
 [O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/4/2025-Parl. Dated: 11th June, 2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 July, 2025 
3 Shraavan, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
36 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
THURSDAY, THE 24th JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1650 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore 
9. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
10. Shri Imran Masood 
11. Shri Janardan Mishra 
12. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
13. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
14. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
15. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
17. Shri Samirul Islam 
18. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
19. Shri Sant Balbir Singh  
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary  -  Deputy 
Secretary 
  

 
 
37 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for (i) consideration and adoption of the Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the 7th Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj; and (ii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and after discussion, adopted the draft Report. 
The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and present the same to 
the Parliament in the ongoing Monsoon Session.   
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX were called in] 
 
4. XXX XXX XX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  
i. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
ii. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
iii. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
iv. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
v. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
5. XXX XXX XX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
 
38 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 [Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  11  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 6, 7, 9 & 11 
 
 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 45% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 & 10 
 
 
 
 
Total: 55 
Percentage: 27% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 