 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources)'] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
16 


 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 16 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
20 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
21 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
26 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the Thirty-Second Sitting of the 
Committee held on 05.08.2025………………………………………... 
27 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj………………………………………………………….. 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. ---Vacant--- 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Atul Singh    - Executive Officer 

 
 
iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (2024-
2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
16th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj on 
'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources)'. 
2.  The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 18.07.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
05.08.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI 
06 August, 2025 
15 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
1 
 
 
  CHAPTER I  
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (2024-25) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in their Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Land Resources). 
1.2 The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. The Report contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 11 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and categorised 
as follows: -  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 
Total:06 
Chapter II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government: 
Serial No. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 2, 8, 9, 10 and 11. 
Total: 05 
Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter V 

 
2 
 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation 
of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for 
any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.  Fund Allocation under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana- Watershed 
Component (WDC-PMKSY) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.6 With regard to Budget allocation for the schemes under the Department of Land 
Resources, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge the positive impact of the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 
in the country with rightful extension of the scheme as WDC-PMKSY 2.0. The 
Committee understand that for extending the coverage and spread of the scheme 
and its stated benefits, the scheme needs more budgetary support year on year. 
Hence, it is disturbing to note that, for 2025-26 the BE of Rs.2505 crore is a very 
nominal increase of Rs 4 crore from previous year's BE of Rs.2501 crore in 2024-
25. This was further reduced by Rs. 701 crore (27.59%) at RE stage with an 
allocation of Rs 1800 crore. Looking at the overall performance of the scheme and 
its remarkable impact on the ground, the Committee feel that while the reduction 
made at the RE stage in such an important scheme is an impediment with almost 
no increase in the allocation for the BE component is also not appropriate, creating 
hindrance in expanding the coverage of the schemes meant to cover newer and 
larger area as the demand grows for development of more rainfed and degraded 
areas. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to seek higher 
funds in order to expand the coverage of the scheme. The Committee also urge 
the DoLR to fully utilize the fund allocated at BE and desist from reduction at RE 
stage.” 
1.7  In the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department in their action taken 
reply have stated as follows: 
“Based on the committee recommendation DoLR is planning to focus on 
the key areas of expenditure in the current year i.e. 2025-26. Also, Department will 
approach Ministry of Finance to enhance the budgetary support at the RE stage. 
After the introduction of SNA-Sparsh the pace of expenditure is decreasing due to 
anomalies/ technical issues in the implementation of SNA-Sparsh.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee recommended the DoLR, to seek more budgetary support to 
expand the coverage of the schemes. Since the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 and 2.0 have shown 

 
3 
 
 
remarkable impact by achieving desired objective, many States have been rightly 
demanding the expansion of the scheme to cover a much larger area. Though the 
Department, in their reply have submitted that they will seek higher budgetary support at 
RE stage, the Committee are of the view that the Department should have planned it well 
in advance by seeking higher fund at BE stage itself. Since the scheme is very impactful 
on ground, expansion of its coverage should always be a priority for the Department for 
benefit of the rural population. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation 
to seek higher funds to expand the coverage of the scheme. 
II. Strict Implementation of the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.9 With regard to implementation of the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR), the Committee recommended the DoLR:  
“The Committee is concerned about various incidents of inadequate 
compensation given for acquisition of land specially in the scheduled areas 
belonging to tribal community in those States covered under the PESA act. It is 
noteworthy that sale of such land is governed by special clauses and lacks 
transaction value, fetching very small amount in comparison to normal land during 
acquisition for Government Projects. The Committee strongly recommend that 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013 should be implemented in its true spirit to ensure just and 
air compensation for affected landowners and communities. All state governments 
should be directed to adhere to the provisions of the Act, refrain themselves from 
diluting it through state-specific amendments. The Social Impact Assessment 
(SIA) process should be strengthened and made mandatory before land 
acquisition.” 
1.10 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The RFCTLARR Act 2013 contains necessary provisions for the fair 
compensation to land acquisition affected families including tribal community living 
in scheduled areas. Apart from above, the Act has provisions for additional 
compensation in case affected family has faced multiple displacements (Section 
39).  
As land acquisition is a subject on the Concurrent List of the Constitution, 
both the Central and State Governments can legislate on it. As a result, several 
states have framed their own rules or amendments aligned with, or in addition to, 
the Central Act. The said Act allows power to State Legislatures to enact any law 
more beneficial to affected families (Section 107). Thus, the central legislation sets 
the minimum standard, and State-level laws cannot dilute the basic entitlements 

 
4 
 
 
provided under the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. 
Under the Act, the Collector determine the 'compensation amount' which 
consists of market value of land multiplied by a factor of 1 to 2 (as notified by the 
appropriate Government) and the value of assets attached to land or building. To 
arrive at the final award, 'solatium' amount equivalent to one hundred percent of 
the 'compensation amount' is additionally provided (Sections 26 to 30 of the Act).  
For the Scheduled Areas, the Central Act under its sections 41 and 42 
contains special provisions to safeguard their interests. Mandatory consultation 
with the Gram Sabha or Panchayats (Fifth Schedule areas) or autonomous 
councils (Sixth Schedule areas) is required before initiating any acquisition in such 
areas. A Development Plan has to be prepared, containing their land rights, a 
programme for development of alternate fuel, fodder and non-timber forest 
produce resources on non-forest lands within a period of five years, sufficient to 
meet the requirements of tribal communities as well as the Scheduled Castes. 
Further, at least one-third of the compensation amount due has to be paid to the 
affected families initially as first instalment and the rest shall be paid after taking 
over of the possession of the land. If they are relocated outside of the district, then, 
they shall be paid an additional 25% R&R benefits along with a one-time 
entitlement of 50,000 rupees. Also, all benefits, including the reservation benefits 
available to the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected areas 
shall continue in the resettlement area. 
RFCTLARR Act 2013 ensures a transparent, consultative &participatory 
approach towards land acquisition. Whenever the appropriate Government intends 
to acquire land for a public purpose, consultation with Panchayat, Municipality or 
Municipal Corporation is done at the village level or ward level in the affected area 
and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) Study is mandatorily carried out” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee take note of the Government’s response regarding the 
implementation of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act), particularly in Scheduled 
Areas governed by the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996 (PESA). While the Ministry has outlined the statutory framework and reiterated 
the legal safeguards available under the Act, including those relating to fair 
compensation, multiple displacements, Scheduled Tribe protections, and procedural 
steps such as Social Impact Assessment (SIA), the Committee are of the considered view 
that the response is insufficient in addressing the core issues raised. The Committee is 
concerned that, despite the existence of these statutory provisions, there continue to be 

 
5 
 
 
widespread and well-documented violations in practice like undervaluation of land 
particularly in Scheduled Areas where market transactions are restricted; delayed or 
superficial Gram Sabha consultations without proper documentation or availability of 
materials in the local language; exclusion of women and vulnerable groups from the 
consultation process; and mechanical issuance of compliance certificates without 
genuine engagement with affected communities. These practices substantially 
undermine the intent of the Act and erode trust in the acquisition process. The 
Committee, therefore, does not endorse the Ministry’s view that the presence of statutory 
safeguards is sufficient. It emphasise that the real challenge lies in their consistent and 
rigorous implementation, particularly in Scheduled Areas where constitutional 
protections under Article 244(1) and the Fifth Schedule, read with PESA Section 4, impose 
a special duty on the State to uphold peace, good governance, and participatory decision-
making. The Committee reiterate that every acquisition in Scheduled Areas must follow 
the full procedural sequence laid down in Sections 4 to 8 of the RFCTLARR Act. In 
particular, the Gram Sabha consultation mandated under PESA must be embedded within 
the SIA process, not conducted separately or after key decisions have already been 
taken. The Committee recommend that the SIA, in its statutory scope under Sections 4–
6 of the Act, must clearly identify all affected families as defined in Section 3(c), including 
livelihood-dependent households reliant on forests, commons, water bodies, and minor 
produce. The SIA must also include mapping of community resources, the loss of which 
would trigger entitlements. The Section 5 public hearing must fulfil the consultation 
requirement under PESA by ensuring that Gram Sabhas are provided with the draft SIA, 
proposed compensation framework under Sections 26–30, details of Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement entitlements under Schedules II and III, and special protections under 
Sections 41 and 42, in the local language and with adequate time for review. The Expert 

 
6 
 
 
Group under Section 7 must record the influence of Gram Sabha inputs on its findings, 
and the Section 8 decision must explicitly apply the statutory tests: assessment of public 
purpose, evaluation of alternatives, benefits outweighing social costs, and confirmation 
that only the bare minimum land is being acquired. The Committee further recommend 
that compensation awards under Sections 26–30 must transparently disclose base 
market value, applicable multiplier, and solatium, with public display at the village level. 
No possession of land should occur until after the full Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
package is delivered or site-ready in accordance with Sections 37–38 of the RFCTLARR 
Act. This includes provision of land for land (Section 41(2)) of the Act wherever feasible, 
with reasons recorded where not feasible; subsistence and shifting allowances; housing 
or housing site; annuity or employment options; and community infrastructure. 
Requirements relating to cultural identity and proximity under Section 41(5) of the Act 
must be fulfilled and documented. The invocation of urgency powers under Section 40 of 
the Act must not be used to bypass the procedural safeguards of Sections 4–8 for 
planned projects. For the sake of transparency and public accountability, the Committee 
strongly recommend that all relevant documents, including the SIA report, Gram Sabha 
records, Expert Group appraisal, Section 8 decision, compensation details, and R&R 
implementation status, be published on an official portal in the local language. Any 
instance where the mandated consultation, assessment, or appraisal process has been 
circumvented or post-dated must be treated as a material procedural violation, subject to 
review and, if necessary, rectification or re-initiation of the process in accordance with 
the Act. The Committee find the Ministry’s reply unsatisfactory and reiterate that the 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013 must be implemented in its entirety and true spirit, especially in 
Scheduled Areas. State-specific amendments or administrative practices that dilute its 
core protections must be discouraged. The Committee urge the Ministry to adopt a 

 
7 
 
 
proactive monitoring and enforcement role ensuring fair and just treatment of families 
affected by the development projects. 
III.  Strengthening the National Monitoring Committee for Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.12 Stressing about the need to strengthen the National Monitoring Committee for 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement, the Committee had recommended that: 
“The Committee is informed that National Monitoring Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, LR has been constituted with several Ministries/ 
Departments as members for reviewing and monitoring the progress of 
implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement schemes or plans related to 
land acquisition under RFCTLARR Act, 2013 in respect of national or inter-state 
projects. However, despite this there is no visible reduction in the number of 
grievances regarding land acquisition/ compensation/ rehabilitation/ 
resettlement. The Committee desire that National Monitoring Committee for 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement should actively intervene in cases of land 
acquisition conflicts, as mandated under Article 48 of the RFCTLARR Act. By 
establishing clear guidelines and timelines for resolving disputes, ensuring that 
displaced individuals receive compensation, alternative land, and livelihood 
support in a timely manner. Further, a public grievance redressal mechanism 
should be introduced to address concerns of affected communities” 
1.13 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The National Monitoring Committee (NMC) has been constituted under 
Section 48 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 to review and monitor the implementation 
of Rehabilitation and Resettlement schemes or plans for National or Inter-State 
projects. In the last meeting (11th meeting) of the NMC held on 30.10.2024, the 
Polavaram Irrigation Project of Andhra Pradesh and Ken Betwa Link project of 
Madhya Pradesh were reviewed. As per information received from the States, a 
grievance redressal portal is available for Polavaram Irrigation Project in Andhra 
Pradesh. For Ken Betwa Link project in Madhya Pradesh, the grievances are 
received by the Collector/SDM and through the Chief Minister’s portal. 
 
In addition to NMC, State Monitoring Committees are constituted by the 
State Governments for reviewing and monitoring the implementation of 
rehabilitation and resettlement schemes or plans under the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. 
For speedy disposal of disputes relating to land acquisition, compensation, 
rehabilitation and resettlement, “the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (LARR) Authorities” are established by the appropriate Government, 
as per Section 51 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. The LARR Authorities have to 
dispose of reference made to them within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt.” 

 
8 
 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee take note of the Government’s response regarding the functioning 
of the National Monitoring Committee (NMC) under Section 48 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 
and its periodic review of projects such as the Ken–Betwa Link and Polavaram. However, 
the Committee express serious concern that despite such institutional mechanisms, 
there has been no significant reduction in grievances relating to land acquisition, 
compensation, rehabilitation, and resettlement, especially in the context of large-scale 
inter-basin river linking projects. These projects, including Ken–Betwa, involve diversion 
of water across ecological and social boundaries, requiring acquisition or diversion of 
forest land, riverine habitats, floodplains, and community resources. They therefore 
trigger multiple legal frameworks, including the RFCTLARR Act (Social Impact 
Assessment and public hearing under Sections 4–8; compensation valuation under 
Sections 26–30; sequencing of possession under Sections 37–38; and Scheduled Tribe 
safeguards under Sections 41–42), as well as forest, environmental, wildlife, irrigation, 
dam safety, and disaster management laws. The Committee understand that several 
recurring deficiencies such as steps often proceed segment by segment without a single 
basin-wide cumulative social, hydrological and ecological assessment; Gram Sabha 
consultation is conducted late and without full documentation; community and individual 
forest rights remain unsettled at the time of diversion; downstream flow alteration, 
sediment trapping, ecological flow, groundwater recharge, and climate resilience are 
poorly modelled; alternative strategies such as reduced storage, phased implementation, 
cropping pattern shifts, watershed recharge, and decentralised irrigation are not 
transparently assessed; and livelihood impacts on fishers, graziers, forest produce 
collectors, women, and other marginalised groups are inadequately represented. As a 
result, projects face protest, litigation, delays, and cost escalation. The Committee 
therefore strongly recommend that all such projects must begin with a single integrated 

 
9 
 
 
baseline and options framework under the RFCTLARR sequence, starting with a basin-
to-basin Social Impact Assessment (SIA) that identifies every category of affected family 
under Section 3(c), including cultivators, tenants, labourers, fishers, pastoralists, forest 
dwellers, artisans, Scheduled Tribes, and women-headed households, while mapping 
seasonal dependence on water bodies, forests, and common lands. This SIA must also 
cover the likely hydrological and ecological impacts of proposed diversion and storage 
on downstream flows, recharge, biodiversity, and livelihoods, so that Section 8 findings 
on public purpose, alternatives, and minimum land requirement are evidence-based. All 
Gram Sabhas in the affected area must receive vernacular summaries, maps, and options 
at least thirty clear days before any decision meetings. No diversion or acquisition 
decision should proceed until all individual and community forest rights, including 
Community Forest Resource (CFR) claims, are fully adjudicated. Consultation or consent 
resolutions must certify that cumulative impacts and alternatives were explained. The 
Committee recommends that Social and Environmental Impact Assessments be 
integrated, with shared datasets and analysis of induced land use change. Ecological 
flow regimes and adaptive management measures, such as drought contingency plans, 
flood release timings, and sediment flushing, must be enforceable project conditions, 
with community and independent expert involvement in monitoring. All affected persons, 
including non-title livelihood dependents, must receive compensation under Sections 
26–30 of the Act with transparent market value, multiplier and solatium, and be entitled 
to Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits under Schedules II and III, such as 
subsistence allowances, housing, annuity or employment options, skill training, and 
community infrastructure, in a manner that ensures no possession occurs before the 
R&R plan is fully implemented, as per Sections 37–38. For Scheduled Tribe families, the 
safeguards under Sections 41–42, such as land-for-land, relocation near original habitat, 

 
10 
 
 
cultural identity protection, and continued access to forests, must be clearly documented 
and certified. Replacement or sustained access to fisheries, grazing, forest produce, and 
women’s livelihood spaces must be secured as part of the R&R plan, since cash alone is 
insufficient. The Committee urge the Ministry to strengthen the National Monitoring 
Committee structurally and functionally to actively intervene in such cases, establish 
clear monitoring guidelines and timelines, set up a centralised grievance redressal portal, 
and ensure that cumulative impact assessments, Gram Sabha processes, and 
entitlements are implemented in full letter and spirit of the RFCTLARR Act, failing which 
such projects risk prolonged social conflict, legal uncertainty, and unjust displacement. 
The Ministry should take all sincere efforts to achieve the goal of the said Act i.e. just 
compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement for the displaced, aiming for a humane and 
transparent process.   
(IV)   Alleged violation of provisions under RFCTLARR Act in Lakshadweep 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.15 With regard to Alleged violation of provisions under RFCTLARR Act in Lakshadweep, the 
Committee recommended that: 
“During their study visit in Lakshadweep, the Committee observed that 
many tribal communities are facing significant challenges related to land 
acquisition, including displacement, lack of proper compensation, and restricted 
access to traditional lands. The Committee recommend the DoLR to take up this 
matter seriously with respective UT administration and all other stakeholders to 
protect the interest of local tribal communities.” 
1.16 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“The RFCTLARR Act 2013 extends to whole of India including 
Lakshadweep. For the Scheduled Tribes, the Central Act under its sections 41 and 
42 contains special provisions to safeguard their interests. Mandatory consultation 
with the Gram Sabha or Panchayats (Fifth Schedule areas) or autonomous 
councils (Sixth Schedule areas) is required before initiating any acquisition in such 
areas. A Development Plan has to be prepared, containing their land rights, a 
programme for development of alternate fuel, fodder and non-timber forest 
produce resources on non-forest lands within a period of five years, sufficient to 
meet the requirements of tribal communities as well as the Scheduled Castes. 
Further, at least one-third of the compensation amount due has to be paid to the 

 
11 
 
 
affected families initially as first instalment and the rest shall be paid after taking 
over of the possession of the land. If they are relocated outside of the district, then, 
they shall be paid an additional 25% R&R benefits along with a one-time 
entitlement of 50,000 rupees. Also, all benefits, including the reservation benefits 
available to the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected areas 
shall continue in the resettlement area. 
For redressal of grievances related to compensation, resettlement or rehabilitation, 
any affected family can approach LARR (Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement) Authority established under the Act.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee take note of the reply provided by the Ministry concerning the 
alleged violations of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013 in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep. 
While the Ministry has reiterated the applicability of the Act to Lakshadweep and outlined 
the statutory protections available under Sections 41 and 42 for Scheduled Tribes, the 
Committee find the response to be generic and inadequate in addressing the specific 
concerns raised by the affected locals during the study visit. The reply fails to engage with 
the substantive issues observed on the ground and does not respond to the patterns of 
procedural deviation and exclusion affecting the tribal and coastal communities in the 
region. The Committee strongly disapprove this interpretation and reaffirms that the 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013, expressly extends protection to livelihood dependents on 
Government and common land. Section 3(c) of the Act clearly defines “affected family” to 
include individuals whose primary source of livelihood for three years prior to acquisition 
depends on water bodies, forests, or common property resources, including fishers, 
gleaners, net menders, boat repairers, vendors, and others. Section 3(d) further extends 
the definition of “affected area” to include localities where access to common resources 
is lost, and Section 3(k) defines land to include both surface and the benefits arising out 
of land use, thus encompassing working beaches and reef-based livelihoods. The 
Committee reiterates that any project enclosing or reclaiming Government coastal or 
lagoon land must be treated as an acquisition under the Act if it affects such livelihood 

 
12 
 
 
users. In such cases, the full procedural safeguards under Sections 4 to 8 must be 
followed. These include a comprehensive Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and public 
hearing (Sections 4–5) identifying all livelihood users, assessing impacts on access to 
fishing grounds, landing beaches, drying areas, boat repair spaces, and market routes; 
publication and independent appraisal (Sections 6–7); and a reasoned decision (Section 
8) applying the tests of public purpose, viable alternatives, and bare minimum land 
requirement with explicit recognition of livelihood loss. Further, compensation and R&R 
benefits under Sections 26 to 30 and Schedules II and III must be extended to all affected 
families, including non-title holders, and no possession may take place until these are 
awarded and implemented, as per Sections 37 and 38. In cases involving Scheduled Tribe 
communities, Sections 41 and 42 provide additional safeguards, including land for land 
where feasible, preservation of cultural identity, and relocation in proximity to the original 
habitat. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Ministry direct the Union 
Territory Administration of Lakshadweep to strictly implement these provisions in both 
letter and spirit. The identification of affected families must be thorough and based on 
verifiable evidence such as Panchayat and cooperative records, seasonal calendars, and 
geotagged photographic documentation of shore-based activities. The SIA must also 
examine genuine alternative sites or design options—such as shared jetties, adjusted 
alignments, or relocation, so as to avoid unnecessary alienation of working coastal areas. 
Where land use change is unavoidable, the R&R plan must include replacement access 
(landing beaches, drying and net mending areas, safe navigation routes, and shelters) 
before taking possession. Under no circumstances should Government ownership of land 
or urgency under Section 40 be used to bypass statutory procedures, nor should any 
approval or possession be allowed to proceed without inclusion of all livelihood users as 
affected families. Any such action, if taken, must be reviewed and, where necessary, set 

 
13 
 
 
aside to restore compliance with the RFCTLARR Act. The Committee underline that this 
approach is firmly rooted in the text and intent of the law and is essential to safeguarding 
the rights and livelihoods of tribal and coastal communities in Lakshadweep. Strict 
adherence to these principles will not only ensure lawful acquisition but also reduce the 
risk of future conflict, social unrest, and legal challenges, thereby enabling more 
sustainable and inclusive development outcomes. 
III. Establishment of a Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Authority 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
1.18 With regard to Establishment of a Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Authority, the Committee had made the following recommendation: 
  “As per provisions under the RFCTLARR Act, a dedicated regulatory authority 
should be set up to oversee all matters related to land acquisition, rehabilitation, 
and resettlement at the national and state levels. Still there are some States 
where this regulatory body has not been set up. The Committee, while 
recommending to establish these authorities on priority basis, also stress upon to 
ensure: 
(i) Speedy resolution of land disputes through a fast-track adjudication 
mechanism. 
(ii) Fair compensation and rehabilitation for displaced individuals, preventing 
procedural delays. 
(iii) Periodic audits of ongoing and past land acquisitions to ensure 
compliance with RFCTLARR Act provisions” 
 
1.19 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“Section 51 of the RFCTLARR Act 2013 provides for establishment of Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Authority (LARRAs) for speedy disposal 
of disputes related to land acquisition. As per this section, the formation as well as 
outlining of jurisdiction, powers and authorities provided to LARRAs is the 
responsibility of the respective State / UT governments.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee take note of the Government’s response stating that, under Section 
51 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013, the responsibility for establishing Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authorities (LARRAs) lies with the respective State and 
Union Territory Governments. However, the Committee expresses serious concern that, 

 
14 
 
 
despite the clear statutory mandate, many States have yet to constitute these Authorities, 
even more than a decade after the Act came into force. This failure not only delays justice 
for project-affected families but also undermines the core objectives of fairness, 
transparency, and timely redressal envisaged in the Act. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate its recommendation for the urgent establishment of LARRAs in all States and UTs. 
In this regard, the Committee strongly urge the Ministry of Rural Development to 
proactively coordinate with State Governments to ensure the timely notification and 
operationalization of these Authorities. The Ministry may also consider issuing necessary 
advisories, providing technical support, and compiling periodic compliance reports from 
the States. Furthermore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry set up a central 
monitoring mechanism to assess the functionality of LARRAs, with particular focus on the 
speed of dispute resolution, enforcement of compensation and rehabilitation, and 
retrospective audit of acquisitions to ensure adherence to the provisions of the 
RFCTLARR Act. Furthermore, recognising the long-term economic vulnerability of farm 
families whose agricultural land is acquired, particularly for revenue-generating 
commercial or industrial projects, the Committee recommend insertion of a new provision 
establishing a mandatory community stake and profit-sharing mechanism. This 
mechanism should guarantee, in addition to existing compensation and R&R entitlements, 
either a share of project equity (held through a statutory trust at the Gram Sabha or 
Panchayat level) or a percentage of gross project revenues, whichever is higher, credited 
annually for a minimum of fifteen years. The trust should use these funds transparently 
for livelihood restoration, education, healthcare, infrastructure, and annuity support for 
the most vulnerable. Such a mechanism would give enduring meaning to the Act’s 
objective of improving the post-acquisition standard of living, reduce grievances, and 
align long-term project benefits with community welfare, while retaining the compensation 

 
15 
 
 
and rehabilitation entitlements already due under law.  Skill development for the displaced 
and affected persons can also become crucial to integrate them back to the labour 
workforce and contribute their economy.   

 
16 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Committee note that during the year 2025-26 there has been reduction of Rs 17.00 
crore in the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS / Scheme component) of the Department of Land 
Resources (DoLR) over the BE of previous year. While the BE for the year 2024-25 was Rs. 2642 
crore, the allocation for this year i.e. 2025-26 has been reduced to Rs. 2625 crore. The Committee 
also note that the allocation at RE stage in 2024-25 was reduced to Rs.1941 crore. Considering 
the importance of two major flagship schemes being implemented by the DoLR i.e. Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY) and Digital India Land Records Modernization 
Programme (DILRMP); the Committee is concerned that overall budgetary support to the 
Department is being reduced year on year which impacts the expansion of coverage of these 
important schemes. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to provide more budgetary 
support to spread the coverage and benefit common masses at a larger scale. 
Reply of the Government  
2.2 Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC-PMKSY) 
  
Based on the committee recommendation DoLR is planning to focus on the key areas of 
expenditure in the current year i.e. 2025-26. Department will also approach Ministry of Finance to 
enhance the budgetary support at the RE stage. After the introduction of SNA-Sparsh fund 
disbursement system, the pace of expenditure is decreasing due to anomalies / technical issues 
in the implementation of SNA-Sparsh 
  
Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP) 
 
Digital India Land Record Modernization Programme (DILRMP) is being implemented as 
a Central Sector Scheme with effect from 1st April, 2016 with 100% funding by the Centre. The 
programme has been extended from 2021-22 to 2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.875 crore. This 
amount of Rs. 875 crore was bifurcated for the duration of 2021-22 to 2025-26. Out of Rs.875.00 
crore allocation under DILRMP, an amount of Rs.754.06 crore has been released during the years 
2021-22 to 2024-25 (04 years). Accordingly, Rs.120.00 (residual amount) has been allocated as 
BE for the year 2025-26. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.3 The Committee also find that the activities under this scheme are largely overlapping with 
the schemes of other Departments and Ministries such as Ministry of Jal Shakti (Water 
Resources), Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare and Department of Rural Development 

 
17 
 
 
which fails to give clarity on the work and performance of the scheme to common public and a lot 
of activities go unnoticed being overshadowed by major flagship project due to smaller size/ 
activity carried out under the scheme. The Committee therefore, recommend that work proposals 
should be invited from elected local representatives including Members of Parliament to add more 
quality of work and recognition to this important scheme. 
Reply of the Government  
2.4 To promote greater public awareness about the Scheme, DoLR has launched a mass 
outreach campaign, 'Watershed Yatra' in the month of February 2025 and now started 
Watershed Janbhagidari Cup as well to continue that momentum. The Watershed Yatra created 
a mass level public awareness in the entire country during a short span of time. Department has 
also planned to launch such type of events on frequent basis. Department is working for creating 
a mechanism for inviting work proposals from elected local representatives, including Members 
of Parliament. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
2.5 The Committee note that the NITI Aayog has recommended that the cost norms for the 
scheme should be revised as per current market scenario. They have also suggested cost norms 
between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 30,000 per hectare for the plains. Contrary to this, WDC-PMKSY 2.0 
goes with the revised cost norm of RS. 28,000 per hectare for hilly and difficult areas, Rs. 22000/- 
per hectare for other areas and up to Rs. 28,000 per hectare for watershed projects in Integrated 
Action Plan Districts. The Committee agree to the fact that higher cost norms as per prevalent 
market condition is utmost requirement for long term performance of the assets created under 
this scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department should increase cost 
norm as suggested by expert groups to ensure maintenance and upkeep of ongoing projects. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The DoLR is yet to revise the cost norms based on the current market scenario, inflation 
index etc. In the next scheme WDC-PMKSY 3.0, Department will try to prescribe higher Cost 
norms. Department will also try to prescribe a provision for maintenance and upkeep of the water 
harvesting structures under existing projects. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
2.7 The Committee note that though substantial progress has been made under WDC-
PMKSY 1.0 in terms of creation of water harvesting, area brought under protective irrigation, 
increase in plantation, treatment of wastelands etc., the problem of depleting water level is posing 
a serious threat to life and livelihoods of millions of people throughout the country. The Committee 
are concerned with this problem and therefore, recommend to include more projects in areas 

 
18 
 
 
where the water level is depleting in order to revive traditional water bodies like storm water drains, 
small rivers and ponds, and dysfunctional borewells by employing suitable water harvesting 
techniques in affected areas. 
Reply of the Government  
2.8 The WDC-PMKSY 1.0 was much larger Scheme compared to WDC-PMKSY 2.0.  DoLR 
is planning to propose a new scheme named WDC-PMKSY 3.0, which will undertake projects in 
areas where there is serious water depletion in water level and also for revival of the traditional 
water bodies. Further, DoLR is planning to undertake a large Springshed development Scheme 
for addressing water scarcity in the hilly areas.  DoLR is also planning to create a mechanism for 
the maintenance and upkeep of the structures in post project period as well. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
2.9 The Committee also note that there has been a reduction of Rs.21 crore in the allocation 
at BE stage 2025-26 for Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme (DILRMP). While 
in 2024-25 it was Rs.141 crore, this year it has been reduced to Rs.120 crore with a reduction of 
14.89% at BE stage in 2025-26. Considering the overall performance of this important scheme 
and remarkable impact on the ground, the Committee feel that the reduction made in the BE 
component is not appropriate affecting the pace of implementation of this scheme. The Committee 
recommend the DoLR to demand appropriate higher funds in order to ensure timely 
implementation and further expansion of the scheme for the benefit of the country. 
Reply of the Government  
2.10 Digital India Land Record Modernization Programme (DILRMP) has been extended from 
2021-22 to 2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.875 crore. This amount of Rs. 875 crore was bifurcated 
for the duration of 2021-22 to 2025-26. Out of Rs.875.00 crore allocation under DILRMP, an 
amount of Rs.754.06 crore has been released during the years 2021-22 to 2024-25 (04 years). 
Accordingly, Rs.120.00 (residual amount) was allocated as BE for the year 2025-26.  The DoLR 
would approach Ministry of Finance, Government of India for more fund during 2025-26, if 
required. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.11 The Committee appreciate the initiative of e-Registration along with progress made in 
implementation of all components under DILRMP. While noticing few shortcomings like non-
updation of information regarding the status of court cases resulting in fraudulent transactions, 
the Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to ensure timely updation of the records with real 
time data pertaining to all courts including Supreme Court, High Courts, District Court and Local 

 
19 
 
 
Tehsil level that will help in curbing multiple registration in absence of authentic information and 
ensure clear title of the property to rightful actual owners. 
Reply of the Government  
2.12 DoLR has initiated the linkage of e-Court with Land Records and Registration data. The 
objective of Linkage of e-Court with Land Record and Registration data base is to make authentic 
first-hand information available to the Courts resulting in speedy disposal of cases and ultimately, 
reduction in land disputes. Pilot test for linking of e-Court with land record and registration data 
base has been undertaken successfully in three states namely, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttar 
Pradesh in association with Department of Justice. So far, 26 States/UTs namely; Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, 
Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have received necessary clearances from the concerned High 
Courts for integration of e-Courts Application Software with the land records application software 
and registration database. 
 [DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
 
 

 
20 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.1 The Committee acknowledge the positive impact of the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 in the country 
with rightful extension of the scheme as WDC-PMKSY 2.0. The Committee understand that for 
extending the coverage and spread of the scheme and its stated benefits, the scheme needs 
more budgetary support year on year. Hence, it is disturbing to note that, for 2025-26 the BE of 
Rs.2505 crore is a very nominal increase of Rs 4 crore from previous year's BE of Rs.2501 crore 
in 2024-25. This was further reduced by Rs. 701 crore (27.59%) at RE stage with an allocation of 
Rs 1800 crore.  
  
            Looking at the overall performance of the scheme and its remarkable impact on the 
ground, the Committee feel that while the reduction made at the RE stage in such an important 
scheme is an impediment with almost no increase in the allocation for the BE component is also 
not appropriate, creating hindrance in expanding the coverage of the schemes meant to cover 
newer and larger area as the demand grows for development of more rainfed and degraded areas. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to seek higher funds in order to expand 
the coverage of the scheme. The Committee also urge the DoLR to fully utilize the fund allocated 
at BE and desist from reduction at RE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 Based on the committee recommendation DoLR is planning to focus on the key areas of 
expenditure in the current year i.e. 2025-26. Also, Department will approach Ministry of Finance 
to enhance the budgetary support at the RE stage. After the introduction of SNA-Sparsh the pace 
of expenditure is decreasing due to anomalies/ technical issues in the implementation of SNA-
Sparsh. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.3 The Committee is concerned about various incidents of inadequate compensation given 
for acquisition of land specially in the scheduled areas belonging to tribal community in those 
States covered under the PESA act. It is noteworthy that sale of such land is governed by special 
clauses and lacks transaction value, fetching very small amount in comparison to normal land 

 
22 
 
 
during acquisition for Government Projects. The Committee strongly recommend that RFCTLARR 
Act, 2013 should be implemented in its true spirit to ensure just and air compensation for affected 
landowners and communities. All state governments should be directed to adhere to the 
provisions of the Act, refrain themselves from diluting it through state-specific amendments. The 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) process should be strengthened and made mandatory before 
land acquisition. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The RFCTLARR Act 2013 contains necessary provisions for the fair compensation to land 
acquisition affected families including tribal community living in scheduled areas. Apart from 
above, the Act has provisions for additional compensation in case affected family has faced 
multiple displacements (Section 39).  
As land acquisition is a subject on the Concurrent List of the Constitution, both the Central and 
State Governments can legislate on it. As a result, several states have framed their own rules or 
amendments aligned with, or in addition to, the Central Act. The said Act allows power to State 
Legislatures to enact any law more beneficial to affected families (Section 107). Thus, the central 
legislation sets the minimum standard, and State-level laws cannot dilute the basic entitlements 
provided under the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. 
Under the Act, the Collector determine the 'compensation amount' which consists of market value 
of land multiplied by a factor of 1 to 2 (as notified by the appropriate Government) and the value 
of assets attached to land or building. To arrive at the final award, 'solatium' amount equivalent to 
one hundred percent of the 'compensation amount' is additionally provided (Sections 26 to 30 of 
the Act).  
For the Scheduled Areas, the Central Act under its sections 41 and 42 contains special provisions 
to safeguard their interests. Mandatory consultation with the Gram Sabha or Panchayats (Fifth 
Schedule areas) or autonomous councils (Sixth Schedule areas) is required before initiating any 
acquisition in such areas. A Development Plan has to be prepared, containing their land rights, a 
programme for development of alternate fuel, fodder and non-timber forest produce resources on 
non-forest lands within a period of five years, sufficient to meet the requirements of tribal 
communities as well as the Scheduled Castes. Further, at least one-third of the compensation 
amount due has to be paid to the affected families initially as first instalment and the rest shall be 
paid after taking over of the possession of the land. If they are relocated outside of the district, 
then, they shall be paid an additional 25% R&R benefits along with a one-time entitlement of 
50,000 rupees. Also, all benefits, including the reservation benefits available to the Scheduled 
Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected areas shall continue in the resettlement area. 
RFCTLARR Act 2013 ensures a transparent, consultative &participatory approach towards land 
acquisition. Whenever the appropriate Government intends to acquire land for a public purpose, 
consultation with Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation is done at the village level or 
ward level in the affected area and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) Study is mandatorily carried 
out. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
23 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.5 The Committee is informed that National Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, LR has been constituted with several Ministries/ Departments as members for 
reviewing and monitoring the progress of implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement 
schemes or plans related to land acquisition under RFCTLARR Act, 2013 in respect of national 
or inter-state projects. However, despite this there is no visible reduction in the number of 
grievances regarding land acquisition/ compensation/ rehabilitation/ resettlement. The Committee 
desire that National Monitoring Committee for Rehabilitation and Resettlement should actively 
intervene in cases of land acquisition conflicts, as mandated under Article 48 of the RFCTLARR 
Act. By establishing clear guidelines and timelines for resolving disputes, ensuring that displaced 
individuals receive compensation, alternative land, and livelihood support in a timely manner. 
Further, a public grievance redressal mechanism should be introduced to address concerns of 
affected communities. 
Reply of the Government  
4.6 The National Monitoring Committee (NMC) has been constituted under Section 48 of the 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013 to review and monitor the implementation of Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement schemes or plans for National or Inter-State projects. In the last meeting (11th 
meeting) of the NMC held on 30.10.2024, the Polavaram Irrigation Project of Andhra Pradesh and 
Ken Betwa Link project of Madhya Pradesh were reviewed. As per information received from the 
States, a grievance redressal portal is available for Polavaram Irrigation Project in Andhra 
Pradesh. For Ken Betwa Link project in Madhya Pradesh, the grievances are received by the 
Collector/SDM and through the Chief Minister’s portal. 
 
In addition to NMC, State Monitoring Committees are constituted by the State 
Governments for reviewing and monitoring the implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement 
schemes or plans under the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. 
  
For speedy disposal of disputes relating to land acquisition, compensation, rehabilitation 
and resettlement, “the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (LARR) Authorities” are 
established by the appropriate Government, as per Section 51 of the RFCTLARR Act, 2013. The 
LARR Authorities have to dispose of reference made to them within a period of six months from 
the date of receipt.  
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
24 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.7 During their study visit in Lakshadweep, the Committee observed that many tribal 
communities are facing significant challenges related to land acquisition, including displacement, 
lack of proper compensation, and restricted access to traditional lands. The Committee 
recommend the DoLR to take up this matter seriously with respective UT administration and all 
other stakeholders to protect the interest of local tribal communities. 
Reply of the Government  
4.8 The RFCTLARR Act 2013 extends to whole of India including Lakshadweep. For the 
Scheduled Tribes, the Central Act under its sections 41 and 42 contains special provisions to 
safeguard their interests. Mandatory consultation with the Gram Sabha or Panchayats (Fifth 
Schedule areas) or autonomous councils (Sixth Schedule areas) is required before initiating any 
acquisition in such areas. A Development Plan has to be prepared, containing their land rights, a 
programme for development of alternate fuel, fodder and non-timber forest produce resources on 
non-forest lands within a period of five years, sufficient to meet the requirements of tribal 
communities as well as the Scheduled Castes. Further, at least one-third of the compensation 
amount due has to be paid to the affected families initially as first instalment and the rest shall be 
paid after taking over of the possession of the land. If they are relocated outside of the district, 
then, they shall be paid an additional 25% R&R benefits along with a one-time entitlement of 
50,000 rupees. Also, all benefits, including the reservation benefits available to the Scheduled 
Tribes and the Scheduled Castes in the affected areas shall continue in the resettlement area. 
For redressal of grievances related to compensation, resettlement or rehabilitation, any affected 
family can approach LARR (Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement) Authority 
established under the Act. 
 [DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
4.9 As per provisions under the RFCTLARR Act, a dedicated regulatory authority should be 
set up to oversee all matters related to land acquisition, rehabilitation, and resettlement at the 
national and state levels. Still there are some States where this regulatory body has not been 
set up. The Committee, while recommending to establish these authorities on priority basis, also 
stress upon to ensure: 
 (i) Speedy resolution of land disputes through a fast-track adjudication 
mechanism. 

 
25 
 
 
 (ii) Fair compensation and rehabilitation for displaced individuals, preventing 
procedural delays. 
 (iii) Periodic audits of ongoing and past land acquisitions to ensure compliance with 
RFCTLARR Act provisions. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 Section 51 of the RFCTLARR Act 2013 provides for establishment of Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement Authority (LARRAs) for speedy disposal of disputes related to land 
acquisition. As per this section, the formation as well as outlining of jurisdiction, powers and 
authorities provided to LARRAs is the responsibility of the respective State / UT governments. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
26 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2025-GC & Parl. Dated:18.07.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
06 August, 2025 
15 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
27 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 5th AUGUST, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1000 hrs to 1040 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
8. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
9. Shri Imran Masood 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
12. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha       
13. Shri Samirul Islam 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
15. Shri Nagendra Ray 
16. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
a. Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 6th Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Department of Land 
Resources (Ministry of Rural Development); and 
b. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
3. Above mentioned draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 

 
28 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
 ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  11  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 
 
 
 
Total: 6 
Percentage: 55% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 2, 8, 9, 10 and 11. 
 
 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 45% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 