STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats’ (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj] 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
23 


TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats’ (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 


CRD No. 214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
12 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
13 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
17 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on      
12.12.2025………………………………………………...................... 
18 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
25. Shri Samirul Islam 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
28. Smt. Rajathi 
29. Shri Nagendra Ray 
30. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
31. Smt. P.T. Usha 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 23rd Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats’ (2024-25) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
2.  The Eighteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 18.11.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
12.12.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Eighteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15 December, 2025 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Clean and 
Green Village: Role of Panchayats’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj'. 
1.2 The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025. The Report contained 04 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 2 & 3  
 Total: 02 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 1 & 4 
Total: 02 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 

2 
 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for 
any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that Final Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.      Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Creation of New Scheme Namely “Clean and Green Village” 
1.6 With regard to Creation of new scheme namely “Clean and Green Village”, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has encouraged the Gram Panchayats (GPs) for 
preparation of thematic based Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). 
Out of 9 Themes one of the Theme is "Clean and Green Village" with the aim to 
provide adequate drinking water and sanitation services, clean air, food security 
etc. for the villagers. During the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that 
Ministry do not have any scheme for this theme but under Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) training have been provided to elected representatives, 
stakeholders and panchayat functionaries so that they prepare details plans on 
this theme. Approximately 99000 panchayats have adopted this theme through 
Sankalp and nearly 4 lakhs stakeholders have been trained during the last three 
years. The Committee observe that rural India is an asset to speed-up 
socioeconomic development and attaining the target of SDG. Despite noble 
objectives, the "Clean and Green Village" initiative faces many challenges in its 
implementation in the country. There is no scheme in MoPR named "Clean and 
Green Village" due to which no separate funds are allocated for this theme. This 
scheme is depended on State assistance, some states giving more assistance 
than others, hence, the progress of this theme is uneven across the country. 
Training is provided to stakeholders but they are facing problem to implement it 
properly on ground level and involvement of local people/villagers are very low, 
which affects the success and sustainability of this theme. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that MoPR should start a separate and Independent Sanitation 
scheme with adequate funds and clear guidelines to provide additional financial 
support to poor States to maintain parity in implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee also recommend that for the purpose specialized training be imparted 
based on feasibility, creating awareness programme/campaigns by strengthening 
usage and behaviour change communication to motivate locals/villagers to take 
active participation for effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
further recommend to establish a dedicated "Clean Village Fund" under MoPR, 

3 
 
allowing direct disbursement to Panchayats so that massive activities like door 
to-door campaigns, wall art and local folk media on toilet hygienic, usage of 
dustbins in households, public places, institutions, household using clean 
cooking-fuel, can be taken up by including community influencers and SHGs in 
behaviour change programmes. The Panchayats can also take up Local 
Sanitation Governance and Monitoring by maintaining village sanitation resisters 
to monitor usage of constructed toilets. Integrate sanitation dashboard with 
eGramSwaraj to track progress and flag gaps.” 
  
1.7 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1.1 Ministry is implementing Revamped Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) w.e.f. financial year 2022-23 with the 
main objective to capacitate Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs) through imparting 
training to Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders of Panchayats 
to develop their governance capabilities for leadership roles to enable the 
Panchayats to function effectively.  
1.2 There is no such scheme under the Ministry that directly provides support 
for Clean & Green Villages. However, Ministry provides support under the 
scheme of RGSA for Capacity Building & Training (CB&T) of ERs, Functionaries 
and other Stakeholder of Panchayats. The CB&T activities are mainly carried out 
for preparation and implementation of convergent and comprehensive Gram 
Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP). Further, following interventions are 
carried out to assist Panchayats through State Government in creation of “Clean 
and Green Village”: 
i. Thematic Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP): Preparation of 
thematic GPDP has been institutionalized, where Panchayats prepare 
development plans focusing on specific themes, including "Clean and Green 
Village" by taking ‘Sankalp’. This enables need-based, locally-driven planning 
aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The activities related 
to “Clean and Green Village” have been incorporated in the portal for 
preparation of Plan. 
ii. Sankalp based GPDP: Gram Panchayats have been advised to prepare 
Sankalp / resolution based GPDP for focus intervention on at least one theme 
out of 9 themes including “Clean and Green Village”.  
iii. Capacity Building & Training: One of the major areas of intervention of the 
Ministry is Capacity Building & Training under the scheme of RGSA. The 
Elected Representatives, functionaries and other Stakeholders of Panchayats 
are being provided training on various aspects of Localisation of Sustainable 
Development Goals (LSDGs) including preparation of thematic GPDP, taking 
Sankalp, convergence at grassroots level, etc.  Total 39,50,59 participants 
were trained under the scheme so far for theme 5: Clean & Green Panchayat.  
iv. Digital initiative for monitoring: An integrated portal called e-GramSwaraj 
portal based on worked based accounting has been introduced to enhance 

4 
 
transparency, accountability, and real-time monitoring of budgeted 
development works included in Panchayat Development Plan, including 
activities undertaken in the theme of Clean & Green village.  
1.3 Further, it is pertinent to mention that the Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation (DDWS) is already implementing the flagship Swachh Bharat Mission 
(SBM), a national priority programme of the Government of India. The scheme 
focuses on sustaining the Open Defecation Free (ODF) status of villages, 
improving cleanliness in rural areas through solid and liquid waste management, 
and making villages ODF Plus. Accordingly, it may not be appropriate to 
implement a separate sanitation scheme with similar objectives under the Ministry 
of Panchayati Raj, as it could result in duplication of efforts and create difficulties in 
maintaining records etc.” 
  Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee note that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is implementing the 
Revamped Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan 
(RGSA) from 2022–23. The scheme aims to strengthen Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) by providing capacity building and training to the elected representatives 
and other stakeholders so they can perform their governance responsibilities 
effectively.  The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry does not run 
any scheme specifically for Clean & Green Villages, however, support is provided 
through RGSA for training and capacity building related to holistic Gram 
Panchayat Development Planning (GPDP).  Further, the Committee note that the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is already implementing the flagship 
Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) in the country which focuses on sustaining ODF 
status, rural cleanliness, solid and liquid waste management, and making villages 
ODF Plus. The Committee feel that launching another similar sanitation scheme 
under the Ministry of Panchayati Raj would cause duplication and administrative 
challenges.  The Committee note that the main objective of RGSA to capacitate 
Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs) through imparting training to Elected 
Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders of Panchayats to prepare good 
GPDPs and develop their governance capabilities for leadership roles to enable 
the Panchayats to function effectively.  The Committee observe the major gap in 
the current framework is the absence of dedicated funding for Clean & Green 
Village activities under RGSA.  The Committee observe that Panchayats are not 

5 
 
equipped with the financial resources for implementing environment-related 
works such as waste management systems, composting infrastructure, or small-
scale water conservation initiatives, as a result thereof, well prepared GPDPs and 
other plans stay only on paper and real work does not take place on the ground.  
To strengthen the effort for Clean and Green Villages, the Committee again urges 
the MoPR should start a separate scheme “Green and Clean Village” with 
sufficient fund along with technical support, set simple targets for cleanliness 
and environmental work, regularly follow up after training, and make sure 
different departments work together smoothly. The Committee also recommend 
that training for digital reporting should be improved so data entered on the e-
GramSwaraj portal could be more accurate and reliable. Additionally, rewarding 
good-performing Panchayats and making at least one clean and green activity 
compulsory in every GPDP will motivate villages to take these initiatives more 
sincerely and show better results on the ground in future. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Panchayats as Self-Reliant Unit 
1.9 Regarding Panchayats as Self-Reliant Unit, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“From the foregoing the Committee are of the firm view that in order to achieve 
complete success of this clean and green village Gram Panchayats must be 
given full autonomy to prepare local plan by incorporating best practices like 
processing of litter, organic farming, avoid use of plastic or its management and 
power to levy taxes, generate income source in order to finance the local 
schemes meant for welfare of the village, otherwise basic purpose of the scheme 
would not be achieved. The Committee are firm that following this process all 
Gram Panchayats will be transformed as self-reliant according to the spirit of the 
73rd Constitutional Amendment, Act 1992” 
1.10 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1.1  Panchayat", being "Local Government", is a State subject and part of State 
List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up to 
achieve and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts which 
may vary from State to State, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. Article 
243G of the Constitution empowers the Legislature of a State to make provisions, 
by law, for the devolution of power and responsibilities upon Panchayat at 
appropriate level, subject to such conditions, as may be, specified with respect to 

6 
 
the preparation of plans and implementation of schemes for economic 
development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in 
relation to matters included in the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. The 
State legislatures are to consider the 29 subjects illustratively set out in the 
Eleventh Schedule for devolution of power and responsibilities upon Panchayats. 
Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats, including to prepare local plan by 
incorporating best practices, power to levy taxes, generate income sources in 
order to finance the local schemes, comes within jurisdiction of the State 
Government. It is the primary responsibility of the State Government to make 
Gram Panchayats self-reliant through devolution of powers and authority upon 
Panchayats. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has initiated thematic approach of 
relevance for Panchayats and villages through aggregating 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) into 9 broad themes for localization of SDGs at 
grass-root level and their attainment through concerted and collaborative efforts 
of all concerned stakeholders. These themes address more than one SDG and 
concern more than one Ministry/ Department. Theme 5 - Clean and Green 
Village addresses targets in SDG 6- Clean Water Sanitation, SDG 7 Affordable & 
Clean Energy, SDG 12- Responsible Consumption and Production, SDG 13 - 
Climate Action, SDG 14 – Life Below Water and SDG 15 - Life on Land. 
1.2 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has consistently emphasized participatory 
and decentralized planning in line with the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 
1992, which envisages Panchayats as institutions of self-government. Through 
the Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) framework, Panchayats are 
encouraged to prepare comprehensive local plans by adopting best practices 
such as solid and liquid waste management, plastic waste management, organic 
farming, and other sustainable initiatives. The Ministry has also been 
encouraging Panchayats to mobilize own-source revenue through local taxes, 
fees, and service charges, in addition to Central and State transfers, to 
strengthen their resource base. 
  
1.3 These efforts are aimed at enabling GPs to become self-reliant institutions 
of local governance, aligned with the spirit of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment 
and the Committee’s vision of clean and green villages. 
  
1.4 The Ministry promotes "Saksham" Panchayats by augmenting Own 
Source Revenue (OSR) at GP level and prioritizing intensive training for Elected 
Representatives and Panchayat functionaries, along with sensitization of officials 
at State, District, and Block levels in the current financial year towards generation 
of OSR. In this regard a Module for generation of Own Source Revenue OSR by 
Gram Panchayat has been developed by Indian Institute of Management, 
Ahmedabad. Further, the Ministry has made provisions for States/UTs to 
undertake capacity building and training programme for elected representatives 
and Panchayat functionaries on generation of OSR.” 
  

7 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee note that as per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
of India, “Panchayat” (local government) is a State subject and Panchayats are 
established through State Panchayati Raj Acts. Article 243G allows State 
Legislatures to make laws giving Panchayats powers and responsibilities at the 
appropriate level. These powers include preparing local plans and implementing 
schemes for economic development and social justice, including 29 subjects 
listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. The Committee further note 
that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has grouped the 17 Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) into 9 themes for villages. In order to have effective plan and 
implement local development by coordinating efforts across different 
departments. The Committee also note that the Ministry helps “Saksham” 
Panchayats to earn their own money (Own Source Revenue or OSR) and also 
impart training to elected members and Panchayat staff/officials at State, District, 
and Block levels to create awareness to generate revenue. The Committee note 
that, the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad has made a module to guide 
Panchayats on earning OSR in the States and Union Territories to run training 
programs to help Panchayats to raise money locally.  The Committee observe 
that despite of having many laws and efforts made, still some Panchayats do not 
have full powers to make proper local plans, collect enough taxes, or earn money 
to run local projects. Thus, Panchayats are dependent on the State and not able 
to take decisions even to meet local needs of their villages. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the MoPR to fill up these gaps in consultation with the States by 
allowing Panchayats to generate their own revenue to meet their local 
requirements like: regular training, encourage community participation, and 
ensure better coordination between the concerned departments to ensure focus 
on clean and green village. The Committee hope that by taking initiatives of waste 
management, water conservation, renewable energy, organic farming etc., 
villages will surely become truly self-reliant. 
 

8 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Increase in Financial Assistance for Construction of IHHLs 
 
2.1  Financial assistance of Rs.12,000/- and technical support are provided by the 
Government to eligible households for construction of Individual Household Latrines 
(IHHLs) in rural villages under various scheme like Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) 
etc. Further financial assistance also provided to Gram Panchayats for constructing 
Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) in villages. However, the Committee is 
surprised to observe that the financial assistance 9 amount for IHHLs has remained 
unchanged over the past several years, despite a significant increase in the cost of 
construction materials during above period. Hence, Committee feel that the allocated 
amount is inadequate to meet the actual construction costs, thus, the objectives of the 
scheme has not been achieved up to the optimum level. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the amount of financial assistance for toilets construction may be 
increased to match the current cost of construction materials and labour so that people 
can easily build toilets and the purpose of the scheme can be achieved. While 
disbursing assistance prioritize vulnerable households with no access to functional 
toilets to keep villages 100 percent defecation free by ensuring availability of toilets in all 
Public Institutions, Anganwadi Centres, Panchayat Bhawans, State Centres, Schools 
etc. Further Committee desire that Government should empower Panchayats to top-up 
assistance from own funds. The adequate regular and timely flow of funds is essential 
to achieve the aims and objectives of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The subject of construction of Individual Household Latrines (IHHLs) and 
Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) in rural areas, including provision of financial 
assistance under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen), falls within the purview of the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti, which is 
the nodal Ministry implementing the programme. 

9 
 
  
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, while not directly responsible for this scheme, 
works in close coordination with the nodal Ministry to enable Panchayats to play an 
active role in planning, mobilisation, implementation, and monitoring of sanitation-
related initiatives. Panchayats are also being encouraged to promote convergence of 
funds, including Finance Commission grants; Own Sources of Revenue, grants etc., to 
support sanitation infrastructure at the local level and to bridge resource gaps wherever 
necessary 
DDWS has informed that presently, the incentive being provided for IHHLS under 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) Phase-II is Rs. 12,000/-. The recommendation of the 
Standing Committee has been noted by DDWS. Any changes in the incentive will be 
brought to the notice of the Committee. 
Operational Guidelines of SBM (G) Phase II provide flexibility to the State / UT 
Governments to provide higher incentive / additional funding from other sources such as 
15th Finance Commission grants, MPLAD / MLALAD / CSR funds or through 
convergence with MGNREGS or other schemes of the State or Central Governments, 
etc. 
After launch of Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) in 2014, the responsibility of 
school and Anganwadi toilets has been transferred to Ministry of Education and Ministry 
of Women and Child Development, respectively. 
 [O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
Recommendation No.3  
Maintenance of Community Toilet Unit 
2.3 Community Toilet Unit (CTU) is helpful for people who do not have toilets in their 
homes due to lack of space and money, specially in poor or crowded areas and villages. 
CTU is usually built as toilet blocks that can be used by some group of people every 
day. The Committee appreciate the CTU scheme, which has significantly improved 
sanitation access to the needy people and make environment clean. The Committee 
observe that the scheme faces several challenges in its effective implementation, 
including irregular cleaning, 10 insufficient water supply, lack of user awareness, and 
inadequate waste management infrastructure. A major concern is the absence of long-
term maintenance contracts for CTUs. The Committee note that without proper 
maintenance after its construction, the condition of CTUs deteriorates over the time. As 
a result, thereof, the people stop using them, rendering the facilities unsafe or unusable. 

10 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that MoPR a long-term maintenance contracts 
for all CTUs should be given to local panchayats to ensure their effective 
implementation and upkeep. A well-designed public toilet should have all essential 
qualities such as clean and dry, well ventilated, easy to maintain, carefully planned 
layout and friendly to persons with disabilities and special needs etc. Regular cleaning 
and inspections should be conducted by trained staff, and a steady water supply must 
be guaranteed for proper usage. Further, waste disposal systems need to be improved 
to maintain cleanliness and safety in the surrounding area. The construction of CTUs 
should adhere to specific guidelines concerning the number of seats allocated for men 
and women, separately, availability of bathing facilities, and provisions for persons with 
disabilities. The Committee also recommend that the region/communities where 
concept of using toilet is a taboo and people not mentally ready, the panchayats should 
first focus on making them aware about benefits of its usage by encouraging them to 
use CTU. This will help in optimum utilization of funds for toilet construction under 
IHHLs aiming at clean and green village.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The subject of construction and funding of Community Sanitary Complexes 
(CSCs) falls within the ambit of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, which is the nodal Ministry implementing the Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Grameen).  However, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj recognizes that the long-
term operation and maintenance of such community assets is critical to sustaining their 
utility and effectiveness. Towards this end, in collaboration with National Institute of 
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR), training programmes are conducted 
for Panchayats in the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) sector, covering aspects 
such as contract management for operation and maintenance of public toilets, water 
supply services, solid waste management, and wastewater/faecal sludge management. 
These efforts are aimed at enabling Panchayats to take up local-level responsibilities 
effectively, including the upkeep of Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs). 
  
The Ministry has also highlighted the issue of operations and maintenance of 
community assets, including Community Sanitary Complexes, in its interactions with the 
Sixteenth Finance Commission 
DDWS has informed that under Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Phase-II 
operational guidelines, States/UTs have been advised that ODF- plus villages with more 
than 100 households must endeavour to have at least one CSC which may cater to the 
sanitation needs of floating/migrant population.  The Gram Panchayat will decide upon a 

11 
 
suitable location for construction of CSC that is easily accessible to all, having adequate 
water availability and where long-term Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is 
ensured.  For the construction of CSC, priority shall be given to the locations with 
predominant SC/ST habitations, poorest of poor in the village and/or those visited by 
migrant labourers/floating population etc.  The CSCs shall have separate facilities for 
men and women, and shall consist of an appropriate number of toilet seats, bathing 
cubicles, washing platforms, wash basins, etc.  The CSC should be accessible for 
Divyangjans.  Under Swachh Bharat Mission Grameen (SBMG), Rs. 3 Lakh has been 
provisioned for construction of CSCs (30% of this has to be borne by Gram Panchayats 
from 15th FC grants).  As per the guidelines, the responsibility for O&M of CSC is with 
Gram Panchayats and they should endeavor to operate and maintain the CSC through " 
Pay and Use model" wherever possible.  
 [O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE  
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has encouraged the Gram Panchayats (GPs) for 
preparation of thematic based Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). Out of 9 
Themes one of the Theme is "Clean and Green Village" with the aim to provide 
adequate drinking water and sanitation services, clean air, food security etc. for the 
villagers. During the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that Ministry do not 
have any scheme for this theme but under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) 
training have been provided to elected representatives, stakeholders and panchayat 
functionaries so that they prepare details plans on this theme. Approximately 99000 
panchayats have adopted this theme through Sankalp and nearly 4 lakhs stakeholders 
have been trained during the last three years. The Committee observe that rural India is 
an asset to speed-up socioeconomic development and attaining the target of SDG. 
Despite noble objectives, the "Clean and Green Village" initiative faces many 
challenges in its implementation in the country. There is no scheme in MoPR named 
"Clean and Green Village" due to which no separate funds are allocated for this theme. 
This scheme is depended on State assistance, some states giving more assistance 
than others, hence, the progress of this theme is uneven across the country. Training is 
provided to stakeholders but they are facing problem to implement it properly on ground 
level and involvement of local people/villagers are very low, which affects the success 
and sustainability of this theme. Hence, the Committee recommend that MoPR should 
start a separate and Independent Sanitation scheme with adequate funds and clear 
guidelines to provide additional financial support to poor States to maintain parity in 
implementation of the scheme. The Committee also recommend that for the purpose 
specialized training be imparted based on feasibility, creating awareness 
programme/campaigns by strengthening usage and behaviour change communication 
to motivate locals/villagers to take active participation for effective implementation of the 
scheme. The Committee further recommend to establish a dedicated "Clean Village 
Fund" under MoPR, allowing direct disbursement to Panchayats so that massive 

14 
 
activities like door to-door campaigns, wall art and local folk media on toilet hygienic, 
usage of dustbins in households, public places, institutions, household using clean 
cooking-fuel, can be taken up by including community influencers and SHGs in 
behaviour change programmes. The Panchayats can also take up Local Sanitation 
Governance and Monitoring by maintaining village sanitation resisters to monitor usage 
of constructed toilets. Integrate sanitation dashboard with eGramSwaraj to track 
progress and flag gaps. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 1.1 Ministry is implementing Revamped Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) w.e.f. financial year 2022-23 with the main 
objective to capacitate Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs) through imparting training to 
Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders of Panchayats to develop their 
governance capabilities for leadership roles to enable the Panchayats to function 
effectively.  
1.2 There is no such scheme under the Ministry that directly provides support for 
Clean & Green Villages. However, Ministry provides support under the scheme of 
RGSA for Capacity Building & Training (CB&T) of ERs, Functionaries and other 
Stakeholder of Panchayats. The CB&T activities are mainly carried out for preparation 
and implementation of convergent and comprehensive Gram Panchayat Development 
Plan (GPDP). Further, following interventions are carried out to assist Panchayats 
through State Government in creation of “Clean and Green Village”: 
v. Thematic Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP): Preparation of 
thematic GPDP has been institutionalized, where Panchayats prepare 
development plans focusing on specific themes, including "Clean and Green 
Village" by taking ‘Sankalp’. This enables need-based, locally-driven planning 
aligned with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The activities related to 
“Clean and Green Village” have been incorporated in the portal for preparation of 
Plan. 
vi. Sankalp based GPDP: Gram Panchayats have been advised to prepare 
Sankalp / resolution based GPDP for focus intervention on at least one theme 
out of 9 themes including “Clean and Green Village”.  
vii. Capacity Building & Training: One of the major areas of intervention of the 
Ministry is Capacity Building & Training under the scheme of RGSA. The 
Elected Representatives, functionaries and other Stakeholders of Panchayats 
are being provided training on various aspects of Localisation of Sustainable 
Development Goals (LSDGs) including preparation of thematic GPDP, taking 
Sankalp, convergence at grassroots level, etc.  Total 39,50,59 participants 
were trained under the scheme so far for theme 5: Clean & Green Panchayat.  
viii. Digital initiative for monitoring: An integrated portal called e-GramSwaraj 
portal based on worked based accounting has been introduced to enhance 
transparency, accountability, and real-time monitoring of budgeted 

15 
 
development works included in Panchayat Development Plan, including 
activities undertaken in the theme of Clean & Green village.  
1.3 Further, it is pertinent to mention that the Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation (DDWS) is already implementing the flagship Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), 
a national priority programme of the Government of India. The scheme focuses on 
sustaining the Open Defecation Free (ODF) status of villages, improving cleanliness in 
rural areas through solid and liquid waste management, and making villages ODF Plus. 
Accordingly, it may not be appropriate to implement a separate sanitation scheme with 
similar objectives under the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, as it could result in duplication of 
efforts and create difficulties in maintaining records etc.” 
 [O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 From the foregoing the Committee are of the firm view that in order to achieve 
complete success of this clean and green village Gram Panchayats must be given full 
autonomy to prepare local plan by incorporating best practices like processing of litter, 
organic farming, avoid use of plastic or its management and power to levy taxes, 
generate income source in order to finance the local schemes meant for welfare of the 
village, otherwise basic purpose of the scheme would not be achieved. The Committee 
are firm that following this process all Gram Panchayats will be transformed as self-
reliant according to the spirit of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment, Act 1992. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 1.1  Panchayat", being "Local Government", is a State subject and part of State 
List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up to achieve 
and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts which may vary from 
State to State, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. Article 243G of the 
Constitution empowers the Legislature of a State to make provisions, by law, for the 
devolution of power and responsibilities upon Panchayat at appropriate level, subject 
to such conditions, as may be, specified with respect to the preparation of plans and 
implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be 
entrusted to them including those in relation to matters included in the Eleventh 
Schedule to the Constitution. The State legislatures are to consider the 29 subjects 
illustratively set out in the Eleventh Schedule for devolution of power and 
responsibilities upon Panchayats. Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats, 
including to prepare local plan by incorporating best practices, power to levy taxes, 

16 
 
generate income sources in order to finance the local schemes, comes within 
jurisdiction of the State Government. It is the primary responsibility of the State 
Government to make Gram Panchayats self-reliant through devolution of powers and 
authority upon Panchayats. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has initiated thematic 
approach of relevance for Panchayats and villages through aggregating 17 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) into 9 broad themes for localization of SDGs 
at grass-root level and their attainment through concerted and collaborative efforts of 
all concerned stakeholders. These themes address more than one SDG and concern 
more than one Ministry/ Department. Theme 5 - Clean and Green Village addresses 
targets in SDG 6- Clean Water Sanitation, SDG 7 Affordable & Clean Energy, SDG 
12- Responsible Consumption and Production, SDG 13 - Climate Action, SDG 14 – 
Life Below Water and SDG 15 - Life on Land. 
1.2 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has consistently emphasized participatory and 
decentralized planning in line with the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, which 
envisages Panchayats as institutions of self-government. Through the Gram Panchayat 
Development Plan (GPDP) framework, Panchayats are encouraged to prepare 
comprehensive local plans by adopting best practices such as solid and liquid waste 
management, plastic waste management, organic farming, and other sustainable 
initiatives. The Ministry has also been encouraging Panchayats to mobilize own-source 
revenue through local taxes, fees, and service charges, in addition to Central and State 
transfers, to strengthen their resource base. 
  
1.3 These efforts are aimed at enabling GPs to become self-reliant institutions of 
local governance, aligned with the spirit of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment and the 
Committee’s vision of clean and green villages. 
  
1.4 The Ministry promotes "Saksham" Panchayats by augmenting Own Source 
Revenue (OSR) at GP level and prioritizing intensive training for Elected 
Representatives and Panchayat functionaries, along with sensitization of officials at 
State, District, and Block levels in the current financial year towards generation of OSR. 
In this regard a Module for generation of Own Source Revenue OSR by Gram 
Panchayat has been developed by Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. 
Further, the Ministry has made provisions for States/UTs to undertake capacity building 
and training programme for elected representatives and Panchayat functionaries on 
generation of OSR. 
 [O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No H-11013/9/2025-Parl. dated 18.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15 December, 2025 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

18 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
FRIDAY, THE 12th DECEMBER, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1510 hrs in Committee Room No. '2',  
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
      
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
16. Smt. Rajathi 
17. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
18. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following draft reports: 
a. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
b. Draft report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the 18th Report on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats’ (2024-25) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 

19 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
  

20 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  04  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 2, 3 
 
 
 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 50% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 1, 4 
 
 
 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 50% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 