STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Devolution of Funds under Panchayati Raj System’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
30 


THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Devolution of Funds under Panchayati Raj System’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 


CRD No. 221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____ Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 19 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
22 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
23 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
35 
ANNEXURES 
I Letter issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional 
Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of 
States/Union Territories to prepare and publish a clear, time-
bound roadmap for devolution of powers to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. 
36 
II Letter issued by Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union 
Territories regarding timely constitution of District Planning 
Committee in every district of States/Union Territories. 
37 
III Letter issued by Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union 
Territories regarding timely constitution of District Planning 
Committee and use NITI Aayog framework for integrated district 
plans. 
38 
IV Extracts of the Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 24.03.2026 39 
V Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
41 

ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
27. Smt. Rajathi 
28. Shri Nagendra Ray 
29. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
30. Smt. P.T. Usha 
31. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Under Secretary 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2025-26) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 30rd Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural 
Development & Panchayati Raj on 'Devolution of Funds under Panchayati Raj System’ (2024-
25) of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
2.  The Fifteenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19.08.2025 and was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2025. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 27.11.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
24.03.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifteenth (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Devolution of Funds under Panchayati Raj System’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. 
1.2 The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 29-07-2025 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29-07-2025. The Report contained 10 Observations/ 
Recommendations. 
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been 
examined and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Serial Nos. 3 & 5 
 Total: 02 
Chapter II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government: NIL 
    Total: NIL 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10 
Total: 08 
 Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total: NIL 
Chapter V 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
I.      Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Re-structuring of Tied and Untied Grants 
1.6 With regard to Re-structuring of tied and Untied Grants, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) recommended 
grants for Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) as Untied (40%) and Tied (60%) grants. 
Tied grants are earmarked for sanitation and drinking water and Untied grants 
used for local needs under the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Tied 
grants can be reallocated between sanitation and water supply once saturation 
is achieved in either category after certification by the Gram Sabha and 
confirmation by the State Government or relevant supervisory authority. The 
Committee further note that similar scheme relating to sanitation and drinking 
water like ‘Har Ghar Nal Har Ghar Jal’ and ‘Swachh Bharat Mission-I & II’ etc. 
are run by the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation under the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti. During the briefing, the representative of Ministry had stated that if 
the work of drinking water and sanitation is 100% completed in a Panchayat, 
hence tied fund will not be released to concerned Panchayat and tied grant 
cannot be used for untied grant. The Committee feel that in such a situation 
there is need to balance the structure of grants released under Central Finance 
Commission to Rural Local Bodies. The Committee therefore, recommend that 
MoPR should work out a mechanism for reallocation of grants between Tied 
and Untied for optimum utilization of allocated funds upon saturation of one 
service area to achieve the development goals.” 
  
1.7 In regard to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“1.1 Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has highlighted before the XVI Finance 
Commission that the Tied grants be earmarked for the following focus areas, to 
enable holistic development in Panchayats 

3 
 
 
i. Panchayat infrastructure, including construction of Panchayat 
Bhawans with the basic facilities. 
ii. Rural roads and drainage systems. 
1.2 The remaining funds, i.e., Untied grants, could be earmarked to other 
locally felt needs (excluding the O&M component) and enabling Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) to exercise discretion in addressing their locally felt needs (as 
per the 29 Subjects listed in the 11thschedule). It has also been urged to the 
XVI Finance Commission that special attention may be given to backward and 
lagging States/UTs to ensure equitable development and balanced resource 
allocation across regions. 
1.3 It may be noted that the structure and conditions governing the ‘Tied 
and Untied grants are laid down by the Finance Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance. As the design and composition of tied and untied 
grants fall within the purview of the Finance Commission, the Ministry has 
limited powers in effecting changes. However, the issue has been brought 
to the notice of the 16th Finance Commission for consideration in its 
future recommendations.” 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee note that the Ministry has expressed their limitation in 
effecting changes/restructuring the tied and untied grants and have taken up the 
issue with 16th Finance Commission for consideration in its future 
recommendations. However, the Committee notes with concern that no interim 
arrangement has been indicated to address the practical difficulties faced by 
Panchayats after achieving saturation in drinking water and sanitation coverage. 
The Committee, therefore, further recommend that the MoPR, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance and Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, evolve 
an interim flexibility framework for optimal utilisation of tied grants, so that funds 
do not remain unutilised at the Panchayat level. Further, the Committee also 
desires that the Ministry should place before the 16th Finance Commission 
evidence-based inputs, including best practices from States, to strengthen the 
case for a practical design of grants. 

4 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Income Source of Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) 
1.9 Regarding Income Source of Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Rural Local Bodies 
(RLBs), the Committee had recommended as under: 
“Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) depends on 
grants received from the State Finance Commission (SFC) and Central 
Finance Commission (CFC) etc. for their funds in the county. Some 
GPs/RLBs which are adjoining urban areas have generated income 
through renting/leasing Panchayat properties, sale of assets, organizing 
income generated programmes and levy and collect the local taxes like 
property tax, vehicle tax etc. MoPR in their presentation during the briefing 
stated that it has taken several steps to increase the own income sources 
of GPs/RLBs, focusing on financial empowerment and capacity building. 
The Committee feel that despite taking several steps/efforts most 
GPs/RLBs have not been able to develop and generate their source of 
income satisfactorily. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoPR 
should provide financial and technical assistance to enhance panchayat’s 
capacity to develop and generate their own sources of income and urge 
States to devolve more powers and functions to Panchayats. So that they 
may perform their core duties of providing basic amenities to the rustic 
populace. The Committee also desire that the MoPR should explore the 
feasibility of providing more incentives and awards to Panchayats that 
perform well so that they are encouraged and motivated to raise their own 
source of income to meet their needs and vital standards.” 
1.10 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“2.1 MoPR has developed an application aimed to provide a digital 
platform to empower Panchayats in augmenting and monitoring their tax / 
non-tax revenue sources – "SAMARTH Panchayat Portal" - by 
streamlining & digitalization of underlying processes and online collection 
of revenue. This is envisaged to strengthen the financial capabilities and 
local governance of Panchayats, thereby ensuring improved quality of life 
for residents at the grassroots level. The portal provides an end-to-end 
digital system for revenue management covering assessment, demand 
generation, collection, and reporting. 
2.2   MoPR is also in the process of developing Model Own Source 
Revenue (OSR) Rules that aim at providing a guiding framework for States 
that have either not formulated OSR rules yet or require improvements in 
their existing ones. Through this model framework, States will be 
encouraged to devolve adequate taxation powers and clearly define the 
procedures by which RLBs can levy, collect, and manage different forms 

5 
 
of local revenues. These developments are envisaged as complementary 
instruments, one providing the digital infrastructure and the other providing 
the regulatory framework, to ensure that Panchayats are both empowered 
and equipped to raise their own income.  
2.3  In this regard, the Ministry has also established an OSR Cell with 
an aim to evolve a sustainable model for Panchayats to encourage the 
generation of their OSR and empower the Panchayats to become the 
Growth Centres. 
2.4  The broader goal is to make the Panchayats Atmanirbhar / self-
reliant, thereby enabling them to perform their core responsibilities of 
delivering basic amenities and services to rural citizens. 
MoPR is making continuous efforts to create "Saksham Panchayat" in line 
with the vision of ‘Vikshit Bharat’. In this endeavour, the Government is 
focusing on making Gram Panchayat self- reliant by strengthening their 
financial capabilities, improving local governance and enhancing public 
service delivery. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has developed a special 
module with the help of IIM Ahmedabad for training of elected 
representatives and officials on OSR. Ministry has also rolled out special 
training module of elected women representatives which contain financial 
management related component.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  The Committee note that the MoPR has initiated several steps such as 
development of the ‘SAMARTH Panchayat Portal’, a digital platform for 
augmenting and monitoring tax/non-tax revenue sources to empower 
Panchayats, formulating Model Own Source Revenue (OSR) Rules as guiding 
framework for States, establishment of OSR cell for empowering panchayats to 
become growth centers, development of special training module for training of 
elected representatives, officials and elected women representatives on OSR. The 
Committee appreciates these steps taken by the Ministry in its efforts to create 
“Saksham Panchayat”. However, the Committee observes that the Ministry has 
not provided a time-bound roadmap with measurable outputs and state-wise 
implementation milestones for scaling up OSR mobilisation across the country. 
The committee, therefore, further recommend that MoPR should take sincere 
steps and accordingly lay down clear timelines with quarterly targets for adoption 
of Model OSR Rules, operationalisation of SAMARTH and measurable 

6 
 
enhancement of OSR collection by Panchayat particularly in low-performing 
states. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should publish a State/UT-
wise OSR performance dashboard to ensure transparency, benchmarking and 
accountability, to achieve its goal within time limit. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Timely Uploading of Gram Panchayats Development Plans (GPDPS) on 
eGramSwaraj Portal 
1.12 Regarding Timely Uploading of Gram Panchayats Development Plans (GPDPs) 
on eGramSwaraj Portal, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) prepared by each Gram 
Panchayat is to identify local development needs and improving 
infrastructure like water, sanitation, road, education, health and welfare of 
villages and villagers. The utilization and monitoring of Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) grants are done through the eGramSwaraj portal. 
Uploading of GPDPs on eGramSwaraj portal every year is mandatory 
condition for releasing XV Finance Commission Grant to GPs. Non-
submission of GPDPs may result in suspension, discontinuation or less 
release of this grants against allocation, which will directly impact the 
Panchayat’s financial resources and its capacity to implement planned 
activities. Referring to the data available on the portal 
https://gpdp.nic.in/planPlusReport.html as on 25.06.2025, the Committee 
observed that some States/UTs have not uploaded any GPDPs and some 
States/UTs have uploaded fewer GPDPs as compared to others. The 
Committee fail to understand that if timely and complete uploading of 
GPDP is not done by the GPs on the eGramSwaraj portal as to how the 
Ministry is to monitor the utilisation of funds/grants of CFC by the 
States/GPs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in coordination with States should conduct regular training 
to panchayat members on technical and financial support for preparing 
and uploading of timely and correct GPDPs on eGramSwaraj portal to 
ensure their eligibility of grants. The Committee also recommend that 
MoPR should encourage GPs to align their GPDPs with Block and District 
level plans to achieve better coordination and more effective development 
outcomes.” 
 
1.13 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“The Ministry has been implementing the RGSA since the financial year 
2022-23. The primary objective of the scheme is to strengthen PRIs by 

7 
 
providing training at various levels (State/ District/ Block) to Elected 
Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders of Panchayats. The support 
for capacity building and training provided in different categories like 
orientation/refresher training of elected representatives, training on 
Panchayat Development Plan (PDP), viz. Gram Panchayat/ Block 
Panchayat/ District Panchayat Development Plans covering different 
aspects of effective PDP formulation and implementation. Under the 
scheme, approval is also granted for technical trainings, including training 
on the eGramSwaraj portal, as proposed by the States/UTs and approved 
by the Central Empowered Committee (CEC). During 2024-25, around 
99% of GPs have uploaded their Gram Panchayat Development 
Programme (GPDP). Very few GPs have not uploaded their GPDPs due to 
technical, administrative and procedural issues. These issues are taken up 
with States and resolved from time to time.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14  The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply have stated that since 
2022-23, various training programmes at various levels are being imparted to 
Elected Representatives and stakeholders of Panchayats to strengthen PRIs 
under RGSA and as a result thereof during 2024-25 around 99% GPs have 
uploaded their GPDP on e-GramSwaraj portal. The Committee, observe that mere 
uploading of GPDPs may not translate into effective grassroots planning unless 
GPDP are technically sound, convergence-based, implementable and are made 
timely. The Committee, therefore, further recommend that the Ministry should 
institute a State/UT-wise monitoring framework for timely preparation of GPDP, 
their quality including monthly identification of defaulting Panchayats and 
providing remedial support mechanisms. The institutionalization of error-
resolution and technical support mechanism will help in faster grievance 
redressal and resolution of portal-related issues. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Strengthening Devolution of Powers to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
1.15 Regarding Strengthening Devolution of Powers to Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs), the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee expresses deep concern that, despite more than three 
decades since the enactment of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment, the 

8 
 
spirit of democratic decentralisation envisioned therein remains largely 
unfulfilled in many parts of the country. The devolution of the 3Fs: 
Functions, Funds, and Functionaries, to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
continues to be partial, fragmented, and uneven across states. Many 
Panchayats function with limited administrative authority, inadequate 
financial resources, and without effective control over line departments or 
local planning processes. The committee recommend that each state must 
prepare and publish a clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers 
to PRIs, covering the full range of subjects listed under the Eleventh 
Schedule of the Constitution. Administrative control over local 
functionaries such as health workers must be effectively transferred to the 
Panchayats to enable genuine local self-governance. The committee also 
recommends that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to prepare an annual 
"State of Devolution Report" measuring progress on the 3Fs in each state, 
and table it before Parliament and The Union Government, through the 
Finance Commission and centrally sponsored schemes, should link 
financial incentives to actual performance in devolution, thereby 
encouraging states to empower PRIs more meaningfully.” 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“6.1 “Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part of 
State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are 
set up and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts 
which may vary from State to State, subject to the provisions of the 
Constitution. Article 243G of the Constitution empowers the Legislature of 
a State to make provisions, by law, for the devolution of power and 
responsibilities upon Panchayat at appropriate level, subject to such 
conditions, as may be, specified with respect to the preparation of plans 
and implementation of schemes for economic development and social 
justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to matters 
included in the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution. The State 
legislatures are to consider the 29 subjects illustratively set out in the 
Eleventh Schedule for devolution of power and responsibilities upon 
Panchayats. Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats, including to 
prepare and publish a clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers 
to PRIs, comes within jurisdiction of the State Government. The Ministry 
has issued an advisory dated 12.09.2025 to all States/UTs in this regard.  
6.2  Recently, the Ministry has released a report titled “Status of 
Devolution to Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-Based 
Ranking, 2024” in February 2025 to assess the effectiveness of devolution 
and the role of local governments in strengthening grassroots democracy. 
This report presents the Devolution Index, which provides the overall 
scores and ranks for all States/Union Territories covered under Part-IX of 
the Constitution, based on six identified dimensions: Framework, 

9 
 
Functions, Finances, Functionaries, Capacity Enhancement, and 
Accountability. Ranking of States/UTs in Devolution Index and Sub-indices 
is attached as Annexure-I. 
6.3  For the assessment of Panchayats, the MoPR has launched the 
Panchayat Advancement Index (PAI) which is a multi-domain and multi-
sectoral index that is intended to be used to assess the overall holistic 
development, performance & progress of Panchayats. The index takes 
into account various socio-economic indicators and parameters to gauge 
the well-being and development status of the local communities within the 
jurisdiction of a Panchayat.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  The Committee express satisfaction to note that as a measure for 
strengthening Devolution of Powers to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), 
Ministry has taken some laudable steps like (i) Issue of advisory to States/UTs for 
preparation and publishing a clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers 
to PRIs coming within their jurisdiction; (ii) Launch of ‘Devolution Index’ in 
February 2025 for States/UTs covered under Part IX of the Constitution and 
ranking them based on six identified dimensions; and (iii) Launch of Panchayat 
Advancement Index (PAI) to assess overall holistic development, performance 
and progress of Panchayats. The Committee, however, observe that issue of 
advisories, and indices by themselves may not be enough to achieve real 
progress unless they are backed by implementation commitments and 
measurable timelines at the state level. The Committee, therefore, further 
recommend that the Ministry should obtain time-bound action plans from states 
and monitor progress through periodic reviews. The Committee, further, desire 
that the Ministry should place before Parliament an Annual National Status 
Report on ‘State of Devolution Report’ highlighting improvements, measuring 
progress on the 3Fs, persistent gaps and targeted interventions required. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 

10 
 
Ensuring Financial Autonomy through Predictable and Accountable Untied Fund 
Transfers to Panchayats 
1.18 Regarding Ensuring Financial Autonomy through Predictable and Accountable 
Untied Fund Transfers to Panchayats, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee believes that untied funds form the backbone of 
meaningful decentralisation. Without financial empowerment and flexibility, 
the vision of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment will remain unfulfilled, 
and Panchayats will be unable to deliver on the aspirations of the people 
they are meant to serve. Untied funds are essential for enabling 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to function as effective units of local 
self-governance. States must ensure the regular and adequate provision 
of such funds through a predictable and formula-based allocation 
mechanism that is transparent, equitable, and grounded in objective 
criteria such as population, geographic area, and levels of socio-economic 
backwardness. These funds should be disbursed in a timely and periodic 
manner, preferably on a quarterly or monthly basis, without administrative 
delays or discretionary controls, to ensure that Panchayats can plan and 
execute works independently. Equally important is the need to allow 
Panchayats full autonomy in the planning and utilisation of untied funds in 
accordance with locally identified needs and priorities. This financial 
discretion must be safeguarded from unguided interference by line 
departments or higher administrative authorities. At the same time, 
appropriate systems for accountability, such as Gram Sabha oversight, 
participatory planning, social audits, and transparency in reporting, must 
be institutionalised to ensure that funds are spent efficiently and in the 
public interest. To strengthen this system, states should also invest in 
capacity building of Panchayat representatives and staff in areas such as 
financial management, budgeting, and project monitoring. The use of 
digital tools for real-time expenditure tracking and linking a portion of 
future transfers to simple performance indicators, such as responsiveness 
to community demands or completion of planned works, can further 
enhance accountability and effectiveness.” 
1.19 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“7.1 As per the Operational Guidelines for the implementation of the 15th 
(XV) Finance Commission recommendations, the basic (untied) grants of 
the 15th (XV) Finance Commission can be utilized by the Rural Local 
Bodies (RLBs) under the 29 subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule 
to the Constitution, except for salaries and other establishment costs. 
Further, the distribution of grants to the RLBs by the States is done as per 
the directions provided in the Operational Guidelines, and the State 
Governments are required to transfer the same to the RLBs within 10 
working days. 

11 
 
7.2 MoPR has been leveraging digital technology at the Panchayat 
level to enable the Panchayats to function effectively and efficiently, and 
also for the Ministry to monitor the public expenditure being incurred by the 
Panchayat. In this regard, MoPR has developed eGramSwaraj, a work-
based accounting module for the Panchayats. eGramSwaraj provides a 
single platform for all the planning and accounting needs of the 
Panchayats. It captures all the aspects of Panchayat functioning, such as 
planning, budgeting, monitoring, expenditure, asset management, 
including real-time payments to the vendors. 
7.3 RGSA is being implemented since financial year 2022-23. The 
primary objective of the scheme is to strengthen Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs) by providing training at various levels (State/ District/ 
Block) to Elected Representatives (ERs) and other stakeholders of 
Panchayats. The support for capacity building and training is provided 
under various categories covering different subjects which include training 
on financial management, budgeting, and related areas, as proposed by 
the States/UTs in their Annual Action Plans and approved by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC). Under the scheme, the States are also 
required to contribute the matching State share in the approved budget, as 
per the norms of the revamped RGSA. Under the scheme since 2022-23, 
total 1,36,03,218 participants were trained as on 18th November, 2025 
covering various aspects of Panchayats and rural governance 
including financial management, budgeting and project monitoring. 
7.4 Further, the Ministry has introduced the Management Development 
Programme (MDP) in collaboration with Institutes of Excellence (IoEs), 
with the objective of strengthening the leadership capabilities of Elected 
Representatives (ERs) and officials of PRIs covering different aspects 
such as financial management, budgeting and project monitoring. Further, 
the Ministry has advised States/UTs to expand collaborations by entering 
into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with local or nearby 
institutions, in addition to IoEs, to supplement the efforts of the Ministry.  
7.5 MoPR would like to submit that, the O/o Comptroller & Auditor 
General, along with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), 
has initiated a certification course for creating a pool of accountants for 
Local Bodies (including remote areas) across the country. This is aimed at 
addressing the shortage of trained accountants across the Panchayats. 
The States have been requested to create awareness about the 
Certification course and to ensure maximum participation.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 

12 
 
1.20  The Committee have noted that the steps taken by the Ministry regarding 
timely releasing the united grants under the Fifteenth Finance Commission to 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) along with the steps taken to improve 
transparency, accountability, and training. The Committee appreciates these 
steps and feel that stronger system is needed to ensure real results at the ground 
level. Digital platforms like eGramSwaraj have improved transparency in 
spending the united grant and they should support Panchayats rather than limit 
their decision-making. Proper guidance, basic infrastructure, and simpler digital 
processes are needed to ensure that smaller Panchayats are not disadvantaged. 
The Committee reiterate their recommendation that timely and sufficient releasing 
of untied funds to PRIs is essential for local financial independence. The 
Committee also recommend that fund transfers to PRIs should be monitored 
regularly and any persistent delays should be avoided. The Committee also 
suggests that States should adopt a clear, formula-based system for giving 
untied funds, without unnecessary discretion, following the Finance 
Commission’s guidelines also. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Strengthening District Planning Committees for Effective Decentralized 
Development 
1.21 Regarding Strengthening District Planning Committees for Effective 
Decentralized Development, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes with concern that despite the constitutional 
mandate under Article 243ZD, many states have either not constituted 
District Planning Committees (DPCs) or have allowed them to remain non-
functional in practice. In states where DPCs have been formed, their 
functioning is often limited by irregular meetings, lack of technical and 
administrative support, poor integration of rural and urban development 
plans, and inadequate involvement of elected representatives. This has 
resulted in fragmented planning, duplication of efforts across departments, 
and underutilisation or misallocation of funds, particularly in centrally 
sponsored schemes and state-level initiatives. The Committee 
recommends that all states take immediate steps to constitute District 
Planning Committees in every district and ensure their effective 
operationalisation. DPCs should be empowered to prepare integrated 
district development plans by consolidating inputs from Panchayats and 
Municipalities, with active participation of elected representatives and 

13 
 
coordination with line departments. States must issue clear operational 
guidelines to ensure that DPCs meet regularly, are supported by qualified 
technical and planning staff, and operate with transparency. Their 
decisions and meeting outcomes should be publicly documented and 
monitored. Further, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in consultation with 
State Planning Departments and NITI Aayog, should develop a model 
framework for participatory district planning, including standardized 
formats, digital tools, and timelines for submission and review. To 
incentivize meaningful decentralised planning, a portion of central and 
state scheme allocations should be linked to DPC-vetted plans that 
demonstrate convergence, local relevance, and accountability.” 
1.22 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“8.1 Article 243ZD of the Constitution provides for setting up a District 
Planning Committee, in every State at the district level, to consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and 
to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. The 
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to- 
  
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; 
  
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: 
  
8.2 Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of 
members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the 
elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the 
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the 
population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district; 
  
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to 
such Committees; 
  
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be 
chosen. 
  
8.3 Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft 
development plan, 
  
(a) have regard to— 
  
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the 
Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other 
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation; 

14 
 
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or 
otherwise; 
  
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by 
order, specify. 
  
The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the 
development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the 
Government of the State. 
  
8.4 It falls under the jurisdiction of the State Government to compose 
District Planning Committee (DPC), the manner in which the seats in such 
Committees shall be filled, the manner in which the Chairpersons of such 
Committees shall be chosen, functioning relating to district planning etc. 
  
8.5 In this regard, the Ministry has issued an advisory dated 
13.11.2025 (Annexure II) to all States/UTs with the request to take 
necessary action to constitute, if not already done, District Planning 
Committee in every district and ensure their effective operationalisation in 
conformity with the Article 243ZD of the Constitution of India, without any 
further delay. Further, States/UTs must issue clear operational guidelines 
to ensure that DPCs meet regularly, are supported by qualified technical 
and planning staff, operate with transparency and their decisions and 
meeting outcomes are publicly documented and monitored. 
  
8.6 Further, the Ministry has also issued an advisory dated 
13.11.2025(Annexure III) to NITI Aayog with the request to instruct the 
State Planning Departments to develop a model framework for 
participatory district planning, including standardised formats, digital tools, 
and timelines for submission and review."  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23  The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply have stated that the 
constitution of District Planning Committees (DPCs) in every district is 
responsibility of concerned State Governments/UTs. State Government/UTs also 
determine the composition of members, method of selecting Chairpersons, and 
define the functions and operational modalities. States/UTs ensure that DPCs 
function effectively, with regular meetings, adequate technical and administrative 
support, transparent decision-making, and prepare district development plans 
aligned with state and central schemes. In this regard Ministry issued certain 
advisories time to time to States/UTs for setting up DPCs, ensure they meet 

15 
 
regularly, deployment of trained staff, working transparency, and use NITI 
Aayog’s framework for integrated district plans. The Committee appreciate the 
efforts/step taken by the Ministry but it seems that efforts are not able to yield 
desired results on ground level. The Committee, therefore reiterate their 
recommendation that Ministry should take sincere steps and accordingly prepare 
concrete mechanism to enforce compliance the provision of “Article 243ZD”. 
Further, the Ministry should develop and circulate detailed model operation 
guidelines for DPCs and introduce incentives scheme for those States/UTs, who 
have constituted DPC in every district. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Ensuring Continuity of Village Development in the Event of Delayed Panchayat 
Elections 
1.24 Regarding Ensuring Continuity of Village Development in the Event of Delayed 
Panchayat Elections, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observes that one of the major impediments to the 
effective utilization of funds and the continuity of development works at the 
village level is the delay or disruption in the conduct of Panchayat 
elections. While timely elections are essential for upholding democratic 
decentralization, there have been several instances where, due to 
administrative, legal, or policy- related hurdles, elections could not be held 
within the stipulated time. The Committee specifically notes delays in 
Lakshadweep due to unresolved boundary delimitation issues, and in 
Telangana, where the implementation of OBC reservation policies has led 
to legal and procedural delays in holding elections. Such disruptions 
create a vacuum in local governance, often resulting in stalled 
development works, unutilised funds, and the breakdown of basic service 
delivery mechanisms. While democratic elections should be held in a 
timely and regular manner as per constitutional provisions, the Committee 
strongly recommends that, in the event of an unavoidable delay, a clear 
mechanism should be established to ensure that local governance and 
village development do not come to a standstill. In such cases, states may 
consider instituting an interim arrangement through the appointment of a 
nominated representative or administrator with clearly defined 
responsibilities and a limited tenure, solely to ensure continuity in the 
implementation of approved plans, fund utilisation, and essential service 
delivery. Such arrangements must be subject to strict oversight, 
transparency, and be guided by the principle of minimal interference until 
elected bodies are restored.” 

16 
 
1.25 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“9.1 “Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part 
of State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats 
are set up and operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts 
which may vary from State to State, subject to the provisions of the 
Constitution. Article 243E (1) of the Constitution of India provides holding 
of elections to the Panchayats every five years. Further Article 243E (3) of 
the Constitution states that elections to constitute a Panchayat shall be 
completed before the expiry of its duration of five years or before the 
expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution. 
Therefore, the timely holding of Panchayat elections in a State or Union 
Territory is a Constitutional requirement. Accordingly, the States and 
Union Territories have made provisions in their State Panchayati Raj laws 
relating to holding of elections to the Panchayats. From time to time, the 
Ministry issues advisories to States to conduct Panchayat Elections on 
time. 
9.2 Further, it falls under the purview of State Government to appoint a 
representative or administrator to exercise the powers of the Government 
in case of dissolution of Panchayats and before the expiration of a period 
of six months from the date of its dissolution.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26  The Committee note that holding of timely Panchayat elections in States or 
Union Territory is Constitutionally mandated under Article 243 E (1) and 243 E (3), 
States and UTs have made provisions in their State Panchayati Raj laws for the 
same and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been issuing advisories to States to 
conduct Panchayat Elections on time. However, despite Constitutional 
provisions, State laws and advisories, some states have had legal and procedural 
delays in holding elections. The Committee, observe that delays in elections 
adversely impact village level governance, affect development works, breakdown 
of service delivery mechanisms and fund utilisation. However, the Committee are 
not inclined to accept the reply of MoPR that appointment of representative/ 
administrator to exercise the powers of the government in case of 
dissolution/pre-term dissolution of Panchayats falls under purview of State 
government reflects a stereotypical approach towards an issue of such enormity. 

17 
 
Therefore, the Committee feel that timely Panchayat election contribute to the 
overall development and progress of rural areas and making timely elections a 
crucial aspect of the panchayat Raj System in the Country. Therefore, the MoPR 
needs to devise an innovative and robust mechanism to ensure continuity of 
village development amidst delayed Panchayat Elections. Hence, the Committee 
strongly reiterate its earlier recommendation and further recommend the Ministry 
to issue a Model Advisory Framework to states for interim governance 
arrangements during delayed elections, including safeguards to ensure 
transparency, continuity of essential development works and prevention of 
misuse of funds. The Ministry should establish frequent meetings with States 
where elections are due and aid in addressing the issues, ensuring timely holding 
of Panchayat elections in order to establish a grass root level Democracy for 
welfare of the people. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Declining Allocation of Funds to Panchayati Raj Institutions: Need for Reversal 
and Strengthening Fiscal Decentralization 
1.27 Regarding Declining Allocation of Funds to Panchayati Raj Institutions: Need for 
Reversal and Strengthening Fiscal Decentralization, the Committee had recommended 
as under: 
“The Committee notes with concern that there has been a steady decline 
in the allocation of funds to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) under 
successive Union Budgets in recent years. This trend undermines the very 
foundation of fiscal decentralisation envisioned under the 73rd 
Constitutional Amendment and weakens the capacity of Panchayats to 
effectively discharge their constitutionally mandated responsibilities. The 
reduction in untied and scheme-based transfers not only restricts the 
ability of PRIs to address local developmental needs but also hampers 
their credibility as self-governing institutions. In the absence of predictable 
and adequate financial support, Panchayats struggle to undertake 
essential functions related to basic service delivery, infrastructure creation, 
livelihood generation, and social welfare implementation. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance and the Fifteenth Finance Commission, take urgent 
steps to reverse this trend and ensure that adequate, untied, and 
performance-linked resources are allocated to PRIs. Additionally, 
mechanisms should be developed to ring-fence PRI funds, prevent 

18 
 
diversion by state departments, and promote transparency in inter-tier 
fiscal transfers.” 
1.28 In regard to the above recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in their action taken reply have stated as below: 
“10.1  It is submitted that the Central Finance Commission grants to 
Rural Local Bodies are continuously increasing from 13thFinance 
Commission to 14th Finance Commission and further from 14th Finance 
Commission to 15th Finance Commission. The allocations under 13th 
Finance Commission (FY 2010-15) were Rs. 64,408 Crore and under 14th 
Finance Commission (FY 2015-2020) were Rs. 2,00,292.20 Crore. The 
allocation under 15th Finance Commission (FY 2021-26) is Rs. 2,36,805 
Crore which is around 4 times of 13th Finance Commission allocation. 
10.2  MoPR has highlighted the issues to the 16th (XVI) Finance 
Commission and requested the Commission to consider it while deciding 
the allocation.”  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29  The Committee finds that Ministry in their reply have informed about 
increased Finance Commission grants and that MoPR has highlighted the issues 
to the 16th Finance Commission and requested the Commission to consider while 
deciding the allocation. The Committee, observes that response furnished by the 
MoPR on issue of strengthening Fiscal Decentralisation by augmenting allocation 
of funds to PRIs is lacking of any concrete measure that have been taken. The 
Committee are concerned regarding the perception of declining net fiscal support 
to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) needs clearer presentation and 
reconciliation of data across Finance Commission grants, Budgetary allocations 
and Centrally Sponsored Schemes fund flows.  The Committee strongly reiterate 
their recommendation that MoPR may continue pursuing with the Ministry of 
Finance and Finance Commission for ensuring adequate, untied resources and 
improved fiscal autonomy of PRIs. Further, the Committee also recommends that 
MoPR may through e-GramSwaraj portal track transfer of funds to PRIs, ensuring 
timely release and utilisation of funds/grants to PRIs. The timely release of funds 
is a key factor in the effective implementation of the Panchayati Raj Schemes, 
contributing to the overall development and well-being of rural communities. 

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Performance Grants 
 
2.1 The Committee note that Performance Grants are special rewards given to Gram 
Panchayats (GPs) and Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) for their good work/performance and 
these grants are meant to encourage Panchayats to work better and serve people well. 
These grants are part of the overall financial assistance provided to Panchayats under 
the Finance Commission’s recommendations. The Committee further note that MoPR 
has also created ranking system for GPs/RLBs to decide eligibility criteria for 
performance grants like, increase own source of income, preparation of Annual Action 
Plans and Immunizations status etc. The Committee observed that many Panchayats 
are not getting these grants because they cannot fulfill the requisite conditions. As such, 
some Panchayats give misleading report to get these grants which they don’t actually 
deserve it. The Committee, therefore, recommend MoPR to make the rules easier by 
amending the ranking system so that more Panchayats can honestly qualify to get the 
awards. The Committee, further, recommend that training should be given to help the 
weaker Panchayats and also claim verification mechanism should be evolved to ensure 
that only valid claims are approved and processed, preventing false claims.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 There are no performance grants to Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) under the 
15th (XV) Finance Commission Grant. However, it is submitted that MoPR has 
requested the 16th (XVI) Finance Commission to consider the grant of Incentive / 
Performance grants to RLBs for enhancing collection. It has been proposed that 
financial incentives be linked to the Panchayat performance, which would encourage 
Panchayats to improve their administrative capacities, reduce dependency on external 
funds, and become more self-reliant. Certain identified parameters, such as Per Capita 
OSR Generation, Revenue Growth Rate, could be leveraged to assess the performance 
of Gram Panchayats in the augmentation of OSR. 
  
MoPR has anchored the process of Localization of Sustainable Development 
Goals (LSDGs) by adopting thematic approach to attain the National Agenda of United 

20 
 
Nation by 2030. With a view to monitor and measure the progress of implementation of 
LSDGs at grassroots level, Ministry has developed Panchayat Advancement Index 
(PAI): a multidimensional index to assess the incremental progress of the Gram 
Panchayat across 9 themes and helps in the outcome-based development goals to 
strengthen the grassroots democracy.  
  
The thematic & composite PAI scores support in measuring the performance of 
the Gram Panchayat); identify the critical gaps in 9 themes & pave the way for 
evidence-based planning & strengthen the delivery of rural governance. 
  
The PAI is a comprehensive framework designed to evaluate and monitor the 
multidimensional development of Panchayats across India. It examines their 
performance in governance, infrastructure, social welfare, and economic growth, 
offering a data-driven framework to rural development. 
  
Awards and incentives under the National Panchayat Awards / Incentivization of 
Panchayats Scheme are administered through a transparent, merit-based, and multi-tier 
evaluation system involving scrutiny at Block, District, State/Union Territory, and 
National levels with evaluation criteria aligned to the nine LSDGs themes. Multiple 
levels of verification, including documentary checks and field validation, are in place 
towards the endeavour for recognizing deserving Panchayats. Further, improvement, 
refinement and simplification of criteria for selection of best performing Panchayats and 
scheme as a whole is a continuous policy intervention adopted by this Ministry from 
time to time. 
  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Constitution of State Finance Commission 
 
2.3 Article 243-I of the Indian Constitution provides for constitution of State Finance 
Commission (SFC) by the State in every five years. It plays a crucial role in 
strengthening the finances of local Governments by recommending measures for 
resources sharing and improving their financial health by reviewing the financial position 
of the Panchayats. The XV Finance Commission (XV FC) has made it mandatory for 
States to set up and act on SFC recommendations for receiving certain central grants 
from 2024–25 onwards. As per the information provided by the Ministry on status of 
constitution of SFCs in the States, the Committee note that out of 28 States only 25 
States have constituted SFC and only nine States have constituted 6th SFC. It is 
disheartening to note that some States have not even constituted 3rd, 4th and 5th SFC. 

21 
 
However, Punjab and Tamil Nadu have shown good compliance with regard to 
constitution of SFC, report submission and laying of ATRs. Whereas, States like 
Arunachal Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have delay or pending submission of reports and 
ATRs. Gujarat, Jharkhand and Telangana are in an early stage with reports yet to be 
submitted. Since the regular constitution of SFC is necessary for the devolution of funds 
to PRIs from State finances, the Committee, recommend that MoPR should take up this 
matter at the highest level and impress upon the State Governments to constitute SFCs 
regularly without any delay so that the flow of central grants is not stopped or 
minimised. The Committee also recommend that MoPR should prevail over the State 
Governments and ensure that a uniform, simple and easy format is prepared for SFCs 
report and if need be, to provide training to SFC members and Panchayat officials in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The Ministry is continuously emphasizing the constitution of State Finance 
Commission. As a result of efforts of the Ministry, for the first time, all States have 
established a State Finance Commission. 
  
MoPR has also proposed continuation of the mandatory condition of constitution 
of State Finance Commission, acting upon their recommendations and laying the 
explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon in the State Legislative 
Assembly, for eligibility of 16th (XVI) FC grant release, similar to the 15th (XV) FC grant 
release condition. 
  
The 13th (XIII) Finance Commission has provided/suggested a format for SFCs' 
report, and the same has been shared with the States. The MoPR has also constituted 
a committee on the date required for SFC, and their availability & sources thereof. 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Committee note that Fifteenth Finance Commission (XV FC) recommended 
grants for Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) as Untied (40%) and Tied (60%) grants. Tied 
grants are earmarked for sanitation and drinking water and Untied grants used for local 
needs under the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Tied grants can be reallocated 
between sanitation and water supply once saturation is achieved in either category after 
certification by the Gram Sabha and confirmation by the State Government or relevant 
supervisory authority. The Committee further note that similar scheme relating to 
sanitation and drinking water like ‘Har Ghar Nal Har Ghar Jal’ and ‘Swachh Bharat 
Mission-I & II’ etc. are run by the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation under the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti. During the briefing, the representative of Ministry had stated that if 
the work of drinking water and sanitation is 100% completed in a Panchayat, hence tied 
fund will not be released to concerned Panchayat and tied grant cannot be used for 
untied grant. The Committee feel that in such a situation there is need to balance the 
structure of grants released under Central Finance Commission to Rural Local Bodies. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that MoPR should work out a mechanism for 
reallocation of grants between Tied and Untied for optimum utilization of allocated funds 
upon saturation of one service area to achieve the development goals. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 1.1 Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has highlighted before the XVI Finance 
Commission that the Tied grants be earmarked for the following focus areas, to enable 
holistic development in Panchayats 
 
i. Panchayat infrastructure, including construction of Panchayat Bhawans with 
the basic facilities. 
ii. Rural roads and drainage systems. 
1.2 The remaining funds, i.e., Untied grants, could be earmarked to other locally felt 
needs (excluding the O&M component) and enabling Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
to exercise discretion in addressing their locally felt needs (as per the 29 Subjects listed 

24 
 
in the 11thschedule). It has also been urged to the XVI Finance Commission that 
special attention may be given to backward and lagging States/UTs to ensure equitable 
development and balanced resource allocation across regions. 
1.3 It may be noted that the structure and conditions governing the ‘Tied and 
Untied grants are laid down by the Finance Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance. As the design and composition of tied and untied grants fall within the 
purview of the Finance Commission, the Ministry has limited powers in effecting 
changes. However, the issue has been brought to the notice of the 16th Finance 
Commission for consideration in its future recommendations. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.3 Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) depends on grants 
received from the State Finance Commission (SFC) and Central Finance Commission 
(CFC) etc. for their funds in the county. Some GPs/RLBs which are adjoining urban 
areas have generated income through renting/leasing Panchayat properties, sale of 
assets, organizing income generated programmes and levy and collect the local taxes 
like property tax, vehicle tax etc. MoPR in their presentation during the briefing stated 
that it has taken several steps to increase the own income sources of GPs/RLBs, 
focusing on financial empowerment and capacity building. The Committee feel that 
despite taking several steps/efforts most GPs/RLBs have not been able to develop and 
generate their source of income satisfactorily. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that MoPR should provide financial and technical assistance to enhance panchayat’s 
capacity to develop and generate their own sources of income and urge States to 
devolve more powers and functions to Panchayats. So that they may perform their core 
duties of providing basic amenities to the rustic populace. The Committee also desire 
that the MoPR should explore the feasibility of providing more incentives and awards to 
Panchayats that perform well so that they are encouraged and motivated to raise their 
own source of income to meet their needs and vital standards. 
 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 2.1 MoPR has developed an application aimed to provide a digital platform to 
empower Panchayats in augmenting and monitoring their tax / non-tax revenue sources 
– "SAMARTH Panchayat Portal" - by streamlining & digitalization of underlying 
processes and online collection of revenue. This is envisaged to strengthen the financial 
capabilities and local governance of Panchayats, thereby ensuring improved quality of 
life for residents at the grassroots level. The portal provides an end-to-end digital 
system for revenue management covering assessment, demand generation, collection, 
and reporting. 
2.2   MoPR is also in the process of developing Model Own Source Revenue (OSR) 
Rules that aim at providing a guiding framework for States that have either not 
formulated OSR rules yet or require improvements in their existing ones. Through this 
model framework, States will be encouraged to devolve adequate taxation powers and 
clearly define the procedures by which RLBs can levy, collect, and manage different 
forms of local revenues. These developments are envisaged as complementary 
instruments, one providing the digital infrastructure and the other providing the 
regulatory framework, to ensure that Panchayats are both empowered and equipped to 
raise their own income.  
2.3  In this regard, the Ministry has also established an OSR Cell with an aim to 
evolve a sustainable model for Panchayats to encourage the generation of their OSR 
and empower the Panchayats to become the Growth Centres. 
2.4  The broader goal is to make the Panchayats Atmanirbhar / self-reliant, thereby 
enabling them to perform their core responsibilities of delivering basic amenities and 
services to rural citizens. 
MoPR is making continuous efforts to create "Saksham Panchayat" in line with the 
vision of ‘Vikshit Bharat’. In this endeavour, the Government is focusing on making 
Gram Panchayat self- reliant by strengthening their financial capabilities, improving local 
governance and enhancing public service delivery. Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
developed a special module with the help of IIM Ahmedabad for training of elected 
representatives and officials on OSR. Ministry has also rolled out special training 
module of elected women representatives which contain financial management related 
component. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.5 The Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) prepared by each Gram 
Panchayat is to identify local development needs and improving infrastructure like 
water, sanitation, road, education, health and welfare of villages and villagers. The 

26 
 
utilization and monitoring of Central Finance Commission (CFC) grants are done 
through the eGramSwaraj portal. Uploading of GPDPs on eGramSwaraj portal every 
year is mandatory condition for releasing XV Finance Commission Grant to GPs. Non-
submission of GPDPs may result in suspension, discontinuation or less release of this 
grants against allocation, which will directly impact the Panchayat’s financial resources 
and its capacity to implement planned activities. Referring to the data available on the 
portal https://gpdp.nic.in/planPlusReport.html as on 25.06.2025, the Committee 
observed that some States/UTs have not uploaded any GPDPs and some States/UTs 
have uploaded fewer GPDPs as compared to others. The Committee fail to understand 
that if timely and complete uploading of GPDP is not done by the GPs on the 
eGramSwaraj portal as to how the Ministry is to monitor the utilisation of funds/grants of 
CFC by the States/GPs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj in coordination with States should conduct regular training to panchayat 
members on technical and financial support for preparing and uploading of timely and 
correct GPDPs on eGramSwaraj portal to ensure their eligibility of grants. The 
Committee also recommend that MoPR should encourage GPs to align their GPDPs 
with Block and District level plans to achieve better coordination and more effective 
development outcomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The Ministry has been implementing the RGSA since the financial year 2022-23. 
The primary objective of the scheme is to strengthen PRIs by providing training at 
various levels (State/ District/ Block) to Elected Representatives (ERs) and other 
stakeholders of Panchayats. The support for capacity building and training provided in 
different categories like orientation/refresher training of elected representatives, training 
on Panchayat Development Plan (PDP), viz. Gram Panchayat/ Block Panchayat/ 
District Panchayat Development Plans covering different aspects of effective PDP 
formulation and implementation. Under the scheme, approval is also granted for 
technical trainings, including training on the eGramSwaraj portal, as proposed by the 
States/UTs and approved by the Central Empowered Committee (CEC). During 2024-
25, around 99% of GPs have uploaded their Gram Panchayat Development Programme 
(GPDP). Very few GPs have not uploaded their GPDPs due to technical, administrative 
and procedural issues. These issues are taken up with States and resolved from time to 
time.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 

27 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.7 The Committee expresses deep concern that, despite more than three decades 
since the enactment of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment, the spirit of democratic 
decentralisation envisioned therein remains largely unfulfilled in many parts of the 
country. The devolution of the 3Fs: Functions, Funds, and Functionaries, to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs) continues to be partial, fragmented, and uneven across states. 
Many Panchayats function with limited administrative authority, inadequate financial 
resources, and without effective control over line departments or local planning 
processes. The committee recommend that each state must prepare and publish a 
clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers to PRIs, covering the full range of 
subjects listed under the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Administrative control 
over local functionaries such as health workers must be effectively transferred to the 
Panchayats to enable genuine local self-governance. The committee also recommends 
that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to prepare an annual "State of Devolution Report" 
measuring progress on the 3Fs in each state, and table it before Parliament and The 
Union Government, through the Finance Commission and centrally sponsored 
schemes, should link financial incentives to actual performance in devolution, thereby 
encouraging states to empower PRIs more meaningfully. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 6.1 “Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part of State 
List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up and 
operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts which may vary from State to 
State, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. Article 243G of the Constitution 
empowers the Legislature of a State to make provisions, by law, for the devolution of 
power and responsibilities upon Panchayat at appropriate level, subject to such 
conditions, as may be, specified with respect to the preparation of plans and 
implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be 
entrusted to them including those in relation to matters included in the Eleventh 
Schedule to the Constitution. The State legislatures are to consider the 29 subjects 
illustratively set out in the Eleventh Schedule for devolution of power and responsibilities 
upon Panchayats. Accordingly, all matters relating to Panchayats, including to prepare 
and publish a clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers to PRIs, comes within 

28 
 
jurisdiction of the State Government. The Ministry has issued an advisory dated 
12.09.2025 to all States/UTs in this regard.  
6.2  Recently, the Ministry has released a report titled “Status of Devolution to 
Panchayats in States - An Indicative Evidence-Based Ranking, 2024” in February 2025 
to assess the effectiveness of devolution and the role of local governments in 
strengthening grassroots democracy. This report presents the Devolution Index, which 
provides the overall scores and ranks for all States/Union Territories covered under 
Part-IX of the Constitution, based on six identified dimensions: Framework, Functions, 
Finances, Functionaries, Capacity Enhancement, and Accountability. Ranking of 
States/Uts in Devolution Index and Sub-indices is attached as Annexure-I. 
6.3  For the assessment of Panchayats, the MoPR has launched the Panchayat 
Advancement Index (PAI) which is a multi-domain and multi-sectoral index that is 
intended to be used to assess the overall holistic development, performance & progress 
of Panchayats. The index takes into account various socio-economic indicators and 
parameters to gauge the well-being and development status of the local communities 
within the jurisdiction of a Panchayat. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.9 The Committee believes that untied funds form the backbone of meaningful 
decentralisation. Without financial empowerment and flexibility, the vision of the 73rd 
Constitutional Amendment will remain unfulfilled, and Panchayats will be unable to 
deliver on the aspirations of the people they are meant to serve. Untied funds are 
essential for enabling Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to function as effective units of 
local self-governance. States must ensure the regular and adequate provision of such 
funds through a predictable and formula-based allocation mechanism that is 
transparent, equitable, and grounded in objective criteria such as population, 
geographic area, and levels of socio-economic backwardness. These funds should be 
disbursed in a timely and periodic manner, preferably on a quarterly or monthly basis, 
without administrative delays or discretionary controls, to ensure that Panchayats can 
plan and execute works independently. Equally important is the need to allow 
Panchayats full autonomy in the planning and utilisation of untied funds in accordance 
with locally identified needs and priorities. This financial discretion must be safeguarded 
from unguided interference by line departments or higher administrative authorities. At 

29 
 
the same time, appropriate systems for accountability, such as Gram Sabha oversight, 
participatory planning, social audits, and transparency in reporting, must be 
institutionalised to ensure that funds are spent efficiently and in the public interest. To 
strengthen this system, states should also invest in capacity building of Panchayat 
representatives and staff in areas such as financial management, budgeting, and 
project monitoring. The use of digital tools for real-time expenditure tracking and linking 
a portion of future transfers to simple performance indicators, such as responsiveness 
to community demands or completion of planned works, can further enhance 
accountability and effectiveness. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 7.1 As per the Operational Guidelines for the implementation of the 15th (XV) 
Finance Commission recommendations, the basic (untied) grants of the 15th (XV) 
Finance Commission can be utilized by the Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) under the 29 
subjects enshrined in the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, except for salaries and 
other establishment costs. Further, the distribution of grants to the RLBs by the States is 
done as per the directions provided in the Operational Guidelines, and the State 
Governments are required to transfer the same to the RLBs within 10 working days. 
7.2 MoPR has been leveraging digital technology at the Panchayat level to enable 
the Panchayats to function effectively and efficiently, and also for the Ministry to monitor 
the public expenditure being incurred by the Panchayat. In this regard, MoPR has 
developed eGramSwaraj, a work-based accounting module for the Panchayats. 
eGramSwaraj provides a single platform for all the planning and accounting needs of 
the Panchayats. It captures all the aspects of Panchayat functioning, such as planning, 
budgeting, monitoring, expenditure, asset management, including real-time payments to 
the vendors. 
7.3 RGSA is being implemented since financial year 2022-23. The primary objective 
of the scheme is to strengthen Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) by providing training at 
various levels (State/ District/ Block) to Elected Representatives (ERs) and other 
stakeholders of Panchayats. The support for capacity building and training is provided 
under various categories covering different subjects which include training on financial 
management, budgeting, and related areas, as proposed by the States/UTs in their 
Annual Action Plans and approved by the Central Empowered Committee (CEC). Under 
the scheme, the States are also required to contribute the matching State share in the 
approved budget, as per the norms of the revamped RGSA. Under the scheme since 
2022-23, total 1,36,03,218 participants were trained as on 18th November, 2025 
covering various aspects of Panchayats and rural governance including financial 
management, budgeting and project monitoring. 
7.4 Further, the Ministry has introduced the Management Development Programme 
(MDP) in collaboration with Institutes of Excellence (IoEs), with the objective of 
strengthening the leadership capabilities of Elected Representatives (ERs) and officials 

30 
 
of PRIs covering different aspects such as financial management, budgeting and project 
monitoring. Further, the Ministry has advised States/UTs to expand collaborations by 
entering into Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with local or nearby institutions, in 
addition to IoEs, to supplement the efforts of the Ministry.  
7.5 MoPR would like to submit that, the O/o Comptroller & Auditor General, along 
with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), has initiated a certification 
course for creating a pool of accountants for Local Bodies (including remote areas) 
across the country. This is aimed at addressing the shortage of trained accountants 
across the Panchayats. The States have been requested to create awareness about the 
Certification course and to ensure maximum participation. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.11 The Committee notes with concern that despite the constitutional mandate under 
Article 243ZD, many states have either not constituted District Planning Committees 
(DPCs) or have allowed them to remain non-functional in practice. In states where 
DPCs have been formed, their functioning is often limited by irregular meetings, lack of 
technical and administrative support, poor integration of rural and urban development 
plans, and inadequate involvement of elected representatives. This has resulted in 
fragmented planning, duplication of efforts across departments, and underutilisation or 
misallocation of funds, particularly in centrally sponsored schemes and state-level 
initiatives. The Committee recommends that all states take immediate steps to 
constitute District Planning Committees in every district and ensure their effective 
operationalisation. DPCs should be empowered to prepare integrated district 
development plans by consolidating inputs from Panchayats and Municipalities, with 
active participation of elected representatives and coordination with line departments. 
States must issue clear operational guidelines to ensure that DPCs meet regularly, are 
supported by qualified technical and planning staff, and operate with transparency. 
Their decisions and meeting outcomes should be publicly documented and monitored. 
Further, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in consultation with State Planning Departments 
and NITI Aayog, should develop a model framework for participatory district planning, 
including standardized formats, digital tools, and timelines for submission and review. 

31 
 
To incentivize meaningful decentralised planning, a portion of central and state scheme 
allocations should be linked to DPC-vetted plans that demonstrate convergence, local 
relevance, and accountability. 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 8.1 Article 243ZD of the Constitution provides for setting up a District Planning 
Committee, in every State at the district level, to consolidate the plans prepared by the 
Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development 
plan for the district as a whole. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision 
with respect to- 
  
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; 
  
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: 
  
8.2 Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such 
Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the 
Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the 
ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district; 
  
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to such 
Committees; 
  
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen. 
  
8.3 Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan, 
  
(a) have regard to— 
  
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the 
Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other 
physical and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation; 
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or 
otherwise; 
  
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, 
specify. 
  
The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development 
plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State. 
  
8.4 It falls under the jurisdiction of the State Government to compose District 
Planning Committee (DPC), the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be 

32 
 
filled, the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen, 
functioning relating to district planning etc. 
  
8.5 In this regard, the Ministry has issued an advisory dated 13.11.2025 (Annexure 
II) to all States/UTs with the request to take necessary action to constitute, if not already 
done, District Planning Committee in every district and ensure their effective 
operationalisation in conformity with the Article 243ZD of the Constitution of India, 
without any further delay. Further, States/UTs must issue clear operational guidelines to 
ensure that DPCs meet regularly, are supported by qualified technical and planning 
staff, operate with transparency and their decisions and meeting outcomes are publicly 
documented and monitored. 
  
8.6 Further, the Ministry has also issued an advisory dated 13.11.2025(Annexure III) 
to NITI Aayog with the request to instruct the State Planning Departments to develop a 
model framework for participatory district planning, including standardised formats, 
digital tools, and timelines for submission and review. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.13 The Committee observes that one of the major impediments to the effective 
utilization of funds and the continuity of development works at the village level is the 
delay or disruption in the conduct of Panchayat elections. While timely elections are 
essential for upholding democratic decentralization, there have been several instances 
where, due to administrative, legal, or policy- related hurdles, elections could not be 
held within the stipulated time. The Committee specifically notes delays in 
Lakshadweep due to unresolved boundary delimitation issues, and in Telangana, where 
the implementation of OBC reservation policies has led to legal and procedural delays 
in holding elections. Such disruptions create a vacuum in local governance, often 
resulting in stalled development works, unutilised funds, and the breakdown of basic 
service delivery mechanisms. While democratic elections should be held in a timely and 
regular manner as per constitutional provisions, the Committee strongly recommends 
that, in the event of an unavoidable delay, a clear mechanism should be established to 
ensure that local governance and village development do not come to a standstill. In 
such cases, states may consider instituting an interim arrangement through the 

33 
 
appointment of a nominated representative or administrator with clearly defined 
responsibilities and a limited tenure, solely to ensure continuity in the implementation of 
approved plans, fund utilisation, and essential service delivery. Such arrangements 
must be subject to strict oversight, transparency, and be guided by the principle of 
minimal interference until elected bodies are restored. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 9.1 “Panchayat”, being “Local Government”, is a State subject and part of 
State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. Panchayats are set up and 
operate through the respective State Panchayati Raj Acts which may vary from State to 
State, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. Article 243E (1) of the Constitution of 
India provides holding of elections to the Panchayats every five years. Further Article 
243E (3) of the Constitution states that elections to constitute a Panchayat shall be 
completed before the expiry of its duration of five years or before the expiration of a 
period of six months from the date of its dissolution. Therefore, the timely holding of 
Panchayat elections in a State or Union Territory is a Constitutional requirement. 
Accordingly, the States and Union Territories have made provisions in their State 
Panchayati Raj laws relating to holding of elections to the Panchayats. From time to 
time, the Ministry issues advisories to States to conduct Panchayat Elections on time. 
9.2 Further, it falls under the purview of State Government to appoint a 
representative or administrator to exercise the powers of the Government in case of 
dissolution of Panchayats and before the expiration of a period of six months from the 
date of its dissolution.  
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.15 The Committee notes with concern that there has been a steady decline in the 
allocation of funds to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) under successive Union 
Budgets in recent years. This trend undermines the very foundation of fiscal 
decentralisation envisioned under the 73rd Constitutional Amendment and weakens the 
capacity of Panchayats to effectively discharge their constitutionally mandated 
responsibilities. The reduction in untied and scheme-based transfers not only restricts 
the ability of PRIs to address local developmental needs but also hampers their 
credibility as self-governing institutions. In the absence of predictable and adequate 
financial support, Panchayats struggle to undertake essential functions related to basic 

34 
 
service delivery, infrastructure creation, livelihood generation, and social welfare 
implementation. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Fifteenth Finance Commission, take 
urgent steps to reverse this trend and ensure that adequate, untied, and performance-
linked resources are allocated to PRIs. Additionally, mechanisms should be developed 
to ring-fence PRI funds, prevent diversion by state departments, and promote 
transparency in inter-tier fiscal transfers. 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 10.1  It is submitted that the Central Finance Commission grants to Rural 
Local Bodies are continuously increasing from 13thFinance Commission to 14th 
Finance Commission and further from 14th Finance Commission to 15th Finance 
Commission. The allocations under 13th Finance Commission (FY 2010-15) were Rs. 
64,408 Crore and under 14th Finance Commission (FY 2015-2020) were Rs. 
2,00,292.20 Crore. The allocation under 15th Finance Commission (FY 2021-26) is Rs. 
2,36,805 Crore which is around 4 times of 13th Finance Commission allocation. 
10.2  MoPR has highlighted the issues to the 16th (XVI) Finance Commission and 
requested the Commission to consider it while deciding the allocation. 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER V 
 RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. H-11013/8/2025-Parl. Dated: 27.11.2025] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
  

36 
 
ANNEXURE I 
Letter issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union Territories to prepare and 
publish a clear, time-bound roadmap for devolution of powers to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. 
 

37 
 
ANNEXURE II 
Letter issued by Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union Territories regarding timely constitution of 
District Planning Committee in every district of States/Union Territories. 
 
 

38 
 
ANNEXURE III 
Letter issued by Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union Territories regarding timely constitution of 
District Planning Committee and use NITI Aayog framework for integrated district plans. 
 

39 
 
ANNEXURE IV 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON TUESDAY, 24th MARCH, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
15. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
16. Smt. Rajathi 
17. Shri Nagendra Ray 
18. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
19. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 

40 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX; (ii) Draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the 15th Report on 'Devolution of 
Funds under Panchayati Raj System’ (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj; and for XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX. 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee 
then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid draft reports and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
 
[XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
 
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 
5.  XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
7. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
8. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 [XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
 
  

41 
 
ANNEXURE V 
 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations 10  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
Serial Nos. 3 & 5 
 
 
 
Total: 02 
Percentage: 20% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10 
 
 
 
Total: 08 
Percentage: 80% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 