 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Effective Functioning of DISHA 
Committees” (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
32 


 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Effective Functioning of DISHA 
Committees’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.04.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.04.2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-2026) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
16 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
20 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
21 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
30 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I.  D.O letter from HMRD to all MPs (LS) and MPs (RS) nominated 
as Chairperson/ Co-Chairperson/ Special Invitee in DLDCs. 
 
31 
II.  D.O letter from Secretary (RD) to Chief Secretaries/ Advisors to 
Administrator/ LG of all the States/ UTs for State Level DISHA 
Committees 
 
33 
III.  D.O letter from Secretary (RD) to Chief Secretaries/ Advisors to 
Administrator/ LG of all the States/ UTs for District Level DISHA 
Committees 
 
35 
IV.  DO letter from SRD to Central Ministries/ Departments whose 
schemes are frequently discussed in DISHA meetings, to ensure 
participation of senior officers.  
 
36 
V.  Advisory to all State/ UT Governments to ensure that accurate and 
updated data is provided to the DISHA Committees 
 
38 
VI.  Extracts of Minutes of the  Seventeenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 01.04.2026 
 
39 
VII.  Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
40 
   
 
 
 

 
 
 
ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
25. Shri Samirul Islam 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
28. Smt. Rajathi 
29. Shri Nagendra Ray 
30. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
31. Smt. P.T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 

 
 
 
iii 
 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the Thirty-Second Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 20th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (18th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Effective Functioning of DISHA Committees’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19.08.2026 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2026. Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 12.11.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 01.04.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
01 April, 2026 
11 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)  
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Effective Functioning of DISHA Committees” 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
1.2  The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19.08.2025 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2025. The Report 
contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 14 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 4, 7 & 12       
          Total: 05
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Serial No. 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 & 14 
 Total: 09 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
Chapter-V 
  

 
 
 
2 
 
1.4  The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/ Recommendations that require reiteration/ merit 
comments.  
I. Making DISHA Portal more Effective 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.6 With regard to making DISHA Portal more effective, the Committee had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that the statutory timelines prescribed 
under the DISHA Guidelines for circulation of agenda papers (ten days 
prior to the meeting) and submission of Minutes and Action-Taken 
Reports (within ten and thirty days, respectively) are being routinely 
breached, thereby obstructing informed deliberation and effective 
follow-up. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Rural Development, in consultation with the National Informatics 
Centre, Institute a tiered, automated alert mechanism on the DISHA 
portal. Under this system, the moment a deadline expires, the portal 
shall generate an electronic reminder by e-mail and SMS-to the District 
Collector, with copies endorsed to the Member of Parliament-
Chairperson, the State Chief Secretary and the Ministry's Monitoring 
Cell. Where the agenda, Minutes or ATR remain un-uploaded for a 
second consecutive cycle, the district shall be flagged "non-compliant" 
on the dashboard and the matter escalated to the concerned State 
Government for appropriate administrative action. Where proceedings 
of Meeting remain un-uploaded on portal, MoRD may take strict view 
on release of funds/ reimbursement of Meeting Bills. All alerts and 
acknowledgements shall be time-stamped and retained on the portal to 
provide a verifiable audit trail.” 
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“To strengthen the DISHA Monitoring System, the state-of-the-
art DISHA Dashboard was launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 
11th October 2017 as a centralized platform for information related to 
schemes implemented by various Ministries under the DISHA 
framework. To support the operations of DISHA Committees and to 
facilitate structured and effective meetings, a tab titled the ‘Meeting 
Reporting Module’ (https:/ / erp.disha.gov.in) has been embedded for 
State and District Level DISHA meetings. This includes features such 
as a Notice Board, Proceedings of Meetings (PoMs), Action Taken 
Reports (ATRs), reimbursement of expenditure for organizing 
meetings, and Meeting Summaries containing scheduled meeting 

 
 
 
3 
 
dates, times, venues, agendas, notices, minutes, and assigned action 
points. As recommended, the Ministry is working to introduce a 
functionality in the Meeting Reporting Portal for sending automated 
messages and email reminders to districts regarding due or overdue 
meetings, and for facilitating the uploading of Meeting Notices, 
Agendas, Proceedings of Meetings, and Action Taken Reports (ATRs) 
on the DISHA Portal.” 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017-disha (E-357375) Dated: 12/ 11/ 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee note that steps are being taken by the Ministry to 
introduce functionalities in the DISHA portal for sending automated reminders 
regarding meetings and for uploading agenda, proceedings and Action Taken 
Reports. The Committee, however, observe that the Ministry has not 
addressed the core issue raised by the Committee regarding the institution of 
a structured enforcement mechanism in cases of repeated non-compliance by 
districts. The Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation that strict 
adherence to timelines for circulation of agenda papers and submission of 
proceedings and Action Taken Reports is essential for meaningful 
deliberations in DISHA meetings. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to put in place a robust and time-bound automated monitoring and escalation 
mechanism on the DISHA portal to ensure compliance with the prescribed 
timelines. 
II. Presence of Decision-Makers, not proxies 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.9 In the context of presence of Decision-Makers in DISHA Meetings, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that several DISHA sittings have been 
attended only by junior Sub-Divisional Officers, while the designated 
Heads of Department, Executive Engineers, Divisional Railway 
Managers, and equivalent officers have absented themselves. Such 
non-attendance nullifies the very purpose of the Committee, which is to 
secure on-the-spot decisions from officers empowered to act. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that where any senior line-
department officer fails to attend two consecutive DISHA meetings 
without written justification accepted by the Chairperson, the District 
Collector shall forthwith report the default to the cadre-controlling 

 
 
 
4 
 
Ministry/ Department. The Ministry of Rural Development shall keep 
further scheme-related fund releases to that line department in 
temporary abeyance until the officer complies with the attendance 
requirement. The Committee feel that meetings can be a highly 
efficient and effective forum for robust discussion and debate, an 
opportunity for executives to align on future action, commit to it and 
hold one another accountable, therefore, all the meetings should be 
attended by the senior most officers of the concerned Departments.” 
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“The Ministry has been consistently working to ensure the timely 
convening of DISHA meetings with active participation from all 
stakeholders and senior-level officers for more effective outcomes. The 
Secretary, Rural Development, has requested all States/ UTs to take 
necessary action in this regard and to ensure the participation of 
concerned senior officers in DISHA meetings. Furthermore, the line 
Ministries and Departments have been advised to ensure the 
participation of officers at appropriate levels. (Annexure-IV).” 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee note that communications have been issued to States/ 
UTs and concerned Ministries by MoRD advising them to ensure participation 
of appropriate level officers in DISHA meetings. The Committee are, however, 
not convinced with the reply of the Ministry as it does not adequately address 
the concern regarding repeated absence of senior officers in such meetings. 
The Committee reiterate that the presence of senior decision-making officers 
is crucial for ensuring meaningful discussions and timely resolution of issues 
raised during DISHA meetings. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
evolve an effective mechanism, in coordination with State Governments, to 
ensure the mandatory participation of senior officers of concerned 
departments in DISHA meetings. The said mechanism will help to ensure 
effective, time bound and coordinated implementation of the schemes. 
 
III. Mandatory Constitution of State level DISHA Committee 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 

 
 
 
5 
 
1.12 With regard to mandatory constitution of State level DISHA Committee, the 
Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that a number of States and Union 
Territories have neither issued the requisite notification constituting the 
State-level DISHA Committee nor convened even a single sitting since 
the issuance of guidelines. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry of Rural Development serve a final notice to all defaulting 
States/ UTs, directing them to (i) notify the State-level DISHA 
Committee within one month of receipt of the notice, and (ii) schedule 
at least one meeting of the committee in each calendar quarter. The 
Ministry shall place before Parliament, as part of its quarterly 
compliance report, a statement Identifying the States/ UTs that remain 
in default after the expiry of one month, together with the remedial 
action initiated in each case.” 
 
1.13 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: 
“As per available information, State Level DISHA Committees 
(SLDCs) have been constituted in 21 States. During the last one year, 
7 States have conducted a total of 8 SLDC meetings. A total of 186 
Hon’ble MPs has been nominated as members of their respective 
SLDCs by the Ministry, while 78 non-official members have been 
nominated based on the recommendations received from Hon’ble MPs. 
The Ministry has requested the State Governments to constitute 
SLDCs in States where they are yet to be formed and to convene the 
meetings at the earliest (Annexure-II).” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee note from the reply of Ministry that State Level DISHA 
Committees have been constituted in several States and that the remaining 
States/ UTs have been requested to constitute such Committees and convene 
meetings. The Committee, however, find that the steps taken by the Ministry 
lack concrete enforcement and are largely persuasive in nature, being limited 
to issuing communications to States/ UTs despite persistent non-compliance 
in certain cases. The Committee are concerned to note that in some States, no 
State Level DISHA Committee has been constituted and no meetings have 
been held since 2018, which severely undermines the monitoring of Central 
Schemes, raises concerns regarding unmonitored utilisation of funds and 
possible irregularities, and deprives effective oversight over grassroots 
implementation. The Committee are of the considered view that mere issue of 
advisories is insufficient to ensure compliance and that stronger, time-bound 

 
 
 
6 
 
measures are required. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry of Rural Development serve a final notice to 
all defaulting States/ UTs, persuading them to (i) notify the State Level DISHA 
Committee within one month of receipt of such notice; and (ii) ensure that at 
least one meeting of the Committee is held in each calendar quarter as these 
meetings are essential to improve public service delivery of the benefits of the 
schemes at the grass roots. The Committee further recommend that the 
Ministry may place before Committee a statement identifying the States/ UTs 
that continue to remain in default after the stipulated period, along with details 
of the remedial action taken in each case. 
IV. Duration and Expenses of DISHA Meeting 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.15 With regard to the issue of duration and expenses of DISHA Meeting, the 
Committee had recommended as follows: 
"The Committee note that several District Collectors are either 
unaware of, or unclear about, the 2 lakh per-meeting ceiling prescribed 
for DISHA sittings, with the result that meetings are postponed and 
essential field inspections omitted. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development issue an updated, 
comprehensive circular, copied to every Member of Parliament and 
every District Collector, clearly specifying that up to 2 lakhs may be 
drawn for each DISHA meeting, enumerating admissible heads of 
expenditure (venue and logistics, TA/ DA for members and officials, 
documentation, transport and site-inspection costs) and outlining a 
simplified, time-bound reimbursement procedure. The circular should 
further state that, where agenda load or on-site verification so requires, 
the meeting may extend over two or three consecutive days while 
remaining within the 2 lakh per-meeting ceiling, where the agenda 
includes quarterly study visits, provision of additional budget may be 
made to meet the expenses. Timely advance release of funds and 
prompt settlement of claims should be ensured to prevent any delay or 
dilution of the review process." 
  
1.16 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 "The Ministry has circulated the revised provisions of the DISHA 
Guidelines pertaining to  
the expenditure to be incurred for DISHA meetings. The State/ 
UT Governments have also been informed about the detailed 
provisions for reimbursement of meeting-related expenditure 
(Annexure–III). The Ministry is making concerted efforts to ensure the 

 
 
 
7 
 
timely release of reimbursement claims upon receipt of the requisite 
proposals." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.17  The Committee note that despite circulation of guidelines by the 
Ministry regarding expenditure and reimbursement for DISHA meetings, 
persistent lack of awareness among District Collectors continues, particularly 
regarding the provision of up to ₹2 lakh per meeting. This has led to 
postponement of meetings and omission of essential field inspections, 
thereby diluting effective monitoring of schemes. The Committee are of the 
view that the efforts of the Ministry in this regard have not been adequate and 
require greater clarity, urgency, awareness and enforcement. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should issue an updated and 
comprehensive circular, duly communicated to all Members of Parliament and 
District Collectors, clearly specifying admissible expenditure within the ₹2 lakh 
ceiling (including venue/ logistics, TA/ DA, documentation, and site inspection/ 
transport) along with a simplified and time-bound reimbursement mechanism. 
The circular should also provide flexibility for meetings to be held over 
multiple days, where required, and enable provision of additional funds for 
study visits, as necessary. The Committee further recommend that timely 
advance release of funds and settlement of claims within a fixed timeframe be 
ensured, and that districts not adhering to DISHA guidelines be flagged on the 
portal, with appropriate measures, including withholding of reimbursement, to 
prevent dilution of the review process. 
V. Full utilisation of grants for expenditure on DISHA Meetings 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
1.18  In the context of utilisation of funds for DISHA Meetings, the Committee had 
recommended as below: 
“The committee note that as per DISHA guidelines the District 
Committee may be arranged on any day during third week of April, 
July, October and February with the permission of Chairperson. For 
organizing additional meetings, date and month of meetings to be 
notified with the consent/ directions of the Chairperson. Member 
Secretary should be personally responsible for convening meetings. 

 
 
 
8 
 
Further, the total expenditure should not, however, exceed 
Rs.2,00,000/ - per meeting. The District Administration may incur 
expenditure on holding the meetings of DISHA adhering to the norms 
applicable. The Committee recommend that since expenditure is not 
limited for only one quarterly meetings, MoRD should encourage for 
increased frequency of DISHA meetings for better monitoring and mid-
course corrections of schemes. This will allow early identification of 
implementation gaps and timely interventions helping reduce last 
minute spending pressures near year-end. The Committee, also 
recommend Ministry for suggesting SoPs for meetings to Member 
Secretary focusing on grouping of Departments based on similarity of 
schemes or Ministry-wise for effective outcome. Therefore, the funds 
should be critically reviewed from time to time and utilized fully and 
properly.” 
 
1.19 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“Ministry consider DISHA District Committees as an important 
mechanism for ensuring effective governance and promoting the 
holistic development of districts. These meetings provide a platform to 
foster synergy in monitoring and ensuring the timely implementation of 
various programmes at the district level. These meetings also help 
identify challenges, address bottlenecks, and align district priorities with 
national development goals, thereby contributing to community 
upliftment and reduction of regional disparities." 
Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, the Ministry has 
been consistently working to ensure that these meetings are convened 
regularly, with active participation from all stakeholders and senior-level 
officers for more effective outcomes. The Secretary, Rural 
Development, has requested all States/ UTs to take necessary action 
in this regard and to ensure the participation of concerned senior 
officers in DISHA meetings. Further, the line Ministries and 
Departments have been advised to ensure the participation of officers 
at appropriate levels. The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has 
also requested Hon’ble MPs to convene DISHA meetings in a timely 
manner (Annexure–I). As per DISHA guidelines, District Level DISHA 
Committees are required to hold meetings at least once every quarter, 
with a minimum of four meetings annually. However, if Chairperson so 
desires, number of meetings to be convened can be more than four. 
As per the DISHA Guidelines, each DISHA Committee is 
required to develop its own system for agenda setting for the quarterly 
meetings, in accordance with the specific requirements of the 
respective district. Action Taken on the recommendations of the 
previous meeting should be the first agenda item for the next meeting. 
The agenda should contain substantive issues to facilitate 
improvement in quality of implementation of the programmes.”  

 
 
 
9 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee note that the Ministry has reiterated the provisions 
contained in the DISHA guidelines regarding the conduct of quarterly 
meetings. The Committee are of the view that, given the wide range of 
schemes monitored under DISHA, there may be situations where additional 
meetings are required to address emerging issues and implementation gaps. 
The Committee therefore reiterate that the Ministry should encourage more 
frequent meetings where necessary and issue suitable guidance to Member 
Secretaries for effective agenda setting and conduct of meetings to align 
development efforts facilitating better synergy and faster decision making. 
VI. Mandatory Attendance and Accountability of Officers 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.21  With regard to mandatory attendance and accountability of officers, the 
Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee note that senior officers of the concerned 
departments do not attend the meetings or nominate junior level 
officers who are ill-informed about the progress of schemes. The 
Committee strongly recommend that in order to achieve the purpose of 
DISHA Committees, MoRD may on regular basis communicate with 
Member Secretaries on the issues of non-attendance of senior officers, 
ill-preparedness for the meeting and ensure strict and timely follow up 
of the recommendations of the meeting. The Committee also 
recommend that, at the end of every quarter, the Ministry of Rural 
Development extract compliance data from the DISHA dashboard and 
issue a concise review letter to each District Collector, itemising the 
number of meetings held, the punctuality of agenda circulation and 
ATR submission, and the attendance record of senior line-department 
officers; copies of this letter should be endorsed to the MP-Chairperson 
and the State Chief Secretary. Where the same deficiencies are 
recorded in two consecutive quarters, the Ministry should formally urge 
the State Government to initiate strict compliance in this regard as per 
guidelines.” 
 
1.22 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, the Ministry has 
been consistently working to ensure that these meetings are convened 
regularly, with active participation from all stakeholders and senior-level 

 
 
 
10 
 
officers for more effective outcomes. The Secretary, Rural 
Development, has requested Chief Secretaries/ Advisors to 
Administrator/ LG of all the States/ UTs to ensure mandated District 
Level DISHA Committee meetings and participation of concerned 
senior officers of the States/ UTs in DISHA meetings (Annexure–III). 
Further, the line Ministries and Departments have also been advised to 
ensure the participation of officers at appropriate levels (Annexure–IV). 
The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has also requested Hon’ble 
MPs to convene DISHA meetings in a timely manner (Annexure–I). 
These communications are also available on DISHA Dashboard. 
To support the operations of DISHA Committees and to facilitate 
structured and effective meetings, a tab titled the ‘Meeting Reporting 
Module’ (https:/ / erp.disha.gov.in) has been embedded for State and 
District Level DISHA meetings. This includes features such as a Notice 
Board, Proceedings of Meetings (PoMs), Action Taken Reports 
(ATRs), reimbursement of expenditure for organizing meetings, and 
Meeting Summaries containing scheduled meeting dates, times, 
venues, agendas, notices, minutes, and assigned action points. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee note the Ministry’s reply that communications have been 
issued to States/ UTs and concerned Ministries to ensure the participation of 
senior officers in DISHA meetings and the effective functioning of the 
committees. The Committee, however, observe that the reply does not fully 
address the issue of ensuring accountability for non-attendance or lack of 
preparedness by concerned officers. The Committee therefore reiterate that 
the Ministry should put in place a systematic monitoring mechanism to track 
the conduct of meetings, adherence to timelines and attendance of officers so 
as to ensure effective functioning of DISHA Committees 
VII. Annual field verification, Collector in attendance 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
1.24  In the context of annual field verification and attendance of Collector during 
on-site review under DISHA, the Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee is of the view that reliance on file-based 
reporting may hide ground-level shortcomings and results into provide 
gloomy picture of the site. To ensure that physical realities match the 
figures presented, the Committee recommend that every district DISHA 
arrange at least one on-site review each year covering key assets, 

 
 
 
11 
 
such as PMGSY roads, school buildings, Anganwadi centres and other 
Central-scheme works. The visiting team, led by the District Collector 
and the MP-Chairperson, should capture geotagged photographs, 
record brief field notes and compile a single-page status report. These 
materials are to be uploaded on the DISHA portal within seven days of 
the visit and prominently flagged on the public dashboard, so that 
subsequent meetings, higher authorities, and citizens alike can track 
follow-up action.” 
 
1.25 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“DISHA Committees have authority to look into complaints/ 
alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the 
programmes, including complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, 
miss-appropriation/ diversion of funds and recommend follow-up 
action. The Committee have also authority to summon and inspect any 
record for this purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the District Collector/ CEO of the Zila Panchayat/ Project 
Director of DRDA (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or suggest suitable 
action to be taken in accordance with the rules which should be action 
upon by him within 30 days.  
 
All documents related to pre and post-meeting activities of 
DISHA Committee are uploaded on meeting reporting portal.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 The Committee finds that the reply of the Ministry merely reiterates the 
existing powers of DISHA Committees to investigate irregularities without 
addressing the core concern of proactive, mandatory field verification. The 
Committee is of the view that file-based reporting continues to mark ground-
level discrepancies, as evidenced by persistent complaints of incomplete 
assets like PMGSY roads and Anganwadi Centres despite reported progress. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Rural 
Development direct every District DISHA Committee to conduct at least one 
annual on-site verification exercise, led by the MP-Chairperson and District 
Collector, capturing geo-tagged photographs, field notes, and a single-page 
status report on key assets. These materials shall be uploaded to the DISHA 
portal within seven days, flagged prominently on the public dashboard, and 
mandatorily reviewed in the next meeting to track follow-up, with non-
compliance reported to the State Chief Secretary for corrective action. 

 
 
 
12 
 
VIII. Guidance to District Planning Committees 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.27  In the context of guidance to District Planning Committees, the Committee 
had recommended as below: 
“The Committee observe that many resolutions adopted in 
DISHA meetings, particularly those pertaining to augmentation of 
resources or inter-sectoral convergence, remain unimplemented 
because the requisite funding and planning approvals rest with the 
District Planning Committee (DPC). To close this coordination gap, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development issue a 
directive empowering every District DISHA Committee to transmit its 
resolutions and recommendations, in writing and in the prescribed 
format, to the Chairperson of the DPC within seven days of the 
meeting. The DPC Chairperson shall examine the proposal and 
communicate an approval, modification or reasoned rejection within a 
maximum period of thirty days. The communication, together with any 
follow-up action, shall be uploaded on the DISHA portal and tagged to 
the relevant agenda item so that progress can be transparently 
monitored at the next DISHA sitting as well as by the State-level 
DISHA Committee and the Ministry.” 
 
1.28 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
“The District Planning Committee (DPC) is a constitutional body 
established under Article 243ZD of the Indian Constitution to prepare 
district-level development plans. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
(MoPR) oversees and facilitates the functioning of these committees by 
issuing planning guidelines and supporting initiatives aimed at 
strengthening their role in decentralized planning. The terms of 
reference of the DISHA Committees, inter alia, include facilitating the 
smooth implementation of priorities determined by the District Planning 
Committees (DPCs) and guiding the DPCs on national programmes 
and how these can be leveraged for the overall development of the 
district. The proposal for issuing directives in consultation with MoPR is 
under consideration.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.29 The Committee note that the Ministry in their reply to the 
recommendation of the Committee for extending guidance to District Planning 
Committees (DPC), have stated that the terms of reference of the DISHA 
Committees, inter-alia, include facilitating the smooth implementation of 
priorities determined by DPCs, which is Constitutional body established 
under Art. 243 ZD of Constitution to prepare district- level development plans. 

 
 
 
13 
 
Also, DISHA Committees guide the DPCs on national programmes and how 
these can be leveraged for the overall development of the district. The 
Committee finds that State Autonomy is limited to DPC formation/ election, 
but functions like plan consolidation do not preclude MoRD advisories on 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes implementation/ monitoring, similar to MoPR 
guidelines. DISHA Committees guide DPCs on leveraging national 
programmes, aligning with Art 243 ZDs planning intent without overriding 
State laws. The Committee observe that many DISHA resolutions on resource 
augmentation and convergence remain unimplemented as DPCs fail to act 
timely for providing requisite funds and granting planning approvals. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the MoRD, in 
consultation with MoPR, forthwith issue a binding directive requiring every 
District DISHA to forward resolutions in standard format to the DPC 
Chairperson within 7 days of the meeting; the DPC shall approve/ modify/ 
reject with reasons within 30 days, uploading outcomes to the DISHA portal 
for tagging and taking up in next-meeting for review. Quarterly non-
compliance by DPCs shall be reported along with MoRD advisories to State 
Panchayati Raj Departments, to ensure seamless scheme execution. Such 
steps are essential for effective monitoring and accountability of the 
schemes. 
IX. Penalties for false or inflated reporting 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.30  In the context of penalties for false or inflated reporting during DISHA 
meetings, the Committee had recommended as below: 
“The Committee is concerned to note that there are some 
instances of inaccurate or misleading progress reporting in certain 
departments. The Committee therefore recommend that, if a 
department submit erroneous data twice within the same district, the 
Ministry of Rural Development should require the District Collector to 
conduct a verification exercise, identify specific corrective measures, 
and certify their completion. Subsequent fund disbursements under the 
relevant scheme for that district shall be processed only after the 
Collector's certification has been placed on record in the minutes of the 
next DISHA meeting and uploaded to the portal for audit and oversight. 
The Ministry of RD should take all sincere and stern steps to check the 
recurrence of such cases.” 

 
 
 
14 
 
 
1.31 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: 
 “DISHA Committees have authority to look into complaints/ 
alleged irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the 
programmes, including complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, 
miss-appropriation/ diversion of funds and recommend follow-up 
action. The Committee have also authority to summon and inspect any 
record for this purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the District Collector/ CEO of the Zila Panchayat/ Project 
Director of DRDA (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or suggest suitable 
action to be taken in accordance with the rules which should be action 
upon by him within 30 days. All documents related to pre and post-
meeting activities of DISHA Committee are uploaded on meeting 
reporting portal. 
The Ministry has also issued an advisory to the State/ UT 
Governments to ensure the accuracy and correctness of the data 
provided to the DISHA Committees (Annexure–V).” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.32 The Committee finds that the reply of the Ministry merely restates the 
existing authority of the DISHA Committees to probe irregularities without 
instituting specific penalties or verification protocols for repeated inaccurate 
reporting. The Committee is concerned to note that instances of inaccurate or 
inflated progress reporting persist in certain departments, undermining the 
credibility of scheme monitoring and diverting recourses from genuine needs. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that where any department 
submits erroneous data twice within the same district, the MoRD direct the 
District Collector to undertake a mandatory verification exercise, under his 
supervision to identity corrective measures, and certify their implementation 
within 30 days. Subsequent fund releases under the concerned scheme for 
that district may be withheld until the Collector’s certification is recorded in 
the DISHA meeting minutes and uploaded on the Portal; the Ministry shall 
further issue quarterly alerts to State Government on repeat offenders and 
table a compliance summary in Parliament, with suitable administrative action 
against those responsible to deter recurrence. 
 

 
 
 
15 
 
  

 
 
 
16 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 Framework for DISHA District Committees, guidelines were issued in June 
2016 and further revised in January 2018 with this District Level tier of DISHA 
became fully functional. It is 9 years since District Level DISHA has been functioning. 
Further, each DISHA Committee has to conduct at least four meetings in a year. The 
Committee are of the view that DISHA meetings not only help to effectively monitor 
developmental programmes but also serve as feedback loop for suitable 
modifications at the policy planning level taking valuable inputs from all stakeholders. 
The Committee observed that the number of meetings held in past years shows that 
the purpose with which DISHA has been launched needs more efforts on the part of 
Members of Parliament, State Government and Stakeholders of DISHA Committees. 
The MoRD needs to take sincere steps to increase active participation of all 
stakeholders such as communicating through letters from Minister, Secretary, phone 
calls from Secretary to Chairpersons (MPs), Member Secretary. Letters and calls 
from Senior Officers of MoRD for timely holding of DISHA meetings. Increase in 
active participation of all stakeholders and number of meetings of DISHA will 
certainly ensure better implementation of Schemes. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.2 DISHA District Committees serve as an important mechanism for ensuring 
effective governance and promoting the holistic development of districts. These 
meetings provide a platform to foster synergy in monitoring and ensuring the timely 
implementation of various programmes at the district level. These meetings also help 
identify challenges, address bottlenecks, and align district priorities with national 
development goals, thereby contributing to community upliftment and reduction of 
regional disparities. 
Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, the Ministry has been consistently 
working to ensure that these meetings are convened regularly, with active 
participation from all stakeholders and senior-level officers for more effective 
outcomes. The Secretary, Rural Development, has requested all States/ UTs to take 
necessary action in this regard and to ensure the participation of concerned senior 
officers in DISHA meetings (Annexure-III). Further, the line Ministries and 

 
 
 
17 
 
Departments have been advised to ensure the participation of officers at appropriate 
levels (Annexure-IV). The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has also requested 
Hon’ble MPs to convene DISHA meetings in a timely manner (Annexure-I). 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.3 The Committee finds that majority of Members of Parliament, also 
Chairperson of DISHA Committees are uninformed about DISHA Dashboard, 
process to access it. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a detailed 
awareness kit containing letter of nomination as DISHA Chairperson/ Convenor 
along with complete guidelines, SOP for its usage and Help desk detail be provided 
to all MPs. Further, the Committee also recommend that during Parliament Session 
period all the MPs are present in Delhi, Orientation Programme on DISHA for MPS 
of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha be organized this period, also Help desk with 
dedicated officers from MoRD for resolving queries of MPs may also be set up. The 
Ministry should also coordinate with Sansad TV to air Special programs promoting 
DISHA and display DISHA Helpline details in Running Tickers for information of 
MPs. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.4 To strengthen the DISHA Monitoring System, the state-of-the-art DISHA 
Dashboard was launched by the Honorable Prime Minister on 11th October 2017 as 
a centralized platform for information related to schemes implemented by various 
Ministries under the DISHA monitoring system. As of today, the DISHA Dashboard 
integrates 100 schemes of 35 different Ministries/ Departments, incorporating 
various geographical levels—such as administrative boundaries of Districts, Gram 
Panchayats, Blocks, and Villages—via APIs for real-time data display. Further, a 
Help Desk has also been established in Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) to 
coordinate with all States/ UTs and districts across the country. 
As recommended, a detailed awareness kit-containing letter of nomination as DISHA 
Chairperson/ Co-chairperson/ Special Invitee along with complete guidelines, 
Dashboard user manual and contact details of dedicated officer from MoRD along 
with Help desk detail have been shared to all MPs. The content of Special programs 
promoting DISHA for airing on Sansad TV is being prepared.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 

 
 
 
18 
 
2.5 The Committee observe that many Members of Parliament have not received 
their user credentials for the DISHA portal, thereby impeding their oversight function. 
It, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development forthwith issue 
Individual user-IDs and passwords to every Member of Parliament Simultaneously 
direct all District Collectors/ District Magistrates to (i) dispatch a formal letter to their 
respective MPs within seven days, apprising them of the issuance and offering on-
boarding assistance, (ii) Designate an officer for any technical support required. In 
addition, the portal shall incorporate an internal analytics page indicating which 
Members have successfully logged in, enabling the Ministry to extend targeted 
technical support to those yet to access the system. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.6 The mobile numbers of Hon’ble MPs (Lok Sabha) and MPs (Rajya Sabha) 
[who have been nominated as Chairperson/ Co-chairperson/ Special Invitee], as per 
information available on the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha websites, have been 
registered to facilitate their access to the DISHA Dashboard. The Dashboard can be 
accessed by entering the pre-registered mobile number and the OTP received, or 
alternatively, by using the user ID and password shared with the Hon’ble MPs on 
their registered email IDs. For any on-boarding assistance, the DISHA Helpdesk may 
be contacted (Help Desk Number- support.disha-mord@nic.in). In addition, an officer 
has been designated as the Nodal Officer to provide necessary support (Name of 
Nodal Officer – Shri Piush Ranjan, Contact no. 011-24663531). The contact details 
of both the Helpdesk and the Nodal Officer have been shared with the Hon’ble MPs 
(Annexure-I). 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.7 The Committee finds that departments presently submit progress 
presentations in assorted, often incomparable formats, hampering effective review. 
The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development 
prescribe a uniform, two-page reporting matrix covering physical progress, financial 
progress, bottlenecks encountered, and the support or clearances required. Every 
department shall upload this matrix on the DISHA portal at least ten days before 
each meeting, allowing Members to compare information quickly and take informed 
decisions during the sitting. 
     Reply of the Government  

 
 
 
19 
 
2.8 As recommended, a model reporting template has been developed to capture 
details on physical progress, financial progress, bottlenecks encountered, and the 
support or clearances required for various schemes and programmes. States/ UTs 
have been instructed to direct the Member Secretaries to submit or upload the 
progress reports on the ‘Meeting Reporting Tab’ of the Dashboard (Annexure–III). 
These reports, once uploaded by the concerned District Authority, can be accessed 
by the Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and other stakeholders for review and 
monitoring. The Ministry has also issued an advisory to all State/ UT Governments to 
ensure that accurate and updated data is provided to the DISHA Committees 
(Annexure–V). 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.9 The Committee reiterates that every DISHA committee must include, at a 
minimum, one elected Scheduled Caste and one elected Scheduled Tribe 
representative. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the DISHA portal 
automatically flag non-compliant districts in red and generate an alert to the District 
Collector. The Collector shall place the matter before the competent authority and 
ensure that the required SC and ST members are formally nominated and notified 
before the next scheduled sitting; failure to do so should be reported to the State 
Chief Secretary to take corrective measures in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 As per the District Level DISHA guidelines, all Mayors/ the Chairpersons of 
Municipalities (inclusive of at least one woman) and five elected heads of Gram 
Panchayat (inclusive of two women) are nominated by the Chairperson and the other 
Members of Parliament in the Committee. Further, one representative each from the 
SC, ST, and Women categories is nominated by the Chairperson and other 
Members of Parliament in the Committee. In addition, at least one non-official 
member belonging to the SC/ ST category is nominated to the District Level DISHA 
Committee by the Ministry of Rural Development on the recommendation of the 
Hon’ble Chairperson. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
  

 
 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.1 The Committee observe that the statutory timelines prescribed under the 
DISHA Guidelines for circulation of agenda papers (ten days prior to the meeting) 
and submission of Minutes and Action-Taken Reports (within ten and thirty days, 
respectively) are being routinely breached, thereby obstructing informed deliberation 
and effective follow-up. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Rural Development, in consultation with the National Informatics Centre, Institute a 
tiered, automated alert mechanism on the DISHA portal. Under this system, the 
moment a deadline expires, the portal shall generate an electronic reminder by e-
mail and SMS-to the District Collector, with copies endorsed to the Member of 
Parliament-Chairperson, the State Chief Secretary and the Ministry's Monitoring Cell. 
Where the agenda, Minutes or ATR remain un-uploaded for a second consecutive 
cycle, the district shall be flagged "non-compliant" on the dashboard and the matter 
escalated to the concerned State Government for appropriate administrative action. 
Where proceedings of Meeting remain un-uploaded on portal, MoRD may take strict 
view on release of funds/ reimbursement of Meeting Bills. All alerts and 
acknowledgements shall be time-stamped and retained on the portal to provide a 
verifiable audit trail. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 To strengthen the DISHA Monitoring System, the state-of-the-art DISHA 
Dashboard was launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 11th October 2017 as a 
centralized platform for information related to schemes implemented by various 
Ministries under the DISHA framework. To support the operations of DISHA 
Committees and to facilitate structured and effective meetings, a tab titled the 
‘Meeting Reporting Module’ (https:/ / erp.disha.gov.in) has been embedded for State 
and District Level DISHA meetings. This includes features such as a Notice Board, 
Proceedings of Meetings (PoMs), Action Taken Reports (ATRs), reimbursement of 
expenditure for organizing meetings, and Meeting Summaries containing scheduled 
meeting dates, times, venues, agendas, notices, minutes, and assigned action 
points. As recommended, the Ministry is working to introduce a functionality in the 
Meeting Reporting Portal for sending automated messages and email reminders to 
districts regarding due or overdue meetings, and for facilitating the uploading of 

 
 
 
22 
 
Meeting Notices, Agendas, Proceedings of Meetings, and Action Taken Reports 
(ATRs) on the DISHA Portal.” 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.3 The Committee note that several DISHA sittings have been attended only by 
junior Sub-Divisional Officers, while the designated Heads of Department, Executive 
Engineers, Divisional Railway Managers, and equivalent officers have absented 
themselves. Such non-attendance nullifies the very purpose of the Committee, which 
is to secure on-the-spot decisions from officers empowered to act. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that where any senior line-department officer fails to attend 
two consecutive DISHA meetings without written justification accepted by the 
Chairperson, the District Collector shall forthwith report the default to the cadre-
controlling Ministry/ Department. The Ministry of Rural Development shall keep 
further scheme-related fund releases to that line department in temporary abeyance 
until the officer complies with the attendance requirement. The Committee feel that 
meetings can be a highly efficient and effective forum for robust discussion and 
debate, an opportunity for executives to align on future action, commit to it and hold 
one another accountable, therefore, all the meetings should be attended by the 
senior most officers of the concerned Departments. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The Ministry has been consistently working to ensure the timely convening of 
DISHA meetings with active participation from all stakeholders and senior-level 
officers for more effective outcomes. The Secretary, Rural Development, has 
requested all States/ UTs to take necessary action in this regard and to ensure the 
participation of concerned senior officers in DISHA meetings. Furthermore, the line 
Ministries and Departments have been advised to ensure the participation of officers 
at appropriate levels. (Annexure-IV). 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 

 
 
 
23 
 
4.5 The Committee observe that a number of States and Union Territories have 
neither issued the requisite notification constituting the State-level DISHA Committee 
nor convened even a single sitting since the issuance of guidelines. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development serve a final notice to 
all defaulting States/ UTs, directing them to (i) notify the State-level DISHA 
Committee within one month of receipt of the notice, and (ii) schedule at least one 
meeting of the committee in each calendar quarter. The Ministry shall place before 
Parliament, as part of its quarterly compliance report, a statement Identifying the 
States/ UTs that remain in default after the expiry of one month, together with the 
remedial action initiated in each case. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 As per available information, State Level DISHA Committees (SLDCs) have 
been constituted in 21 States. During the last one year, 7 States have conducted a 
total of 8 SLDC meetings. A total of 186 Hon’ble MPs has been nominated as 
members of their respective SLDCs by the Ministry, while 78 non-official members 
have been nominated based on the recommendations received from Hon’ble MPs. 
The Ministry has requested the State Governments to constitute SLDCs in States 
where they are yet to be formed and to convene the meetings at the earliest 
(Annexure-II). 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.7 The Committee note that several District Collectors are either unaware of, or 
unclear about, the 2 lakh per-meeting ceiling prescribed for DISHA sittings, with the 
result that meetings are postponed and essential field inspections omitted. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development issue an 
updated, comprehensive circular, copied to every Member of Parliament and every 
District Collector, clearly specifying that up to 2 lakhs may be drawn for each DISHA 
meeting, enumerating admissible heads of expenditure (venue and logistics, TA/ DA 
for members and officials, documentation, transport and site-inspection costs) and 
outlining a simplified, time-bound reimbursement procedure. The circular should 
further state that, where agenda load or on-site verification so requires, the meeting 
may extend over two or three consecutive days while remaining within the 2 lakh 

 
 
 
24 
 
per-meeting ceiling, where the agenda includes quarterly study visits, provision of 
additional budget may be made to meet the expenses. Timely advance release of 
funds and prompt settlement of claims should be ensured to prevent any delay or 
dilution of the review process. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The Ministry has circulated the revised provisions of the DISHA Guidelines 
pertaining to the expenditure to be incurred for DISHA meetings. The State/ UT 
Governments have also been informed about the detailed provisions for 
reimbursement of meeting-related expenditure (Annexure–III). The Ministry is 
making concerted efforts to ensure the timely release of reimbursement claims upon 
receipt of the requisite proposals. 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
4.9  The committee note that as per DISHA guidelines the District Committee may 
be arranged on any day during third week of April, July, October and February with 
the permission of Chairperson. For organizing additional meetings, date and month 
of meetings to be notified with the consent/ directions of the Chairperson. Member 
Secretary should be personally responsible for convening meetings. Further, the 
total expenditure should not, however, exceed Rs.2,00,000/ - per meeting. The 
District Administration may incur expenditure on holding the meetings of DISHA 
adhering to the norms applicable. The Committee recommend that since expenditure 
is not limited for only one quarterly meetings, MoRD should encourage for increased 
frequency of DISHA meetings for better monitoring and mid-course corrections of 
schemes. This will allow early identification of implementation gaps and timely 
interventions helping reduce last minute spending pressures near year-end. The 
Committee, also recommend Ministry for suggesting SoPs for meetings to Member 
Secretary focusing on grouping of Departments based on similarity of schemes or 
Ministry-wise for effective outcome. Therefore, the funds should be critically 
reviewed from time to time and utilized fully and properly. 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
 
25 
 
4.10 Ministry consider DISHA District Committees as an important mechanism for 
ensuring effective governance and promoting the holistic development of districts. 
These meetings provide a platform to foster synergy in monitoring and ensuring the 
timely implementation of various programmes at the district level. These meetings 
also help identify challenges, address bottlenecks, and align district priorities with 
national development goals, thereby contributing to community upliftment and 
reduction of regional disparities. 
Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, the Ministry has been 
consistently working to ensure that these meetings are convened regularly, with 
active participation from all stakeholders and senior-level officers for more effective 
outcomes. The Secretary, Rural Development, has requested all States/ UTs to take 
necessary action in this regard and to ensure the participation of concerned senior 
officers in DISHA meetings. Further, the line Ministries and Departments have been 
advised to ensure the participation of officers at appropriate levels. The Hon’ble 
Minister of Rural Development has also requested Hon’ble MPs to convene DISHA 
meetings in a timely manner (Annexure–I). As per DISHA guidelines, District Level 
DISHA Committees are required to hold meetings at least once every quarter, with a 
minimum of four meetings annually. However, if Chairperson so desires, number of 
meetings to be convened can be more than four. 
As per the DISHA Guidelines, each DISHA Committee is required to develop 
its own system for agenda setting for the quarterly meetings, in accordance with the 
specific requirements of the respective district. Action Taken on the 
recommendations of the previous meeting should be the first agenda item for the 
next meeting. The agenda should contain substantive issues to facilitate 
improvement in quality of implementation of the programmes.  
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.11  The Committee note that senior officers of the concerned departments do not 
attend the meetings or nominate junior level officers who are ill-informed about the 
progress of schemes. The Committee strongly recommend that in order to achieve 
the purpose of DISHA Committees, MoRD may on regular basis communicate with 
Member Secretaries on the issues of non-attendance of senior officers, ill-
preparedness for the meeting and ensure strict and timely follow up of the 
recommendations of the meeting. The Committee also recommend that, at the end 
of every quarter, the Ministry of Rural Development extract compliance data from the 
DISHA dashboard and issue a concise review letter to each District Collector, 

 
 
 
26 
 
itemising the number of meetings held, the punctuality of agenda circulation and 
ATR submission, and the attendance record of senior line-department officers; 
copies of this letter should be endorsed to the MP-Chairperson and the State Chief 
Secretary. Where the same deficiencies are recorded in two consecutive quarters, 
the Ministry should formally urge the State Government to initiate strict compliance in 
this regard as per guidelines 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12  Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, the Ministry has been 
consistently working to ensure that these meetings are convened regularly, with 
active participation from all stakeholders and senior-level officers for more effective 
outcomes. The Secretary, Rural Development, has requested Chief Secretaries/ 
Advisors to Administrator/ LG of all the States/ UTs to ensure mandated District 
Level DISHA Committee meetings and participation of concerned senior officers of 
the States/ UTs in DISHA meetings (Annexure–III). Further, the line Ministries and 
Departments have also been advised to ensure the participation of officers at 
appropriate levels (Annexure–IV). The Hon’ble Minister of Rural Development has 
also requested Hon’ble MPs to convene DISHA meetings in a timely manner 
(Annexure–I). These communications are also available on DISHA Dashboard. 
To support the operations of DISHA Committees and to facilitate structured and 
effective meetings, a tab titled the ‘Meeting Reporting Module’ (https:/ / 
erp.disha.gov.in) has been embedded for State and District Level DISHA meetings. 
This includes features such as a Notice Board, Proceedings of Meetings (PoMs), 
Action Taken Reports (ATRs), reimbursement of expenditure for organizing 
meetings, and Meeting Summaries containing scheduled meeting dates, times, 
venues, agendas, notices, minutes, and assigned action points. 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
4.13  The Committee is of the view that reliance on file-based reporting may hide 
ground-level shortcomings and results into provide gloomy picture of the site. To 
ensure that physical realities match the figures presented, the Committee 
recommend that every district DISHA arrange at least one on-site review each year 
covering key assets, such as PMGSY roads, school buildings, Anganwadi centres 
and other Central-scheme works. The visiting team, led by the District Collector and 

 
 
 
27 
 
the MP-Chairperson, should capture geotagged photographs, record brief field notes 
and compile a single-page status report. These materials are to be uploaded on the 
DISHA portal within seven days of the visit and prominently flagged on the public 
dashboard, so that subsequent meetings, higher authorities, and citizens alike can 
track follow-up action. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 DISHA Committees have authority to look into complaints/ alleged 
irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the programmes, including 
complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, miss-appropriation/ diversion of funds 
and recommend follow-up action. The Committee have also authority to summon 
and inspect any record for this purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the District Collector/ CEO of the Zila Panchayat/ Project Director of 
DRDA (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or suggest suitable action to be taken in 
accordance with the rules which should be action upon by him within 30 days.  
 
All documents related to pre and post-meeting activities of DISHA Committee 
are uploaded on meeting reporting portal. 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.15 The Committee observe that many resolutions adopted in DISHA meetings, 
particularly those pertaining to augmentation of resources or inter-sectoral 
convergence, remain unimplemented because the requisite funding and planning 
approvals rest with the District Planning Committee (DPC). To close this coordination 
gap, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development issue a 
directive empowering every District DISHA Committee to transmit its resolutions and 
recommendations, in writing and in the prescribed format, to the Chairperson of the 
DPC within seven days of the meeting. The DPC Chairperson shall examine the 
proposal and communicate an approval, modification or reasoned rejection within a 
maximum period of thirty days. The communication, together with any follow-up 
action, shall be uploaded on the DISHA portal and tagged to the relevant agenda 

 
 
 
28 
 
item so that progress can be transparently monitored at the next DISHA sitting as 
well as by the State-level DISHA Committee and the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 The District Planning Committee (DPC) is a constitutional body established 
under Article 243ZD of the Indian Constitution to prepare district-level development 
plans. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) oversees and facilitates the 
functioning of these committees by issuing planning guidelines and supporting 
initiatives aimed at strengthening their role in decentralized planning. The terms of 
reference of the DISHA Committees, inter alia, include facilitating the smooth 
implementation of priorities determined by the District Planning Committees (DPCs) 
and guiding the DPCs on national programmes and how these can be leveraged for 
the overall development of the district. The proposal for issuing directives in 
consultation with MoPR is under consideration.” 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
4.17  The Committee is concerned to note that there are some instances of 
inaccurate or misleading progress reporting in certain departments. The Committee 
therefore recommend that, if a department submit erroneous data twice within the 
same district, the Ministry of Rural Development should require the District Collector 
to conduct a verification exercise, identify specific corrective measures, and certify 
their completion. Subsequent fund disbursements under the relevant scheme for that 
district shall be processed only after the Collector's certification has been placed on 
record in the minutes of the next DISHA meeting and uploaded to the portal for audit 
and oversight. The Ministry of RD should take all sincere and stern steps to check 
the recurrence of such cases. 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 DISHA Committees have authority to look into complaints/ alleged 
irregularities received in respect of the implementation of the programmes, including 
complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, miss-appropriation/ diversion of funds 
and recommend follow-up action. The Committee have also authority to summon 
and inspect any record for this purpose. The Committee may refer any matter for 
enquiry to the District Collector/ CEO of the Zila Panchayat/ Project Director of 
DRDA (or Poverty Alleviation Unit) or suggest suitable action to be taken in 
accordance with the rules which should be action upon by him within 30 days. All 
documents related to pre and post-meeting activities of DISHA Committee are 
uploaded on meeting reporting portal. 

 
 
 
29 
 
The Ministry has also issued an advisory to the State/ UT Governments to ensure 
the accuracy and correctness of the data provided to the DISHA Committees 
(Annexure–V). 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
30 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. H-11013/ 01/ 2017- DISHA (E-357375) dated 12.11.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
01 April, 2026 
11 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)  
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
 
31 
 
Annexure I 
  


 
 
 
32 
 
 


 
 
 
33 
 
Annexure II
 


 
 
 
34 
 
  


 
 
 
35 
 
Annexure III 
 


 
 
 
36 
 
Annexure IV 
 


 
 
 
37 
 
 
 


 
 
 
38 
 
Annexure V 
 


 
 
 
39 
 
ANNEXURE VI 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 01ST APRIL, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs to 1045 hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Janardan Mishra  -- Acting Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
7. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
8. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
9. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
10. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
12. Smt. Rajathi 
13. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
14. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
  
2. At the outset, under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX; 
and (ii) Draft Report on ‘Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Effective Functioning of DISHA 
Committees” (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development)’. 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same with slight modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Acting Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft 
reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
_____________________________ 
XXXX Not related to the Draft Report. 

 
 
 
40 
 
ANNEXURE VII 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (18TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:     14
        
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1,2,4, 7, 12  
Total:5 
Percentage: 36% 
III.  Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL 
Percentage: 0% 
 
IV. Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 3,5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 & 14      
Total: 9 
Percentage: 64%  
V. Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
Percentage: 0% 
 