 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT   
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Functioning of National Institute of Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR)” (2024-25) of the Ministry 
of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
22 


 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of National Institute of Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) (2024-25) of the Ministry 
of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2025 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025/Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 213 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-2026) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
12 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
14 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
15 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
20 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on 12.12.2025 
 
21 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
24. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
25. Shri Samirul Islam 
26. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
27. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
28. Smt. Rajathi 
29. Shri Nagendra Ray 
30. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
31. Smt. P.T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty Second Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 10th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (18thLok Sabha) on 
‘Functioning of National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRD&PR)’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
2.  The Tenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22.07.2025 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2025. Replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 16.10.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 12.12.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15 December, 2025 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Tenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of National Institute of Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR)’ of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the term 2024-25. 
1.2  The Tenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22.07.2025 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2025. The Report contained 
04 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 04 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 4          
          Total: 1
          Chapter-II
            
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 1, 2, 3       
 Total: 03 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4  The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Continuation of NIRD&PR’s Engagement with MoRD 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
1.6 With regard to the continuation of NIRD&PR’s engagement with MoRD, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that NIRD&PR has a long-cherished 
history of existence since 1958 and is also recognized as one of the 
UN-ESCAP centres of Excellence and building capacities of rural 
development functionaries, elected representatives of PRIs, banks, 
NGOs and other stakeholders. It also acts as a ‘Think-Tank’ for the 
MoRD, MoPR and other line Ministries by helping them with policy 
formulation, development and implementation of national-level 
programmes/schemes through its various training and research 
activities. 
The Committee note that the Department of Expenditure with a 
view to furthering the aim of “minimum government, maximum 
governance” and ensuring economical and efficient use of public fund, 
reviewed the need for the continuity of Autonomous Bodies under the 
control of Department of Rural Development in the year 2020 and 
recommended in its report AB-4 that NIRD&PR may be disengaged 
from MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of financial support 
and administrative control and it may be converted into a Center of 
Excellence/Deemed University engaged in training and research. 
Further, Committee note from the report that Central government may 
access its services as a client. Government may give grants based on 
the functions of the body till it is converted into a deemed, autonomous 
Institute. Disengagement by the government is recommended with a 
three-year timeline and a gradual budget reduction of 25 % each year. 
 
The Committee observe that NIRD&PR’s work has always been 
aligned with the constitutionally mandated goals of social sector 
development, decentralized governance and inclusive growth. Its focus 
has been on creating public goods, not revenue-generated services. Its 
structure, processes and priorities have therefore evolved to support 
long-term outcomes, not commercial outputs. The Committee strongly 
believe that any move to delink NIRD&PR from MoRD represents not 
only an administrative change but a fundamental shift away from these 
core national priorities. The Committee also find that NIRD&PR has 
grown under the aegis of MoRD with global recognition, a highly 
qualified faculty, vast infrastructure and an expansive reach. Hence, 

 
 
3 
 
the Committee opine that any disengagement as decided by the 
Government apprehends to undermine its credibility and authority in 
policymaking is likely to dilute the quality of long-term research and 
training, divert it into unrelated or short-term consultative activities and 
sever its intellectual alignment with the rural development ecosystem. 
The 
Committee is of the view that disengagement will not reduce 
Government expenditure. Instead, it will shift costs to various agencies 
with disparate mandates, further increasing the burden on MoRD 
officers for oversight and coordination. Moreover, the financial 
instability due to disengagement may force the institution to drift away 
from supporting the flagship Programmes/Schemes of rural 
development viz., MGNREGA, DAY-NRLM, DDU-GKY, PMAY-G, 
PMGSY, NSAP and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The 
Committee are therefore, at a loss to understand that such a centre of 
excellence and serving as apex capacity building institution 
instrumental in nation building and national development especially in 
rural areas since the last seventy years has to be abruptly disengaged 
by the Government with the sole aim of furthering “minimum 
Government and maximum Governance”. 
 
The Committee, strongly feel that rather than disengagement, 
the need of the hour is to forge deeper strategic collaboration between 
MoRD and NIRD&PR through structural reforms, decentralized 
decision-making, adequate allocation of budgetary grant-in-aid and 
with greater autonomy and allow the institute to thrive and grow within 
the existing MoRD framework. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that keeping in view the immense contribution made by 
NIRD&PR in the progress and development of nation building in all 
spheres in rural areas the MoRD should take initiatives and come out 
with a strategic plan/new roadmap for the institute and prevail upon the 
DoE to halt the ongoing process of disengagement and allowing the 
institute to continue and sustain itself.”  
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“The Department of Expenditure (DoE) has recommended that 
the National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRD&PR) be developed into a Centre of Excellence or a Deemed 
University by progressively disengaging it from direct government 
control and financial dependence. Under this model, the Government 
may continue to utilize the Institute’s services as a client, while 
NIRD&PR transitions towards full financial autonomy. 
The Department of Rural Development requested the 
Department of Expenditure in October 2024 to re-consider the proposal 
keeping the National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj (NIRD&PR)'s position as a cornerstone of India's rural 
development strategy and an indispensable critical think tank and 
strongly advocated for its continued integration. However, the D/o 
Expenditure conveyed vide OM dated 13.2.2025 that request of 
Department of Rural Development has not been agreed to. 

 
 
4 
 
 Further, GIA has also not been allocated to NIRD & PR in 
Demand for Grants of Department of Rural Development in FY 2025-
26. It has been observed that in the absence of allocated government 
funding, NIRD&PR has been successfully operating on a self-
sustaining basis during the initial five months of FY 2025–26 (since 1st 
April 2025). The Institute has comfortably mobilized resources by 
conducting sponsored programmes commissioned by various State 
Government departments and Ministries of the Government of India, 
including the Ministry of Rural Development.   
 As NIRD & PR is operating on self-sustaining mode as on date, 
the Cabinet Note is being revised afresh for Inter Ministerial 
consultations and the same shall be placed before the Cabinet in due 
course for a final decision regarding the future course of action on 
NIRD&PR.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 NIRD&PR is recognised as centre of excellence and building capacity of 
rural development in India. It trains people to run villages better and helps to 
make rules for programs that fight against poverty and build roads or homes. 
The Committee laud NIRD&PR for its 67-year legacy in rural development, 
however, at the same time rejects the disengagement process. The Committee 
are dismayed at the prospect of abruptly severing ties with an institution that 
has been instrumental in rural nation-building for almost seven decades, 
solely to advance the "minimum government, maximum governance" agenda. 
The Committee, view the disengagement not as a mere administrative tweak 
but as a profound deviation from core national priorities. The committee 
contend that NIRD&PR's growth fuelled by MoRD's support has been 
symbiotic, enabling its international stature and broad impact. Financially, 
disengagement promises no net savings instead, costs would redistribute 
across agencies with divergent mandates, escalating oversight and 
coordination burdens on MoRD officers. This fragmentation could inflate 
overall expenditures, contradicting the DoE's fiscal prudence goals. 

 
 
5 
 
Operationally, the spectre of financial instability looms large and without 
steady grants, NIRD&PR might drift from supporting flagship rural schemes, 
including the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) for wage employment, Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National 
Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) for women's self-help groups, Deen 
Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) for skill 
development, Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G) for rural 
housing, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) for connectivity, 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) for vulnerable groups, and 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) for local governance strengthening. 
Strategically, the committee express dismay at the irony that a 67-year-old 
institution, pivotal to rural nation-building, faces abrupt curtailment under the 
very banner of governance optimization. Employee unrest, including delayed 
salaries and pension issues, has compounded challenges. Therefore, rather 
than disengagement, the Committee reiterate earlier recommendation to 
intensified broader strategic partnership between MoRD and NIRD&PR, 
underpinned by structural reforms to enhance efficiency and relevance, 
decentralized decision-making to empower local innovation, adequate grant-
in-aid to ensure financial stability, and enhanced autonomy for growth—all 
within the existing MoRD framework. Furthermore, once again the MoRD is 
urged to formulate a comprehensive strategic plan or roadmap, delineating 
NIRD&PR's future contributions to rural spheres and must persuade DoE to 
suspend the ongoing disengagement process immediately to safeguard 
NIRD&PR's continuity and to persist it as a beacon of excellence in rural 
development and capacity building. 

 
 
6 
 
II. Constitution of a MoRD led Committee to Oversee Administrative and 
Governance matters at NIRD&PR 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.9 With regard to constitution of a MoRD led Committee to Oversee 
Administrative and Governance matters at NIRD&PR, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee were apprised about the progress and 
challenges being faced by the NIRD&PR during their study visit 
recently. Over the past four years, the institute got paralyzed by the 
present administration. The administrative framework of NIRD&PR has 
adversely affected the key posts such as DDG (Academic), Registrar, 
and FA lying vacant or being handled by lower-rank officers on an in-
charge basis. This Centralized control has weakened the institution’s 
operational integrity. While the Administrative Staff College of India 
(ASCI) was appointed to develop a roadmap for transition, its report 
was reportedly ignored. The disengagement plan submitted to MoRD 
was neither internally reviewed nor externally validated, making it the 
work of a single individual rather than a collective institutional vision. 
Infrastructure has been poorly maintained under the guise of cost-
cutting, leading to declining training ratings and a diminishing brand 
image. Faculty morale is at an all-time low due to adhoc inter-centre 
transfer policy, unresolved vigilance cases (non-financial in nature), 
long-pending promotions through Centre for Agrarian Studies (CAS) 
and lack of leadership trust. Lastly, the current administration has also 
tasked individual units with preparing revenue generation plans in 
isolation, with no strategic coordination or institutional direction 
particularly unfeasible for support centres not designed to generate 
revenue. The Committee take serious view of the present piquant 
situation of the institute which is unwarranted at this critical juncture 
and feel that it is more of an impediment thrust upon them with no clear 
directions as to how to proceed. The Committee also disapprove the 
attitude of the present executive council towards the problems being 
faced by the employees serving and retired who are not able to get 
their salary/pension in time. In view of the above, the Committee 
strongly recommend the MoRD to expeditiously constitute a committee 
under its supervision to oversee administrative and governance 
matters so as to prevent the situation from going bad to worse." 
  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 "NIRD&PR already has a statutory governance structure. The 
General Council, chaired by the Hon'ble Minister of Rural 
Development, is the apex policy-making body, and the Executive 
Council, chaired by the Secretary, Rural Development, is the principal 
executive authority for administration, finance, and management. The 
most recent meeting of the Executive Council was held on 2nd May 
2025, wherein important administrative and programme relating issues 
were deliberated. The Department is of the view that strengthening the 

 
 
7 
 
functioning of the statutory councils would adequately address 
governance concerns and ensure accountability and delivery of 
outcomes. 
 Further, it is envisaged that, post disengagement, the Institute 
would be fully equipped to operate independently. A new governance 
framework is expected to be established, in line with NIRD&PR’s 
evolving role as a high-impact, research-driven, autonomous institution. 
The revamped structure will emphasize enhanced professional 
autonomy, transparency, inclusive stakeholder participation, and 
adherence to best practices in academic and research governance." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11  The Committee welcome the Government's move, which reaffirms 
confidence in NIRD&PR's statutory governance structure—the General Council 
(chaired by the Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development) as the apex policy-
making body and the Executive Council (chaired by the Secretary, Rural 
Development) as the principal executive authority for administration, finance, 
and management. The Committee also acknowledge and appreciate the 
positive outcomes from the Executive Council's meeting on May 2, 2025, 
where administrative and programmatic issues were deliberated, and the 
forward-looking vision for a post-disengagement governance framework 
emphasizing enhanced professional autonomy, transparency, inclusive 
stakeholder participation, and adherence to best practices in academic and 
research governance. However, given the elapsed time since the May,2025 
meeting (now over six months) and the persistent challenges outlined in initial 
report such as key post vacancies, faculty morale erosion, infrastructure 
neglect, uncoordinated revenue planning, and delays in salary/pension 
disbursements, the Committee strongly urge DoRD to take proactive measures 
to translate commitments into tangible progress. While the existing structure 
is robust on paper, its efficacy depends on timely, transparent implementation. 

 
 
8 
 
In view of the above, the Committee once again strongly recommend and urge 
DoRD to expeditiously constitute a committee under its supervision and if not 
possible, at least constitute a lean Interim Task Force (5-7 members, including 
MoRD representatives, external governance experts from ASCI/IIMs, and 
NIRD&PR stakeholders) to monitor transition milestones. For the time being, 
the Committee also recommend DoRD to prevail upon the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) to allocate a dedicated "Transition Fund" (at least 10% of 
NIRD&PR's annual budget) for immediate interventions, such as leadership 
training programs to rebuild trust and targeted infrastructure upgrades to halt 
brand erosion. The Committee remain committed to NIRD&PR's revitalization 
and view these recommendations as collaborative extensions of the 
Government's reply. Timely action will not only avert worsening challenges but 
also position the Institute as a model for autonomous rural development 
excellence. 
III. Expeditious Filling up of Vacancies 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.12  In the context of expeditious filling up of vacancies, the Committee had 
recommended as below:- 
“The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj (NIRD&PR) serves as the apex capacity-building institution in the 
country. It supports the implementation of rural development 
programmes through its multidisciplinary faculty and an extensive 
outreach network in States. The Committee are constrained to note 
that the institute has eighteen functional centres falling under seven 
schools catering to different thematic areas of holistic rural 
development. In addition, three professional centres are providing 
support to overall functioning of the institute, yet the institute of national 
importance like NIRD&PR has been experiencing huge shortage of 
manpower in the categories of Academic and Non-academic Posts. 
The Committee also note with concern that as against the total 
sanctioned strength of 640, the NIRD&PR is working with a strength of 
only 221 leaving as large as 419 vacancies. Moreover, recruitment of 
regular officials in key positions viz., DDG, Registrar and Finance 
Advisor are also pending since long. The Committee are surprised to 

 
 
9 
 
note that these 3 key positions which are very crucial for the day-to-day 
smooth functioning of the institute are lying vacant. In such a situation 
one cannot expect the institute to perform its role and functions 
effectively. In view of these, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the MoRD should take all out efforts to fill up the existing vacancies 
expeditiously on full time basis for the smooth functioning of the 
institute.” 
 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“Based on the recommendations of the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) for the gradual disengagement of NIRD&PR from 
MoRD and its transition into a self-sustained Centre of 
Excellence/Deemed University within a three-year period, filling up of 
regular administrative posts has been constrained. 
 However, with reference to the Committee’s concern regarding 
large-scale vacancies, it is submitted that it was decided in the EC 
meeting for filling up key positions on deputation basis.  
 It is further submitted that, subsequent to the proposed 
disengagement, NIRD&PR will be in a better position to address the 
issue of vacancies in a pragmatic and need-based manner. The 
Institute will have greater flexibility to assess its functional requirements 
from time to time and accordingly decide the mode of filling posts—
through deputation, contractual appointments, or regular recruitment, 
as the situation demands. This will enable NIRD&PR to ensure that 
critical positions do not remain vacant for long periods and that the 
overall administrative and academic efficiency of the Institute is 
maintained without disruption.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 The Committee express deep concern over the institute's chronic 
manpower crisis, which threatens its ability to fulfil its mandate effectively. 
Despite a sanctioned strength of 640 posts (spanning academic, 
administrative, and support roles), NIRD&PR is operating with a mere 221 
staff members, resulting in a staggering 419 vacancies equivalent to over 65% 
of its total workforce. This acute shortage permeates all categories, severely 
limiting the institute's capacity to conduct training programs, maintain 
research output, and extend outreach to state-level stakeholders. Particularly 
alarming is the prolonged vacancy in three critical leadership positions viz., 

 
 
10 
 
DDG, Registrar and Finance Advisor. These gaps have led to reliance on 
lower-rank officers in in-charge roles, causing operational bottlenecks, 
delayed decision-making, and diminished institutional efficiency. The 
Committee underscore that such a scenario is untenable for an institute of 
national importance, as it directly impairs day-to-day functioning and long-
term strategic goals. Therefore, the Committee had strongly recommended 
DoRD to undertake all-out efforts to fill these vacancies on a full-time, regular 
basis as expeditiously as possible. This would restore operational 
smoothness, bolster faculty and staff morale, and ensure uninterrupted 
delivery of rural development services. The DoRD, provided a measured 
response that situates the vacancy issue within the broader context of 
institutional reforms. It references recommendations from the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) for a gradual disengagement of NIRD&PR from MoRD over 
a three-year period. The objective is to transform the institute into a self-
sustained Centre of Excellence or Deemed University, reducing dependency 
on central funding and enhancing its autonomy. This transition imposes 
constraints on filling regular administrative posts, as premature hiring could 
conflict with the evolving organizational structure and fiscal prudence. 
However, with reference to the Committee’s concern regarding large-scale 
vacancies, the DoRD has decided in its Executive Council (EC) meeting for 
filling up key positions on deputation basis. The Committee, however, 
comprehend about the risks exacerbating current challenges if interim 
measures like deputation are not implemented promptly and swiftly. 
Therefore, to ensure no disruption in day-to-day functioning, the Committee 
strongly recommend DoRD to operationalize the EC decision by launching a 

 
 
11 
 
targeted deputation drive immediately for key posts and preparing for broader 
vacancy reductions in phase wise manner to address the 419 vacancies viz., 
short-term via contractual appointments for non-core support roles (e.g., 
administrative assistants in professional centres) to stabilize outreach 
networks, medium-term via deputation or on contractual basis in academic 
categories, prioritizing thematic schools with highest shortages and long-
term via regular recruitment depending upon the functional requirements. The 
Committee are of the view that this pragmatic mix would mitigate the current 
"huge shortage" without contravening DoE guidelines, ensuring 
multidisciplinary faculty support for rural programmes. By acting 
expeditiously, DoRD can safeguard NIRD&PR's role as the nation's premier 
rural development institution. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
2.1 The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) 
is setup as registered society which has two main governing entities, which are the 
General Council headed by the Minister for Rural Development and the Executive 
Council headed by the Secretary for Rural Development and Director General being 
the Member Secretary and Principal Executive Officer. The Committee were 
enlightened during their recent study visit about the centralized control and 
mismanagement by current administration. In this connection, the Committee 
observe that since the 2025 budget presentation, NIRD&PR employees and faculty 
have sought clarity and administratorship from the Director General (DG) regarding a 
strategy for self-sustainability and institutional transition. Unfortunately, there has 
been no formal communication, no inclusive consultation, and no clarity on the way 
forward. Internal file notings and verbal instructions are being used based on the 
Zero budget allocation by Government of India which is creating panic and distrust 
within the organization. The Committee also observe that, despite sufficient Internal 
Generated Revenue (IGR) and corpus fund interest, there are delays in salary 
disbursements, medical reimbursements, and vendor payments-causing financial 
distress, especially among SHG and contractual staff. The Committee, also learn 
that there is no plan or direction from Director General to mobilize resources or 
bringing sponsored projects. There is pressure on individual faculty to generate 
income for her/his monthly salary. This centralized control has weakened the 
institution’s operational integrity and create serious apprehensions about the 
administration's commitment to upholding the assurances made to faculty and staff 
at the time of their recruitment. Therefore, in order to ensure effective leadership and 
institutional stability, the Committee strongly recommend for immediate review and 
replacement of the current administration, which has failed to maintain faculty trust or 
organizational coherence till than grant already extended by the Government may be 
continued. 
 

 
 
13 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.2 It is submitted that NIRD&PR is an autonomous body and, in keeping with its 
mandate, is empowered to take decisions necessary for achieving its objectives and 
safeguarding institutional sustainability. Further, in the absence of grant-in-aid 
support from the Government, the Institute may suitably determine, from time to 
time, the role of its faculty and administration need to undertake for achieving self-
reliance.  
 
Further, post disengagement, the Institute would be fully equipped to operate 
independently. A new governance framework is expected to be established, in line 
with NIRD&PR’s evolving role as a high-impact, research-driven, autonomous 
institution. The revamped structure will emphasize enhanced professional autonomy, 
transparency, inclusive stakeholder participation, and adherence to best practices in 
academic and research governance. 
 
Furthermore, in the absence of allocated government funding, NIRD&PR has been 
operating on a self-sustaining basis during the initial five months of FY 2025–26 
(since 1st April 2025). The Institute has successfully mobilized resources by 
conducting sponsored programmes commissioned by various State Government 
departments and Ministries of the Government of India, including the Ministry of 
Rural Development.  
         (O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
  

 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Committee note that NIRD&PR has a long-cherished history of existence 
since 1958 and is also recognized as one of the UN-ESCAP centres of Excellence 
and building capacities of rural development functionaries, elected representatives of 
PRIs, banks, NGOs and other stakeholders. It also acts as a ‘Think-Tank’ for the 
MoRD, MoPR and other line Ministries by helping them with policy formulation, 
development and implementation of national-level programmes/schemes through its 
various training and research activities.  
The Committee note that the Department of Expenditure with a view to 
furthering the aim of “minimum government, maximum governance” and ensuring 
economical and efficient use of public fund, reviewed the need for the continuity of 
Autonomous Bodies under the control of Department of Rural Development in the 
year 2020 and recommended in its report AB-4 that NIRD&PR may be disengaged 
from MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of financial support and 
administrative control and it may be converted into a Center of Excellence/Deemed 
University engaged in training and research. Further, Committee note from the report 
that Central government may access its services as a client. Government may give 
grants based on the functions of the body till it is converted into a deemed, 
autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the government is recommended with a 
three-year timeline and a gradual budget reduction of 25 % each year. 
The Committee observe that NIRD&PR’s work has always been aligned with 
the constitutionally mandated goals of social sector development, decentralized 
governance and inclusive growth. Its focus has been on creating public goods, not 
revenue-generated services. Its structure, processes and priorities have therefore 
evolved to support long-term outcomes, not commercial outputs. The Committee 
strongly believe that any move to delink NIRD&PR from MoRD represents not only 
an administrative change but a fundamental shift away from these core national 
priorities. The Committee also find that NIRD&PR has grown under the aegis of 
MoRD with global recognition, a highly qualified faculty, vast infrastructure and an 
expansive reach. Hence, the Committee opine that any disengagement as decided 

 
 
16 
 
by the Government apprehends to undermine its credibility and authority in 
policymaking is likely to dilute the quality of long-term research and training, divert it 
into unrelated or short-term consultative activities and sever its intellectual alignment 
with the rural development ecosystem. The Committee is of the view that 
disengagement will not reduce Government expenditure. Instead, it will shift costs to 
various agencies with disparate mandates, further increasing the burden on MoRD 
officers for oversight and coordination. Moreover, the financial instability due to 
disengagement may force the institution to drift away from supporting the flagship 
Programmes/Schemes of rural development viz., MGNREGA, DAY-NRLM, DDU-
GKY, PMAY-G, PMGSY, NSAP and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The 
Committee are therefore, at a loss to understand that such a centre of excellence 
and serving as apex capacity building institution instrumental in nation building and 
national development especially in rural areas since the last seventy years has to be 
abruptly disengaged by the Government with the sole aim of furthering “minimum 
Government and maximum Governance”. 
The Committee, strongly feel that rather than disengagement, the need of the 
hour is to forge deeper strategic collaboration between MoRD and NIRD&PR 
through structural reforms, decentralized decision-making, adequate allocation of 
budgetary grant-in-aid and with greater autonomy and allow the institute to thrive and 
grow within the existing MoRD framework. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that keeping in view the immense contribution made by NIRD&PR in the 
progress and development of nation building in all spheres in rural areas the MoRD 
should take initiatives and come out with a strategic plan/new roadmap for the 
institute and prevail upon the DoE to halt the ongoing process of disengagement and 
allowing the institute to continue and sustain itself.  
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The Department of Expenditure (DoE) has recommended that the National 
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) be developed into a 
Centre of Excellence or a Deemed University by progressively disengaging it from 
direct government control and financial dependence. Under this model, the 
Government may continue to utilize the Institute’s services as a client, while 
NIRD&PR transitions towards full financial autonomy. 
The Department of Rural Development requested the Department of 
Expenditure in October 2024 to re-consider the proposal keeping the National 

 
 
17 
 
Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR)'s position as 
a cornerstone of India's rural development strategy and an indispensable critical 
think tank and strongly advocated for its continued integration. However, the D/o 
Expenditure conveyed vide OM dated 13.2.2025 that request of Department of Rural 
Development has not been agreed to. 
  Further, GIA has also not been allocated to NIRD & PR in Demand for Grants 
of Department of Rural Development in FY 2025-26. It has been observed that in the 
absence of allocated government funding, NIRD&PR has been successfully 
operating on a self-sustaining basis during the initial five months of FY 2025–26 
(since 1st April 2025). The Institute has comfortably mobilized resources by 
conducting sponsored programmes commissioned by various State Government 
departments and Ministries of the Government of India, including the Ministry of 
Rural Development.   
  As NIRD & PR is operating on self-sustaining mode as on date, the Cabinet 
Note is being revised afresh for Inter Ministerial consultations and the same shall be 
placed before the Cabinet in due course for a final decision regarding the future 
course of action on NIRD&PR. 
 
(O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.3 The Committee were apprised about the progress and challenges being faced 
by the NIRD&PR during their study visit recently. Over the past four years, the 
institute got paralyzed by the present administration. The administrative framework 
of NIRD&PR has adversely affected the key posts such as DDG (Academic), 
Registrar, and FA lying vacant or being handled by lower-rank officers on an in-
charge basis. This Centralized control has weakened the institution’s operational 
integrity. While the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) was appointed to 
develop a roadmap for transition, its report was reportedly ignored. The 
disengagement plan submitted to MoRD was neither internally reviewed nor 
externally validated, making it the work of a single individual rather than a collective 
institutional vision. Infrastructure has been poorly maintained under the guise of cost-
cutting, leading to declining training ratings and a diminishing brand image. Faculty 
morale is at an all-time low due to ad-hoc inter-centre transfer policy, unresolved 
vigilance cases (non-financial in nature), long-pending promotions through Centre for 
Agrarian Studies (CAS) and lack of leadership trust. Lastly, the current 

 
 
18 
 
administration has also tasked individual units with preparing revenue generation 
plans in isolation, with no strategic coordination or institutional direction particularly 
unfeasible for support centres not designed to generate revenue. The Committee 
take serious view of the present piquant situation of the institute which is 
unwarranted at this critical juncture and feel that it is more of an impediment thrust 
upon them with no clear directions as to how to proceed. The Committee also 
disapprove the attitude of the present executive council towards the problems being 
faced by the employees serving and retired who are not able to get their 
salary/pension in time. In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend the 
MoRD to expeditiously constitute a committee under its supervision to oversee 
administrative and governance matters so as to prevent the situation from going bad 
to worse. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  NIRD&PR already has a statutory governance structure. The General 
Council, chaired by the Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development, is the apex 
policy-making body, and the Executive Council, chaired by the Secretary, Rural 
Development, is the principal executive authority for administration, finance, and 
management. The most recent meeting of the Executive Council was held on 2nd 
May 2025, wherein important administrative and programme relating issues were 
deliberated. The Department is of the view that strengthening the functioning of the 
statutory councils would adequately address governance concerns and ensure 
accountability and delivery of outcomes. 
  
Further, it is envisaged that, post disengagement, the Institute would be fully 
equipped to operate independently. A new governance framework is expected to be 
established, in line with NIRD&PR’s evolving role as a high-impact, research-driven, 
autonomous institution. The revamped structure will emphasize enhanced 
professional autonomy, transparency, inclusive stakeholder participation, and 
adherence to best practices in academic and research governance. 
 
(O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.5 The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) 
serves as the apex capacity-building institution in the country. It supports the 
implementation of rural development programmes through its multidisciplinary faculty 
and an extensive outreach network in States. The Committee are constrained to note 

 
 
19 
 
that the institute has eighteen functional centres falling under seven schools catering 
to different thematic areas of holistic rural development. In addition, three 
professional centres are providing support to overall functioning of the institute, yet 
the institute of national importance like NIRD&PR has been experiencing huge 
shortage of manpower in the categories of Academic and Non-academic Posts. The 
Committee also note with concern that as against the total sanctioned strength of 
640, the NIRD&PR is working with a strength of only 221 leaving as large as 419 
vacancies. Moreover, recruitment of regular officials in key positions viz., DDG, 
Registrar and Finance Advisor are also pending since long. The Committee are 
surprised to note that these 3 key positions which are very crucial for the day-to-day 
smooth functioning of the institute are lying vacant. In such a situation one cannot 
expect the institute to perform its role and functions effectively. In view of these, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the MoRD should take all out efforts to fill up 
the existing vacancies expeditiously on full time basis for the smooth functioning of 
the institute. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 Based on the recommendations of the Department of Expenditure (DoE) for 
the gradual disengagement of NIRD&PR from MoRD and its transition into a self-
sustained Centre of Excellence/Deemed University within a three-year period, filling 
up of regular administrative posts has been constrained. 
  
However, with reference to the Committee’s concern regarding large-scale 
vacancies, it is submitted that it was decided in the EC meeting for filling up key 
positions on deputation basis.  
  
It is further submitted that, subsequent to the proposed disengagement, 
NIRD&PR will be in a better position to address the issue of vacancies in a 
pragmatic and need-based manner. The Institute will have greater flexibility to 
assess its functional requirements from time to time and accordingly decide the 
mode of filling posts—through deputation, contractual appointments, or regular 
recruitment, as the situation demands. This will enable NIRD&PR to ensure that 
critical positions do not remain vacant for long periods and that the overall 
administrative and academic efficiency of the Institute is maintained without 
disruption. 
 
(O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O.M. No. K-15018/01/2025-Trg. (391468) dated 16.10.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15 December, 2025 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 12th DECEMBER, 2025 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1510 hrs in Committee Room No. '2',  
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension (EPHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
      
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
16. Smt. Rajathi 
17. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
18. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following draft 
reports: 
a. Draft report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 10th Report on ‘Functioning of National Institute of Rural 

 
 
22 
 
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR)’ (2024-25) pertaining to the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). 
b. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one 
and after discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. 
The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the aforesaid draft 
reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
  

 
 
23 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              4
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 4  
          Total:1
                Percentage: - 25%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL         
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0% 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 1, 2, 3       
Total: 3 
        Percentage: - 75% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0% 
 