 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
      
 
        EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
   
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources)'] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
12 


 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-25) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF LAND RESOURCES) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land 
Resources)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.07.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)............................................................... ii 
INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... iii 
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 11 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies.................................................. 
16 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee...................................... 
17 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited............................................................ 
23 
ANNEXURES 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Ninth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 01.07.2025……………………………………... 
24 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj………………………………………………………….. 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Shri Vaiko 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Atul Singh    - Executive Officer 
 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
(2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present the 12th Report on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Land Resources)'. 
2.  The Second Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 26.03.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
01.07.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
  
1 
 
 
  CHAPTER I  
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (2024-
25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources). 
1.2 The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2024 and was laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2024. The Report contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. 
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 11 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorised as follows: -  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9 
Total:06 
Chapter II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of replies of the Government: 
Serial No. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 8, 10 and 11. 
Total: 05 
Chapter IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. Nil. 
Total: Nil 
Chapter V 

 
2 
 
 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where it is not possible for 
any reasons to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
I.    Fund allocation during 2024-25  
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
1.6 With regard to Budget allocation for the schemes under the Department of Land 
Resources, the Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that during the year 2024-25 there has been an 
increase of only Rs. 246.25 Crore in the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS / Scheme 
component) of the Department of Land Resources (DoLR) over the BE of previous 
year. The BE for the year 2023-24 was Rs. 2395.75 Crore and the allocation for this 
year i.e. 2024-25 has been increased to Rs. 2667.24 Crore which is an increase of 
just 6.98% over the previous year's BE. The Committee also note that the allocation 
at BE stage to Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (Watershed Component) 
has been increased by 13.70% as compared to previous year BE and for Digital 
India Land Records Modernisation Programme (DILRMP) the allocation at BE stage 
has been reduced by 27.97%. It is also evident that during the year 2023-24, 
Budgetary allocation for PMKSY-WDC was reduced by 20.45% at RE stage while 
allocation for DILRMP was also reduced by 36.14%. Considering the overall 
performance of these two schemes and their remarkable impact on the ground, the 
Committee feel that the reduction made in the BE component was not appropriate 
and reasons for creating hindrance in expanding the coverage of the schemes 
meant to benefit newer and larger area and targeted people at large as per the 
growing need of today's landscapes. Therefore, the Committee recommend the 
DoLR to take up the matter at the highest level in the Ministry of Finance seeking 
substantially higher allocation of fund so that remarkable benefits of the schemes 
may further be expanded to common masses at a faster pace. The Committee hope 
that slightly higher budgetary allocation (2024-25) for the scheme would be utilised 
fully as per programmes envisaged by the Department of Land Resources.” 
1.7  In the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department in their action taken reply 
have stated as follows: 
“The continuation of ‘WDC-PMKSY 2.0’ was approved by the Government 
on 15th December 2021 with a Central Share allocation of Rs. 8134 crores for the 
period from 2021-22 to 2025-26. Projects under ‘WDC-PMKSY 2.0’ have been 
sanctioned to States/UTs in the last quarter of FY 2021-22. 
 
During 2022-23, States/UTs were supposed to undertake measures to 
strengthen their institutions for implementation of project works. Moreover, 

 
3 
 
 
Government has made PFMS mandatory for releasing/utilizing funds under the 
scheme which necessitated PFMS infrastructure to be revamped at the Department 
level and at States/UTs level based on the new and evolving guidelines of Ministry 
of Finance. Experiences show that this exercise caused delays in release of funds 
at the Central level and expenditure at the States/UTs level.  
  
Ministry of Finance’s OM dated 31.03.2021 further stipulated that Central 
grants would be released in four equal tranches of 25% each, and release of the 
next tranche would require States/UTs to utilize at least 75% of the previous 
tranche. Further, at least a time period of 4-6 months is required for preparation of 
quality DPRs which is prerequisite for starting of field works and reaching the stage 
of Natural Resources Management (NRM) work phase. It is relevant to mention that 
major resource requirement is in the work phase. Now, most of the States/UTs have 
reached to the stage of NRM, therefore, it is expected that pace of physical and 
financial achievement would get momentum in near future. As per the Scheme 
Guidelines, the project period stands at 3-5 years and accordingly, the allocation of 
Central grants was made maximum for 5 years. The year-wise allocation in 
percentage terms stood 25% for initial three years, 15% for fourth year, and 
remaining 10% for the last year. As per the Cabinet Note of the Scheme, outlay of 
Central share for WDC-PMKSY for the period of 15th Finance Commission (FY 
2021-22 to FY 2025-26) for FY 2024-25 has been kept at Rs 1500.00 crore. 
Therefore, the proposed fund requirement for FY 2024-25 is consistent with the 
Cabinet Note and Scheme Guidelines.  
 
However, it is pertinent to mention that BE and RE in a financial year are 
firmed up as part of the overall budgetary exercise.  
Status of utilization of amount of BE 2024-25 as on 19.03.2025 is Rs. 864.31 crore, 
and till now Mother Sanctions amounting to Rs. 470.37 crore for 21 States have 
been issued on SNA SPARSH, out of which Rs. 31.82 crore has been utilised.  
 
Department of Land Resources has proposed Rs.141.00 crore as Budget 
Estimate for the FY 2024-25 under Digital India Land Record Modernization 
Programme (DILRMP). During the FY 2024-25, an amount of Rs.122.28 crore have 
been released to States/UTs (as on March 25, 2025) and Rs. 18.72 crore is 
expected to release till March 31st 2025.  
 
Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme (DILRMP) has been 
extended by the Government of India for a period of five years from 2021-22 to 
2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.875.00 crore. Out of this, an amount of Rs.755.00 
crore has been allocated by the Government of India during last four years from 
2021-22 to 2024-25. The remaining amount of Rs.120.00 crore has been 
provisioned for 2025-26. However, DoLR may review the fund requirement position 
during 2025-26 and if need be, a proposal would be sent to Ministry of Finance for 
providing additional fund under DILRMP during 2025-26.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 The Committee while stressing upon the need to increase the budgetary support to 
the two flagship schemes of the DoLR, recommended to seek more budgetary support to 
expand the coverage of the schemes. Since there has been considerable impact of the 

 
4 
 
 
WDC-PMKSY 1.0 and 2.0, its coverage needs to be expanded to a much larger area as per 
demand made by various states. Moreover, to meet the ever-growing demand of the 
scheme at a faster pace requires more budgetary support. Further, to meet the set targets 
under DILRMP and to implement various new initiatives proposed under this scheme also 
requires more budgetary support year on year. But there has been almost no 
corresponding increase in Budgetary allocation to the DoLR for these two important 
schemes. The Committee are of the view that higher budgetary allocation is required for 
rapid coverage of both the schemes which will also ensure more coverage serving larger 
areas under WDC-PMKSY and spread timely benefits of all key components under DILRMP 
to common masses. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation to seek 
higher budgetary allocation for the schemes under DoLR. 
II.     Overlapping of Schemes 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 With regard to convergence with schemes of other ministries and increased participation 
of Members of, the Committee had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee also find that the activities under this scheme are largely 
overlapping with the schemes of other Departments and Ministries such as Ministry 
of Jal Shakti (Water Resources), Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare and 
Department of Rural Development which fails to give clarity on the work and 
performance of the scheme to common public and the a lot of activities go 
unnoticed being overshadowed by major flagship project due to smaller size/ activity 
carried out under the scheme. The Committee recommend to invite work proposals 
from elected local representatives including Members of Parliament to add more 
quality work and recognition to this important scheme.” 
1.10 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“Under Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (WDC-PMKSY 1.0) activities undertaken, inter-alia, include ridge 
area treatment, drainage line treatment, soil and moisture conservation, rainwater 
harvesting, nursery raising, afforestation, horticulture, pasture development, 
livelihoods for asset less persons, etc. 
  
These activities are directly or indirectly inter-connected to the intended 
targets for soil and moisture consideration and making available water for 
agricultural, drinking and other purposes for the communities in the water scarce 
areas, which are also the objectives of schemes implemented by other line 
Departments/ Ministries. These coordinated efforts would enable to enhance the 
level of convergence in watershed projects and would facilitate achieving effective 

 
5 
 
 
saturation in land development efforts under the Scheme. Keeping this in mind, the 
DoLR has been emphasizing with States / UTs to maximize convergence of 
possible activities under various schemes of Central and State Governments and try 
abridging the financial gap. The convergence is likely to help in the effective 
implementation of PMKSY on saturation basis. 
  
The watershed development projects will be broadly taken up in the most 
vulnerable rainfed Districts by prioritization of micro-watersheds. However, the 
challenges and issues of North-Eastern and hilly States/UTs will be given due 
emphasis to accommodate the policies and thrust areas of the government for these 
regions.  
  
Further, community members and local representatives are involved in 
various phases, right from planning to implementation of watershed projects. 
Regular monitoring, evaluation and learning exercises to promote quality of 
execution are carried out, to ensure the principles of economy, ecology and equity 
under the scheme. 
 
Ministry of Rural Development has constituted District Development 
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) with a view to fulfill the objectives 
of ensuring a better coordination among all the elected representatives 
in Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Governments (Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/Municipal Bodies) for efficient and time-bound development of districts in 
our country. These Committees are envisioned to monitor the implementation of the 
programmes including Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana in accordance with prescribed procedures and guidelines 
and promote synergy and convergence for greater impact. These meetings are 
regularly taking place in District HQ and being attended to by representatives of the 
concerned Central Government schemes. 
  
The Department of Land Resources has already issued advisory to CEOs 
of SLNAs with a request to instruct district authorities associated with 
implementation of WDC-PMKSY to actively participate in the DISHA Committee 
meetings and also keep informed DoLR about the ATRs on 
suggestions/recommendations made by the people’s representatives. The reports of 
the DISHA Committee meetings held in the past could be referred to for necessary 
action at the Department of Rural Development’s website at 
https://ruraldiksha.nic.in” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11 Noting the fact that schemes under DoLR are being carried out in convergence with 
bigger schemes of other Ministries, which overshadows performance and publicity of the 
ongoing schemes of DoLR, the Committee recommended to effectively engage elected 
local representatives especially Members of Parliament who will suggest more quality 
work in accordance with the prevailing local ground realities and also add more 
recognition to the works being carried out under these important schemes. From the reply 

 
6 
 
 
submitted by the DoLR, the Committee noted that District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committees ('DISHA) headed by Members of Parliament, provides platform 
where discussion on development programmes including DoLR schemes can be held in 
detail and further course of actions may be decided taking valuable views from MPs and 
MLAs. The Committee, however, take a strong view of the fact that Heads of Department 
are most of the times absent from these meeting, which is why the desired results of 
effective monitoring is not met. The Committee also strongly felt that the views/inputs 
given by the MPs and MLAs during the DISHA meetings should be effectively complied 
with at the time of implementation of the schemes. Stressing upon the important role 
played by the DISHA committee and the need to further strengthen the working of DISHA 
committee, the Committee reiterate its recommendation to ensure effective and regular 
participation of MPs in implementation of schemes run by the DoLR and other Central 
Ministries. The Committee further urged that the DISHA meetings should also be held with 
strict adherence to the guidelines, thereby according more importance and say to local 
MPs in the effective implementation and monitoring of ongoing schemes. 
III.    Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.12 With regard to timebound implementation of Digital India Land Records Modernization 
Programme (DILRMP) scheme, the Committee had recommended that: 
“The Committee note from the reply made by DoLR that the Department is 
putting concentrated efforts to implement all components of DILRMP including 
‘One Nation One Registration’ by 2026. The Committee also acknowledge the 
importance of this project in achieving its desired result in a time bound manner. 
The Committee are of the view that effective implementation of the scheme will 
resolve huge number of land disputes and court cases pending at Revenue Court. 
The Committee urge upon the DoLR to ensure expeditious completion of DILRMP 
to cover the entire country as per schedule fixed” 
1.13 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“National Generic Document Registration System (NGDRS) - “One Nation 
One Registration Software” is generic software that aptly addresses the diversity 
prevailing across the States on account of languages, processes, formulae, and 
formats, and includes requirements of all the States and enables user States / UTs 
to provide ease in interoperability and compatibility with other applications of other 

 
7 
 
 
sectors.  
NGDRS has been adopted by 16 States/UTs viz. Andaman & Nicobar 
Island, Assam, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadar & Nagar Haveli, Delhi, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Punjab and Tripura. Additionally, 8 States/UTs, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand and West Bengal have 
been sharing registration related data with national portal of NGDRS- 
www.ngdrs.gov.in through API /UI. Real time information is available on National 
portal www.ngdrs.gov.in.The major benefits of the system include (i) Citizen 
empowerment through online entry of deed, online appointment, online admission, 
document search and certified copy generation, online payment (ii) Checks on 
fraudulent / benami transaction, (iii) Reduces document registration process, time, 
and cost at Sub Registrar level.  
The term of DILRMP is up to 31.03.2026. The DoLR would pursue with the 
States/UTs to complete the work under various components by the above said 
date as the programme is implemented through Revenue/Registration/Survey and 
Settlement Departments of States/UTs.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 Though the department has informed that it is pursuing with all the States/UTs to 
complete the work under various components by the stipulated term of the scheme up to 
31.03.2026, the Committee feel that there are few States who are lagging behind and a lot 
of work is still pending in various key components of this scheme. Taking note of the 
importance of this scheme for the benefit of common people, the Committee reiterate that 
the for the timely completion of this scheme, the Department should aggressively pursue 
with all the stakeholders and ensure completion of all components. 
(IV)     Boundary Determination in land survey 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
1.15 With regard to growing disputes in boundary related issues, the Committee recommended 
that: 
“The Committee note rising disputes of boundary during survey/ resurvey of 
the land assets due to multiple divisions among family members. This leads to 
problem in determining the actual ownership and deprives benefits of several 
ongoing schemes to the rightful owner and a cause of enmity in the community. 
Considering the Department’s submission regarding such challenges in resurvey of 
land, the Committee therefore strongly recommend to take up this matter seriously 
and devise a suitable plan to address this persistent problem.” 
 

 
8 
 
 
1.16 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“Boundary disputes can be resolved through carrying out Survey/Re-survey 
in States/UTs. One of the most important components of DILRMP is Survey/Re-
survey of agricultural land in revenue villages so that Cadastral Maps/Land parcels 
are as per Record of Rights (RoRs) and as per current ownership. 
Considerable amount has also been sanctioned and released as per proposals 
submitted by States/UTs.  Survey/Re-survey is a voluminous and cumbersome 
processes involving acquisition of High Resolution Imagery of land through 
Satellite/Aircraft or drone flying, establishment of Ground Controlling Points (GCPs), 
creation of Ortho Rectified Images (ORIs), feature extraction, ground truthing by 
field survey teams, draft map publication, inviting objections from citizens, redressal 
of objections and final map publication etc. The DoLR is formulating a proposal for 
carrying out Survey/Resurvey of Rural Agricultural land in 20% of area of Country 
for consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee to be completed in two years’ 
time i.e. up to 31.03.2027. ORI obtained after Aerial Survey under National 
Geospatial Mission (NGM) would be utilized for Field Survey during Survey / 
Resurvey. 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee is concerned to note that the action taken reply furnished by the 
Department has acknowledged the growing problem of boundary determination during land 
divisions but failed to provide a concrete mechanism to resolve this persistent issue which 
is also affecting the peace and social harmony in the society due to long fought court cases 
of land disputes. Therefore, the Committee reiterates to take up this matter seriously and 
devise a suitable plan to address this persistent problem. 
III. Adequate compensation under Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
1.18 With regard to Adequate compensation under Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR), the Committee had made the following recommendation: 
   “The Committee took notice of the various incidents of meagre 
compensation given for acquisition of land in scheduled areas belonging to tribals. 
It is noteworthy that sale of such land is governed by special clauses and lacks 
transaction value, fetching very small amount in comparison to normal land during 
acquisition for Government Projects. The Committee recommend to take up this 
matter seriously and devise a suitable plan to address this grave issue ensuring 
fair and sufficient compensation to the land owners being affected by such 
anomaly in coordination.” 
 

 
9 
 
 
1.19 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
“Land acquisition is undertaken by the Central and the State Governments 
under various Central and State Acts, including the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
(RFCTLARR Act, 2013). The provisions of the RFCTLARR Act 2013 are 
implemented by 'appropriate Government' as defined under Section 3(e) of the said 
Act. In relation to acquisition of land situated within the territory of a State, the 
'appropriate Government is the concerned State Government.  
The Act has provisions to provide fair compensation to those whose land is taken 
away. To ensure comprehensive compensation package for the land owners, a 
scientific method for calculation of the market value of the land exists in the Act. The 
First Schedule to the Act provides components that constitute the minimum 
compensation package to be given to those whose land is acquired to be decided 
by the appropriate Government. Under this schedule, the factor by which the market 
value is to be multiplied in the case of rural areas has been given as 1.00 (one) to 
2.00 (Two), based on the distance of project from urban area, as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government. While the factor by which the market value is to be 
multiplied in the case of urban areas is 1.00 (one). The States notify multiplication 
factor for their respective areas. Added to the above value is also the value of 
assets attached to the land or building (to be determined as provided under Section 
29) and Solatium up to 100 percent of the total compensation by the RFCTLARR 
Act. Section 107 of the Act allows power to State Legislatures to enact any law 
more beneficial to affected families. Section 108 allows affected families to choose 
better compensation or R&R benefits if a State law or policy provides more 
favourable terms than the RFCTLARR Act. This allows affected persons to receive 
the best possible compensation package. The RFCTLARR Act 2013 also provides 
for special provisions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under Section 41 
and 42 that mandate that no land acquisition shall be made in Scheduled Areas 
unless absolutely necessary. If acquisition occurs, prior consent from relevant local 
governing bodies is required, including in cases of urgency. At least one-third of the 
compensation amount shall be paid initially as first installment and rest after taking 
over possession of land. Affected families shall be settled preferably in same 
Scheduled Area and if relocated outside of the district, shall be paid an additional 
25% rehabilitation and resettlement benefits along with a onetime entitlement of fifty 
thousand rupees.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee are constrained to note that the action taken reply furnished by the 
Department has only stated the objective behind the enactment of this important legislation 
which affects lives and livelihoods of citizens of this country. Whereas, the Committee are 
deeply concerned about growing number of cases under dispute including inadequate 
compensation for the acquired land and improper and unsatisfactory rehabilitation post-
acquisition which is contrary to the spirit of the Act. The Committee strongly opine that the 
Central Government should ensure the proper implementation of all the provisions 

 
10 
 
 
contained in the LAAR Act in letter and spirit and should not shed the responsibility only on 
the States which may further amend clauses of the Act to suit their needs and bypass the 
Central Act defeating the very purpose of this land mark legislation. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly reiterate that the Department and the Central Government should 
ensure that State Government should strictly complied with and adhere to all provisions of 
the Act so as to safeguard the interests of lakhs of aggrieved citizens being affected by the 
faulty implementation of Land Acquisition and rehabilitation norms.    

 
11 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
2.1 While acknowledging the positive impacts of the WDC-PMKSY 1.0 scheme in terms of 
assets created, area brought under protective irrigation including enhancing ground water level and 
afforestation, the Committee believe that this scheme has the potential to counter rural distress by 
reviving rural economy and had strongly recommended in its previous reports to increase number 
of projects by encouraging States to participate actively by submitting more projects for 
development of rainfed and degraded areas so as to cover larger rural population dependent on 
farm related activities. The Committee observe the reduction of fund allocation by the Government 
while approving continuation of programme as WDC-PMKSY 2.0 for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 
with a physical target of 49.5 lakh ha and financial outlay of Rs. 8,134 crores as against rightful 
demand made by the Department of Land Resources for development of 20 million ha with the 
total Central share of Rs. 34,658 crores. As many States have also been demanding sanction of 
additional projects (area) under WDC-PMKSY 2.0, the Committee recommend to allocate more 
budgetary funds for this time-tested scheme for identification and implementation of more 
watershed projects in the country for the benefit of masses by increasing productivity of 
rainfed/degraded land through the process of Integrated Watershed Management. 
Reply of the Government  
2.2 On the recommendation of SGoS, DoLR had submitted EFC Memo for continuation of 
WDC-PMKSY with the approval of Hon'ble MoRD for development of 20 million ha from 2020-21 to 
2027-28 with the total Central share of Rs. 34,658 crore (total cost of Rs. 52766 crore). In the due 
course, following the several instructions received from Department of Expenditure regarding 
continuation of scheme beyond 31st March, 2021, DoLR projected physical target of 10 Million ha 
and financial allocation of Rs. 25,311.63 crore (Central share: Rs. 16,597.63 crore and State share 
of Rs. 8,946.63 crore). However, The EFC in its meeting held on 06.08.2021 recommended 
continuation of Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
Scheme with an estimated Central Share of expenditure of Rs. 8134 crore for the duration of 2021-
22 to 2025-26. Accordingly physical target got reduced to 4.95 Million ha. The cost norm 
recommended for WDC-PMKSY 2.0 were Rs. 22,000/- per ha for plain areas, and Rs.28,000/- per 
ha for hilly & difficult areas, and upto Rs. 28000/- per ha for Integrated Action Plan (IAP) Districts & 
LEW affected areas. In the light of EFC recommendation, DoLR submitted note for CCEA for 
continuation of WDC-PMKSY to DoWR, RD&GR for preparation of consolidated Note for CCEA 
proposal for umbrella scheme of PMKSY.   
 
Government of India approved continuation of programme as WDC-PMKSY 2.0 for the 
period 2021-22 to 2025-26 with a physical target of 49.5 lakh ha and financial outlay of Rs. 8,134 
crore, as the Central share. Many States have been demanding sanction of additional projects 
(area) under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 and the Department has recently sanctioned 56 Nos. of additional 
projects covering an area of 2.80 Lakh Ha at the cost of Rs. 700 crore for the remaining period of 
WDC-PMKSY 2.0.  

 
12 
 
 
  
Recommendation of the Committee regarding enhancement of project areas with more 
budgetary allocation is noted by the Department for implementation of more watershed projects in 
the country in future. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
 Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.3 As informed by the Department, 1.05 lakh water harvesting structures were created / 
rejuvenated, 1.47 lakh ha additional area has been brought under protective irrigation, 7.06 lakh 
farmers benefitted, 0.85 lakh ha brought under plantation (Afforestation/ Horticulture) and 127.31 
lakh man-days have been generated under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 during 2022-23 & 2023-24. Referring 
to the Report regarding various achievements made in the key activities of WDC-PMKSY-2.0 in the 
year 2023-24 as available on scheme’s website, the Committee note low achievement of targets in 
afforestation (47%), horticulture (41%), soil and moisture conservation (26%) and new water 
harvesting structures (31%). Considering such a low pace of completion, the Committee strongly 
recommend to fast track the progress in these activities so as to timely achieve the set target. 
Reply of the Government  
2.4 As per the procedural norms/guidelines of WDC-PMKSY 2.0 at least a period of initial 6-8 
months is required for Entry Point Activities, Preparation of DPRs, IEC and enter into NRM phase. 
All the projects under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 are in advance stage of implementation. As developing 
degraded lands into arable land, is a tedious and time-taking process, and the projects are hardly 
into 3rd/ 4th year of implementation, no project has been reported as completed. Under WDC-
PMKSY 2.0, as per the information compiled from States, during 2022-23 to 2024-25 (upto 3rd 
Quarter), 1.22 lakh water harvesting structures were created / rejuvenated, 1.75 lakh ha 
additional area has been brought under protective irrigation, 11.49 lakh farmers benefited, 0.98 
lakh ha brought under plantation (Afforestation/ Horticulture) and 171.26 lakh man-days have 
been generated. It is pertinent to mention here that the progress as reported aforesaid has been 
actually achieved during the period from April 2022 till date as there was an initial delay in the 
sanctioning of Scheme and hence allocation of Projects to the States thereof. In view of the 
same, there was effectively minimal progress during the initial months i.e., January-March 2022. 
However, even after time lag in initiation of Scheme in the field, effective implementation has led 
to an achievement, surpassing the targets as set for the period; and accordingly, it is expected 
that by sunset date of the project i.e., March 2026 the area anticipated to be brought under 
protective irrigation would exceed the target estimated. An Output Outcome Monitoring 
Framework developed in consultation with NITI Aayog is in place for monitoring the performance 
of the Scheme through 11 output-outcome indicators. Further, performance and implementation 
of the scheme is regularly reviewed and monitored at Department level through Review Meetings, 
National Level Meetings, review taken through Video Conferences and field visits by the Senior 
and program officers of the Department. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
2.5 The Committee note that the NITI Aayog has recommended that the cost norms for the 

 
13 
 
 
scheme should be revised as per current market scenario. They have also suggested cost norms 
between Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 30,000 per hectare for the plains. Contrary to this, WDC-PMKSY 2.0 
goes with the revised cost norm of RS. 28,000 per hectare for hilly and difficult areas, Rs. 22000/- 
per hectare for other areas and upto Rs. 28,000 per hectare for watershed projects in Integrated 
Action Plan Districts. The Committee agree to the fact that higher cost norms as per prevalent 
market condition is utmost requirement for long term performance of the assets created under this 
scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department should increase cost norm as 
suggested by expert groups to ensure maintenance and upkeep of ongoing projects. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The existing cost norms under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 is Rs. 22,000/ha for plain areas and Rs. 
28,000/ha for hilly area, difficult areas and IAP Districts. These norms were fixed in 2021-22. In-
principal approval has been accorded for continuation of WDC-PMKSY for 2026-27 to 2030-31 as 
WDC-PMKSY 3.0 and under the same a revision of cost norms is at proposal stage. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
2.7 The Committee note that though substantial progress has been made under WDC-PMKSY 
1.0 in terms of creation of water harvesting, area brought under protective irrigation, increase in 
plantation, treatment of wastelands etc, the problem of depleting water level is posing a serious 
threat to life and livelihoods of millions throughout the country. The Committee are concerned with 
the problem echoed by many of its Members and therefore, recommend to include more projects in 
areas where the water level is depleting in order to revive traditional water bodies like storm drains, 
small rivers and ponds, and dysfunctional borewells by employing suitable water harvesting 
techniques in affected areas. 
Reply of the Government  
2.8 Government of India approved continuation of programme as WDC-PMKSY 2.0 for the 
period 2021-22 to 2025-26 with a physical target of 49.5 lakh ha and financial outlay of Rs. 8,134 
crore, as the Central share. Depletion of groundwater table is one of the criteria for selection of 
watershed projects at the time of selection of new project. Further, creation/ revival of traditional 
water bodies are already taken up under the scheme.  
  
Under WDC-PMKSY 2.0, as per the information compiled from States, during 2022-23 to 2024-25 
(upto 3rd Quarter), 1.22 lakh water harvesting structures were created / rejuvenated, 1.75 lakh ha 
additional area has been brought under protective irrigation, 11.49 lakh farmers benefitted, 0.98 
lakh ha brought under plantation (Afforestation/ Horticulture) and 171.26 lakh man-days have been 
generated.  
  
The watershed development projects will be broadly taken up in the most vulnerable rainfed 
Districts by prioritization of micro-watersheds. However, the challenges and issues of North-
Eastern and hilly States/UTs will be given due emphasis to accommodate the policies and thrust 
areas of the government for these regions. While prioritizing the watershed projects in the critical 

 
14 
 
 
areas of the Districts, the following criteria may be used in selection: 
 
a) Frequency of drought occurrence. 
b) Acute scarcity of drinking water Degree of over exploitation of ground water resources. 
c) Preponderance of degraded lands/wastelands. 
d) Decline in Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). 
e) Status of soil health, aquifer characteristics and topography. 
f) Hydrological assessment of surplus run off from watersheds Contiguity to another 
watershed that has already been developed/ treated. 
g) High proportion of population belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, and 
other socially & economically backward population. 
h) Low productivity of major crops to that of District/State average. 
i) Willingness of village community to make voluntary contributions, adopt regulatory norms 
for maintenance of common property resources, and ensure 
equitable sharing of the resources/benefits. 
The Department is in the process for getting approval for sanction of projects covering 38 lakh 
hectares under the proposed WDC-PMKSY 3.0 for the period from 2026 to 2031. Accordingly, the 
total outlay proposed for next 5 years (2026-27 to 2030-31), for continuation of WDC-PMKSY by 
sanctioning new projects is estimated to be Rs. 12765 crore. Recommendation of the Committee is 
noted by the Department for implementation of more watershed projects in the country in future 
under WDC-3.0. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.9 The Committee endorsed the positive impact of Seechwal Model of waste water treatment 
for irrigation purpose thereby stopping the direct flow of waste water into rivers. From the reply, 
Committee observe that the treated water using this technique increase the fertility of the farm 
land. The Committee therefore recommend that such a unique and effective model must be 
brought under the ambit of the ongoing scheme thereby making improved results in soil fertility 
conservation, ground water recharge and contain river pollution. 
Reply of the Government  
2.10 Ground water recharge is one of the activities under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 which primarily 
intends to develop rainfed/degraded lands. It is also stated that Department of Land Resources 
has been implementing Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee 
Yojana (WDC-PMKSY) for the development of rainfed and degraded lands in the country. Through 
the implementation of WDC-PMKSY 1.0 projects (sanctioned during 2009-10 to 2014-15), 
significant improvement were registered in ground water table, increase in productivity, vegetative 
cover, enhanced livelihood opportunities and household incomes in watershed project areas.  
States will be encouraged to visit such type of models and if found feasible, it may be 
implemented/ replicated at different locations in different project areas under the scheme. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
  

 
15 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
2.11 The Committee appreciate the initiative of e-Registration alongwith progress made in 
implementation of all components under DILRMP. While noticing few shortcomings like non-
updation of information regarding the status of court cases resulting in fraudulent transactions, the 
Committee strongly recommend the DoLR to ensure timely updation of the records with real time 
data pertaining to all courts including Supreme Court, High Courts, District Court and Local Tehsil 
level that will help in curbing multiple registration in absence of authentic information and ensure 
clear title of the property to rightful actual owners. 
Reply of the Government  
2.12 DoLR has initiated the linkage of e-Court with Land Records and Registration data. The 
objective of Linkage of e-Court with Land Record and Registration data base is to make authentic 
first-hand information available to the Courts resulting in speedy disposal of cases and ultimately, 
reduction in land disputes. Pilot test for linking of e-Court with land record and registration data 
base has been undertaken successfully in three states namely, Haryana, Maharashtra and Uttar 
Pradesh in association with Department of Justice. So far, 26 States/UTs namely; Tripura, Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Uttar Pradesh, Manipur, West Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Telangana, Jharkhand, Delhi, 
Sikkim, Meghalaya, Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, 
Puducherry and Andhra Pradesh have received necessary clearances from the concerned High 
Courts for integration of e-Courts Application Software with the land records application software 
and registration database. 
 [DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
 
 

 
16 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW  
OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Committee note that during the year 2024-25 there has been an increase of only Rs. 
246.25 Crore in the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS / Scheme component) of the Department of 
Land Resources (DoLR) over the BE of previous year. The BE for the year 2023-24 was Rs. 
2395.75 Crore and the allocation for this year i.e. 2024-25 has been increased to Rs. 2667.24 
Crore which is an increase of just 6.98% over the previous year's BE. The Committee also note 
that the allocation at BE stage to Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (Watershed 
Component) has been increased by 13.70% as compared to previous year BE and for Digital India 
Land Records Modernisation Programme (DILRMP) the allocation at BE stage has been reduced 
by 27.97%. It is also evident that during the year 2023-24, Budgetary allocation for PMKSY-WDC 
was reduced by 20.45% at RE stage while allocation for DILRMP was also reduced by 36.14%. 
Considering the overall performance of these two schemes and their remarkable impact on the 
ground, the Committee feel that the reduction made in the BE component was not appropriate and 
reasons for creating hindrance in expanding the coverage of the schemes meant to benefit newer 
and larger area and targeted people at large as per the growing need of today's landscapes. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend the DoLR to take up the matter at the highest level in the 
Ministry of Finance seeking substantially higher allocation of fund so that remarkable benefits of 
the schemes may further be expanded to common masses at a faster pace. The Committee hope 
that slightly higher budgetary allocation (2024-25) for the scheme would be utilised fully as per 
programmes envisaged by the Department of Land Resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The continuation of ‘WDC-PMKSY 2.0’ was approved by the Government on 15th 
December 2021 with a Central Share allocation of Rs. 8134 crore for the period from 2021-22 to 
2025-26. Projects under ‘WDC-PMKSY 2.0’ have been sanctioned to States/UTs in the last quarter 
of FY 2021-22.  
  
During 2022-23, States/UTs were supposed to undertake measures to strengthen their institutions 
for implementation of project works. Moreover, Government has made PFMS mandatory for 
releasing/utilizing funds under the scheme which necessitated PFMS infrastructure to be revamped 
at the Department level and at States/UTs level based on the new and evolving guidelines of 
Ministry of Finance. Experiences show that this exercise caused delays in release of funds at the 
Central level and expenditure at the States/UTs level.  
  
Ministry of Finance’s OM dated 31.03.2021 further stipulated that Central grants would be released 

 
18 
 
 
in four equal tranches of 25% each, and release of the next tranche would require States/UTs to 
utilize at least 75% of the previous tranche. Further, at least a time period of 4-6 months is required 
for preparation of quality DPRs which is prerequisite for starting of field works and reaching the 
stage of Natural Resources Management (NRM) work phase. It is relevant to mention that major 
resource requirement is in the work phase. Now, most of the States/UTs have reached to the stage 
of NRM, therefore, it is expected that pace of physical and financial achievement would get 
momentum in near future. As per the Scheme Guidelines, the project period stands at 3-5 years 
and accordingly, the allocation of Central grants was made maximum for 5 years. The year-wise 
allocation in percentage terms stood 25% for initial three years, 15% for fourth year, and remaining 
10% for the last year. As per the Cabinet Note of the Scheme, outlay of Central share for WDC-
PMKSY for the period of 15th Finance Commission (FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26) for FY 2024-25 
has been kept at Rs 1500.00 crore. Therefore, the proposed fund requirement for FY 2024-25 is 
consistent with the Cabinet Note and Scheme Guidelines. 
  
However, it is pertinent to mention that BE and RE in a financial year are firmed up as part of the 
overall budgetary exercise. Status of utilization of amount of BE 2024-25 as on 19.03.2025 is Rs. 
864.31 crore, and till now Mother Sanctions amounting to Rs. 470.37 crore for 21 States have been 
issued on SNA SPARSH, out of which Rs. 31.82 crore has been utilised. 
 
Department of Land Resources has proposed Rs.141.00 crore as Budget Estimate for the FY 
2024-25 under Digital India Land Record Modernization Programme (DILRMP). During the FY 
2024-25, an amount of Rs.122.28 crore have been released to States/UTs (as on March 25, 2025) 
and Rs. 18.72 crore is expected to release till March 31st 2025.  
 
Digital India Land Records Modernisation Programme (DILRMP) has been extended by the 
Government of India for a period of five years from 2021-22 to 2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.875.00 
crore. Out of this, an amount of Rs.755.00 crore has been allocated by the Government of India 
during last four years from 2021-22 to 2024-25. The remaining amount of Rs.120.00 crore has 
been provisioned for 2025-26. However, DoLR may review the fund requirement position during 
2025-26 and if need be, a proposal would be sent to Ministry of Finance for providing additional 
fund under DILRMP during 2025-26. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 The Committee also find that the activities under this scheme are largely overlapping with 
the schemes of other Departments and Ministries such as Ministry of Jal Shakti (Water 
Resources), Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer's Welfare and Department of Rural Development 
which fails to give clarity on the work and performance of the scheme to common public and the a 
lot of activities go unnoticed being overshadowed by major flagship project due to smaller size/ 
activity carried out under the scheme. The Committee recommend to invite work proposals from 
elected local representatives including Members of Parliament to add more quality work and 
recognition to this important scheme. 
  

 
19 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 Under Watershed Development Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(WDC-PMKSY 1.0) activities undertaken, inter-alia, include ridge area treatment, drainage line 
treatment, soil and moisture conservation, rainwater harvesting, nursery raising, afforestation, 
horticulture, pasture development, livelihoods for asset less persons, etc. 
  
These activities are directly or indirectly inter-connected to the intended targets for soil and 
moisture consideration and making available water for agricultural, drinking and other purposes for 
the communities in the water scarce areas, which are also the objectives of schemes implemented 
by other line Departments/ Ministries. These coordinated efforts would enable to enhance the level 
of convergence in watershed projects and would facilitate achieving effective saturation in land 
development efforts under the Scheme. Keeping this in mind, the DoLR has been emphasizing 
with States / UTs to maximize convergence of possible activities under various schemes of Central 
and State Governments and try abridging the financial gap. The convergence is likely to help in the 
effective implementation of PMKSY on saturation basis. 
  
The watershed development projects will be broadly taken up in the most vulnerable rainfed 
Districts by prioritization of micro-watersheds. However, the challenges and issues of North-
Eastern and hilly States/UTs will be given due emphasis to accommodate the policies and thrust 
areas of the government for these regions.  
  
Further, community members and local representatives are involved in various phases, right from 
planning to implementation of watershed projects. Regular monitoring, evaluation and learning 
exercises to promote quality of execution are carried out, to ensure the principles of economy, 
ecology and equity under the scheme. 
Ministry of Rural Development has constituted District Development Coordination 
and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) with a view to fulfill the objectives of ensuring a better 
coordination among all the elected representatives in Parliament, State Legislatures and Local 
Governments (Panchayati Raj Institutions/Municipal Bodies) for efficient and time-bound 
development of districts in our country. These Committees are envisioned to monitor the 
implementation of the programmes including Watershed Development Component of Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana in accordance with prescribed procedures and guidelines and 
promote synergy and convergence for greater impact. These meetings are regularly taking place in 
District HQ and being attended to by representatives of the concerned Central Government 
schemes. 
  
The Department of Land Resources has already issued advisory to CEOs of SLNAs with a 
request to instruct district authorities associated with implementation of WDC-PMKSY to actively 
participate in the DISHA Committee meetings and also keep informed DoLR about the ATRs on 
suggestions/recommendations made by the people’s representatives. The reports of the DISHA 
Committee meetings held in the past could be referred to for necessary action at the Department 
of Rural Development’s website at https://ruraldiksha.nic.in. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
20 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.5 The Committee note from the reply made by DoLR that the Department is putting 
concentrated efforts to implement all components of DILRMP including ‘One Nation One 
Registration’ by 2026. The Committee also acknowledge the importance of this project in achieving 
its desired result in a time bound manner. The Committee are of the view that effective 
implementation of the scheme will resolve huge number of land disputes and court cases pending 
at Revenue Court. The Committee urge upon the DoLR to ensure expeditious completion of 
DILRMP to cover the entire country as per schedule fixed. 
Reply of the Government  
4.6 National Generic Document Registration System (NGDRS) - “One Nation One Registration 
Software” is generic software that aptly addresses the diversity prevailing across the States on 
account of languages, processes, formulae, and formats, and includes requirements of all the 
States and enables user States / UTs to provide ease in interoperability and compatibility with 
other applications of other sectors.  
NGDRS has been adopted by 16 States/UTs viz. Andaman & Nicobar Island, Assam, 
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Delhi, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Punjab and Tripura. Additionally, 8 
States/UTs, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttarakhand 
and West Bengal have been sharing registration related data with national portal of NGDRS- 
www.ngdrs.gov.in through API /UI. Real time information is available on National portal 
www.ngdrs.gov.in.The major benefits of the system include (i) Citizen empowerment through 
online entry of deed, online appointment, online admission, document search and certified copy 
generation, online payment (ii) Checks on fraudulent / benami transaction, (iii) Reduces document 
registration process, time, and cost at Sub Registrar level.  
The term of DILRMP is upto 31.03.2026. The DoLR would pursue with the States/UTs to 
complete the work under various components by the above said date as the programme is 
implemented through Revenue/Registration/Survey and Settlement Departments of States/UTs.  
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.7 The Committee note rising disputes of boundary during survey/ resurvey of the land assets 
due to multiple divisions among family members. This leads to problem in determining the actual 
ownership and deprives benefits of several ongoing schemes to the rightful owner and a cause of 
enmity in the community. Considering the Department’s submission regarding such challenges in 
resurvey of land, the Committee therefore strongly recommend to take up this matter seriously and 
devise a suitable plan to address this persistent problem. 
  

 
21 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
4.8 Boundary disputes can be resolved through carrying out Survey/Re-survey in States/UTs. 
One of the most important components of DILRMP is Survey/Re-survey of agricultural land in 
revenue villages so that Cadastral Maps/Land parcels are as per Record of Rights (RoRs) and as 
per current ownership. Considerable amount has also been sanctioned and released as per 
proposals submitted by States/UTs.  Survey/Re-survey is a voluminous and cumbersome 
processes involving acquisition of High Resolution Imagery of land through Satellite/Aircraft or 
drone flying, establishment of Ground Controlling Points (GCPs), creation of Ortho Rectified 
Images (ORIs), feature extraction, ground truthing by field survey teams, draft map publication, 
inviting objections from citizens, redressal of objections and final map publication etc. The DoLR is 
formulating a proposal for carrying out Survey/Resurvey of Rural Agricultural land in 20% of area of 
Country for consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee to be completed in two years time i.e. 
upto 31.03.2027. ORI obtained after Aerial Survey under National Geospatial Mission (NGM) 
would be utilized for Field Survey during Survey / Resurvey. 
 [DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
4.9 The Committee took notice of the various incidents of meagre compensation given for 
acquisition of land in scheduled areas belonging to tribals. It is noteworthy that sale of such land 
is governed by special clauses and lacks transaction value, fetching very small amount in 
comparison to normal land during acquisition for Government Projects. The Committee 
recommend to take up this matter seriously and devise a suitable plan to address this grave issue 
ensuring fair and sufficient compensation to the land owners being affected by such anomaly in 
coordination. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 Land acquisition is undertaken by the Central and the State Governments under various 
Central and State Acts, including the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (RFCTLARR Act, 2013). The provisions of 
the RFCTLARR Act 2013 are implemented by 'appropriate Government' as defined under Section 
3(e) of the said Act. In relation to acquisition of land situated within the territory of a State, the 
'appropriate Government’ is the concerned State Government. 
 
The Act has provisions to provide fair compensation to those whose land is taken away. To ensure 
comprehensive compensation package for the land owners, a scientific method for calculation of 
the market value of the land exists in the Act. The First Schedule to the Act provides components 
that constitute the minimum compensation package to be given to those whose land is acquired to 
be decided by the appropriate Government. Under this schedule, the factor by which the market 
value is to be multiplied in the case of rural areas has been given as 1.00 (one) to 2.00 (Two), 
based on the distance of project from urban area, as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government. While the factor by which the market value is to be multiplied in the case of urban 
areas is 1.00 (one). The States notify multiplication factor for their respective areas. Added to the 
above value is also the value of assets attached to the land or building (to be determined as 

 
22 
 
 
provided under Section 29) and Solatium up to 100 percent of the total compensation by the 
RFCTLARR Act. Section 107 of the Act allows power to State Legislatures to enact any law more 
beneficial to affected families. Section 108 allows affected families to choose better compensation 
or R&R benefits if a State law or policy provides more favourable terms than the RFCTLARR Act. 
This allows affected persons to receive the best possible compensation package. The RFCTLARR 
Act 2013 also provides for special provisions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under 
Section 41 and 42 that mandate that no land acquisition shall be made in Scheduled Areas unless 
absolutely necessary. If acquisition occurs, prior consent from relevant local governing bodies is 
required, including in cases of urgency. At least one-third of the compensation amount shall be 
paid initially as first installment and rest after taking over possession of land. Affected families shall 
be settled preferably in same Scheduled Area and if relocated outside of the district, shall be paid 
an additional 25% rehabilitation and resettlement benefits along with a onetime entitlement of fifty 
thousand rupees. 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
23 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[DoLR’s O.M. No. H-11015/1/2024-GC dated: 26.03.2025] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
24 
 
 
ANNEXURE I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON TUESDAY, THE 1st JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1150 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Dr Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri K. Radhakrishnan  
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha       
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
14. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
1. At the outset, after introductory speech of the Chairperson, the Committee considered and 
adopted the following two Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2024-25):  
i. Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 2nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Department of Land Resources (Ministry of Rural 
Development)  
ii. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  
 
2. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 

 
25 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
 ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  11  
 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9 
 
 
 
Total: 6 
Percentage: 55% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Serial Nos. 1, 4, 8, 10 and 11. 
 
 
 
Total: 05 
Percentage: 45% 
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Serial Nos. NIL 
 
 
Total: 00 
Percentage: 00% 
 
 