 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
      EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (NIRD & PR) 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
10 


 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (NIRD & PR) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2025/ Ashadha, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
CRD No. 201  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Introduction  iii  
REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
A. Background of NIRD&PR and its Mandate 1 
B. Implementation Support Role of NIRD&PR 2 
C. Governing Structure of NIRD&PR 3 
D. Functional Centres of NIRD&PR 3 
E. Employee details of NIRD&PR 3 
F. Major Activities of the Institute 4 
G. Academic Programmes 7 
H. Statement of Budget Estimate (BE)/ Revised Estimate (RE) and Grants 8 
I. Achievements of NIRD&PR 9 
J. Recent Achievements 10 
K. Significant Activities 11 
L. Current Status 13 
M. Recommendation of Department of Expenditure 14 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
16-20 
ANNEXURES  
I. Functions and Powers of General Council 21 
II. Functions and Powers of the Executive Council 22 
III. List of Schools and Centres 24 
IV. Centres being set up under the SoEPR 25 
V. Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee held on 17th March, 
2025 
26 
VI. Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
held on 16th June, 2025 28 
 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Shri Vaiko 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Executive Officer 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Tenth Report on ‘Functioning of National Institute of 
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR)’ of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development).  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) on 17th March, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
16 June, 2025. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) for placing before them the 
requisite material and their considered views in connection with the examination of the 
subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha,1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and  
Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
TENTH REPORT 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
  
A. Background of NIRD&PR and its Mandate 
  
1.1       National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), is an 
autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Rural Development. It builds capacities 
of rural development functionaries, elected representatives, financial institutions, 
community-based organisations and other stakeholders through training, research/ 
consultancy, technology transfer, etc. 
  
1.2       Originally established as the National Institute of Community Development in 
1958 in Mussoorie, the Institute was shifted to its Hyderabad Campus in 1965 and 
renamed the National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) in 1977.  Recognizing the 
need for more focus on strengthening the Panchayati Raj system and capacity building 
of its functionaries, as per the decision of the General Council of the Institute, the name 
of NIRD was changed to National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRDPR) with effect from December 4, 2013.  
 1.3       Later, the Government of India, recognizing that the objectives of NIRD&PR 
substantially overlap with those of the Council for Advancement of People’s Action and 
Rural Technology (CAPART), merged CAPART with NIRDPR on May 1, 2020. The 
Institute is located on a 174.21 acres serene campus with rural surroundings at 
Rajendranagar in the historic city of Hyderabad. 
  
1.4       Besides the main campus at Hyderabad, the Institute has three centres in Delhi, 
Guwahati, and Vaishali. The detail of location wise land available is as under: 
S. 
No.  Location Area in Acres Approx 
1  Hyderabad, Telangana  164.002 Acres 
2  Guwahati, Assam 4.99 Acres 
3  New Delhi 0.096 Acres 
4  Bihar 6.009 Acres 
Total  175.097 Acres  

 
 
2 
 
1.5       NIRD&PR is recognized internationally as one of the UN-ESCAP Centres of 
Excellence and builds capacities of rural development functionaries, elected 
representatives of PRIs, bankers, NGOs and other stakeholders.   
  
1.6       NIRD&PR acts as a ‘Think-Tank’ for the MoRD and MoPR, being a repository of 
knowledge on Rural Development, Panchayati Raj and allied sectors, thereby assisting 
the Government in policy formulation, development and implementation of national-level 
programmes/schemes through its various training and research activities.  
  
B.         Implementation Support Role of NIRD&PR 
  
1.7       NIRD&PR plays a significantly important role in providing implementation 
support for better implementation of Government programs particularly in the Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj areas, which are taken up with huge investment of 
public funds. Following are some ways in which NIRD&PR provides implementation 
support: 
 NIRD&PR acts as a Think Tank for the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) and other line Ministries, by helping with 
designing new programs and improving existing programs. 
 Identify the deficiency in the guidelines of key programs and fill the gaps in 
implementation through capacity building of stakeholders. 
 Providing support for better implementation of programs by orienting state level 
functionaries upto the block level towards the framework, guidelines and 
implementation arrangements for the programs. 
 Helps in national level implementation of National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) & Deen Dayal Upadhyaya - Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY). 
 Acts as an Apex Capacity Building Organisation by mentoring the 29 SIRDPRs, 
90 ETCs, 6000+ Master Resource Persons and National Resource Persons for 
the NRLM program. 

 
 
3 
 
C.         Governing Structure of NIRD&PR 
  
  
1.8       NIRD&PR is setup as registered society which has two main governing entities, 
which are the General Council headed by the Minister for Rural Development and the 
Executive Council headed by the Secretary for Rural Development and Director General 
being the Member Secretary and Principal Executive Officer. 
(i) General Council is responsible to observe the provisions of the Memorandum of 
Association, rules and instructions of the Government of India in the Department, 
exercise general control and issue directions for efficient management and 
administration of the affairs of the Institute, to nominate members of Executive 
Council, etc. The General Council comprises 29 Ex-Officio members and 
43Nominated members. The functions and powers of General Council is given at 
Annexure-I. 
(ii) The management and administration of the Institute is the responsibility of 
Executive Council subject to general control exercised and directions issued by 
the General Council. The Executive Council comprises 15 members. The 
functions and powers of Executive Council is given at Annexure-II. 
 D       Functional Centres of NIRD&PR 
  
1.9 The Institute has 18 functional centres falling under seven schools catering to 
different thematic areas of holistic rural development. In addition, 3 professional centres 
are providing support to overall functioning of the institute (Details are given in 
Annexure-III).  
 
E.         Employee details of NIRD&PR 
1.10 Details of the employees of National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR) as on 12th March, 2025 is as follows: 
  

 
 
4 
 
S. 
No 
Post/Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
In position Vacant 
 Academic posts 
1 Group A 96 45 51 
2 Group B 10 02 08 
  
Non-Academic Posts 
3 Group A 52 12 40 
4 Group B 110 39 71 
5 Group C 206 64 142 
6 Group RC 166 59 107 
Total 640 221 419 
  
 F.         Major Activities of the Institute 
   
(i)       Capacity Building & Training 
  
1.11 NIRD&PR’s mandate is to impart trainings and build capacities of the State level 
officials associated with Rural Development & Panchayati Raj, through various Training 
of Trainers (ToT) programmes at national level and regional level. All the State, District, 
Block and Panchayat level trainings are being organized by 29 SIRDPRs and 90 ETCs 
spread across the country. Being an apex training institute, NIRD&PR mentors the 
SIRD&PRs and ETCs by building capacities of their faculty by imparting training and 
engaging SIRDPRs through Training of Trainers (ToTs) and network programmes, on 
demand.  This gives NIRD&PR’s capacity building activities wide each across the length 
and breadth of the Country. 
  
(ii)       Training Programmes Conducted  
  
1.12 In the fiscal year 2021-22, NIRDPR organized a total of 1,319 programs, with 
1,163 of these linked to the flagship initiatives of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(MoRD). Among the MoRD schemes, 500 programs were related to the Mahatma 

 
 
5 
 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), 465 with the Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM), and 197 with the 
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) and 1 with the 
Department of Land Resources (DoLR). 
  
1.13 For the fiscal year 2022-23, NIRDPR conducted 1,441 programs, of which 1,070 
were related to MoRD's flagship initiatives. Within the MoRD schemes, 163 programs 
pertained to the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 598 to the DAY-NRLM, 154 to the DDU-
GKY, 96 to the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Gramin (PMAY-G), 17 to the Department 
of Land Resources (DoLR), 8 to the Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY), 14 to the 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), and 20 to the National Social 
Assistance Programme (NSAP). 
  
1.14 In the fiscal year 2023-24, NIRDPR executed 1,926 programs, with 1,760 of 
these associated with MoRD's flagship programs. Of the MoRD schemes, 556 were 
related to the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 1,004 related to the DAY-NRLM, 75 are 
related to the DDU-GKY, 106 are related to the PMAY-G, 7 are related to the SARAS 
Mela, 1 is to the SAGY, 4 are related to the MoRD's Annual Capacity Building Plan 
(ACBP), 5 are related to CCA, and 2 are related to IAW. 
  
1.15 As of March 13, 2025, in the fiscal year 2024-25, NIRDPR has conducted 1,165 
programs, with 1,019 related to the flagship initiatives of MoRD. Among the MoRD 
schemes, 201 programs are related to the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 673 related to the 
DAY-NRLM, 31 are related to the DDU-GKY, 30 are related to the PMAY-G, 46 are 
related to the DoLR, 7 are related to the SARAS Mela, 3 are related to the MoRD's 
ACBP, 4 are related to CCA, and 12 each are related to the IAW and NSAP schemes. 
 
1.16 The details of the programmes conducted by NIRDPR during last 4 years with 
MoRD programmes and other than MoRD programmes are presented in the following 
Table. 
 

 
 
6 
 
FY Total MoRD Other than MoRD* 
2021-22 1319 1163 156 
2022-23 1441 1070 371 
2023-24 1926 1760 166 
2024-25  
(As on 13-03-
2025) 
1165 1019 146 
  
*The programmes other than MoRD are related to the schemes and programmes 
of MoPR, Ministry of Social Justice, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti and other State Govt. Departments. 
  
1.17 The MoRD scheme-wise programmes conducted during the last 4 years are 
presented in the following Table. 
 
MoRD Scheme wise Performance 
Scheme 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
(As on 13-03-2025) 
MGNREGA 500 163 556 201 
NRLM 465 598 1004 673 
Skill (DDUGKY) 197 154 75 31 
PMAY-G 0 96 106 30 
DoLR 1 17 0 46 
Mela 0 0 7 7 
SAGY 0 8 1 0 
ACBP 0 0 4 3 
CCA 0 0 5 4 
IAW 0 0 2 12 
PMGSY 0 14 0 0 
NSAP 0 20 0 12 
Total 1163 1070 1760 1019 
  
(iii)     Research  
 
 1.18 Research conducted by NIRDPR is field-based with an emphasis on current rural 
development issues. Hence, it becomes an important ingredient in policy formulation for 
rural development. Also, the Institute undertakes location-specific research in which a 
theme or a model is field tested, step-by-step, while actually implementing the project 
on the ground.  

 
 
7 
 
 The details of the year-wise research studies initiated and completed are presented in 
the following Table: 
 
Research conducted in NIRDPR during the last 4 years 
S. 
No. 
Year  Initiated Completed Ongoing 
1 2021-
22 
19 17 2 
2 2022-
23 
24 22 2 
3 2023-
24 
29 22 7 
4 2024-
25 
43 2 41 
  Total 115 63 52 
 
1.19 During the course of evidence, the representative of MoRD on the issue of 
training and its linkage to livelihood etc. stated as under: 
 
“I would like to emphasize at this point that the primary function of this 
Institute is to build capacity of the people, the employees of various 
Governments across the country, which includes Government of India and 
the State Governments and the Panchayati Raj functionaries, so as they 
are in a better position to run our various programs and to run the 
Panchayati Raj administration. So, this is the primary purpose. It also 
functions as a think-tank for the Government in this regard. So, the kind of 
things that are done with regard to the SHGs and the markets, I would 
submit that they are not relevant to this discussion at this point. I think I 
would like to end here.” 
      
 
G.         Academic Programmes 
  
 1.20 The Institute offers one year and two-year PG Diploma in Rural Management 
programmes, with a capacity of 50 students per year. Also, four distance education 
programmes are being offered with specialization in Tribal Development, Geospatial 
Technology Applications in RD, Panchayat Governance and Sustainable Rural 
Development. 
  
1.21 NIRDPR has introduced Ph.D. program in Rural Development with recognition 
from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, which has been conceived as a solution-

 
 
8 
 
oriented programme to provide solutions and policy suggestions to address the various 
issues and challenges arising in the rural development sector 
  
H.         Statement of Budget Estimate (BE)/ Revised Estimate (RE) and Grants  
 (Rupees in Lakhs) 
 
1.22 The Statement of Budget Estimate (BE)/Revised Estimate (RE) and Grants from 
the years 2020-21 to 2024-25 are as under: 
 
Year BE  RE  Grants Released by 
MoRD 
2020-21 12400.00 8050.00 8043.00 
2021-22 12400.00 10548.00 10548.00 
2022-23 13546.00 11458.00 7579.97 
2023-24 11500.00 9138.00 7876.51 
2024-25* 10837.00 9000.00 8127.00* 
  
Note: (i) Grant released for 2024-25 Rs.8127.00 is as on 13-03-2025 
             (ii)  Corpus Fund as on 31.03.2024 is Rs.498.93 crores (audited)  
  
  
1.23        At present, there are 331 pensioners including family pensioners. Detail of 
Pensioners/ Family Pensioners as on date showing Expenditure in Last Four Years is 
as follows: 
  
      (Rupees in Lakhs) 
 Head  2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Pension  1,091.44 1,271.93 1,345.70 1,532.54 
Retirement Benefits 
  
716.23 724.97 735.35 468.89 
  
TOTAL 
  
1,807.67 1,996.90 2,081.05 2,001.43 
  
 1.24 During the course of evidence, the representative of MoRD on the issue of 
gradual budget reduction of 25% per annum, stated as under: 
 
“This recommendation was from the year 2022-23. As we said, the 
Department of Expenditure’s own review took place in 2020-21. This has 
been in discussion since then. In fact, I did not say so, but a presentation 
on this was also made before the hon. Union Council of Ministers which 

 
 
9 
 
has also had a look at this proposal and other proposals of other 
departments as well.” 
 
 
 
1.25 Adding further on the issue, the representative of MoRD, stated as under: 
 
“We have had deliberations on this. But after all the deliberations, now we 
are the same goal at this point and that is engagement of NIRDPR. Our 
revised proposal is getting formulated. As soon as it is ready, we will take 
the necessary approvals and circulate it including to the Ministry of 
Finance. With regard to the budget, as has been mentioned by Secretary 
(Expenditure), some arrangement will be made for the interim period. With 
regard to cost norms, at this point I would not be able to comment. The 
MOUs that the hon. Chairperson has talked about can be modified in 
terms of the successor institute. I would like to make one thing clear. The 
NIRDPR, by virtue of disengagement, will not cease to be an entity owned 
by the Government. But its management, finances etc. will be disengaged. 
As hon. Chairperson mentioned, it is such a valuable real estate asset 
given the way it has grown in the past so many decades. 
To sum up, I would like to say that we are in the process of reformulating 
the Cabinet note on the basis of whatever deliberations we have had and 
whatever comments we have received from various ministries and 
departments and we will be coming up very soon with the final Cabinet 
proposal.” 
 
 
 
I.         Achievements of NIRD&PR 
  
1.26 During the last 65 years, NIRDPR has contributed enormously in building the 
Nation and it has emerged as an internationally recognized center of excellence in Rural 
Development. Some of the notable achievements of NIRDPR include:  
 Assisted in drafting the model bills for Panchayati Raj culminated in the 73rd 
Amendment Act (1992) and Right to Information Act (2005);  
 Drafting guidelines for Integrated Rural Development Programme (1980), 
 India’s Rural Development Report (1999);  
 Setting up of Rural Technology Park (2000);  
 Centre of Excellence Award from CIRDAP received from President of India 
(2013), 
 AARDO award for outstanding contribution in Rural Development (2013) 

 
 
10 
 
 Bloomberg Group Conferred B-School Excellence Award for Leadership 
Development (2014) 
 ISO 9001:2008 Certification for NIRDPR (2015) 
 Establishing NRLM’s Capacity Building Programme (2015),  
 Gram Panchayat Development Plan - GPDP (2018);  
 Block Panchayat Development Plan and District Panchayat Development Plan 
(2020). 
 J.       Recent Achievements 
 
1.27 The recent achievements are as follows: 
  
 Conducted research studies on the impact of Mann Ki Baat (MKB) on SHGs and 
Amrit Sarovars. 
 Prepared Social Audit Guidelines in respect of MGNREGA, NSAP, PMAY-G, and 
RURBAN, and for utilization of 15th FC Grants by the Panchayats and the 
Ministry of Education. Established the National Resource Centre for Social Audit 
at NIRDPR to support all Social Audit Units across the country.  
 Centre for Internal Audit in Rural Development (CIARD) was established at 
NIRDPR to enhance the internal audit capabilities of States/UTs.  
 Developed Kaushal Bharat as a single centralized monitoring platform and data 
source for the DDUGKY projects for the entire country. 
 Signed MoUs with 23 national and international organizations, including NHSRC-
Ministry of Health, Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, ICAI, Assam 
Central University, Administrative Staff College of India, CSIR-CBRI, NECTAR, 
University of Reading, UK, and ICRISAT. 
 The Ministry of Jal Sakthi has recognized the NIRDPR as a Key Resource 
Centre (KRC) for training and research on water & sanitation.  
 Organised the National WASH Conclave 2022 in collaboration with the Ministry 
of Jal Shakti, Ministry of Panchayati Raj and UNICEF-India.    
 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is organising the People’s Plan Campaign (‘Sabki 
Yojana Sabka Vikas’) for formulating GPDP, and NIRDPR has organized 2 

 
 
11 
 
national level orientation trainings and 5 regional thematic workshops, resulting in 
the preparation of GPDP by 2,54,000 GPs. 
 NIRDPR imparts special training programmes for UTs of J&K and Ladakh on 
localization of SDGs. 
 Created e-repository on Child Rights Resources & published the Child Rights 
Training Manual. 
 Prepared model Disaster Management Plan & included in GPDP guidelines of 
MoPR. 
 Organized State Finance Commissions (SFCs) Conclave in November 2022. 
 Organized training programmes for the Presidents & Vice Presidents of Atol 
Councils of Maldives (Local Government Authority) – supported by the Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India 
 The Institute and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj organized a national 
stakeholder’s workshop in September, 2023, titled Panchayati Raj Institution: In 
Retrospect and Prospect, to chart the work for PRIs up to 2047. 
  
K.       Significant Activities 
 
1.28 The Institute is currently engaged in several significant activities, as outlined 
below: 
 Setting-up of School of Excellence in Panchayati Raj: The institute has 
launched the School of Excellence in Panchayati Raj, with 9 specialized centres 
aimed at developing the knowledge base across 9 verticals of Panchayati Raj 
operations (Annexure-IV) with a view to professionalize rural local governance 
and to raise it to international standards.  
 NIRDPR played a key role in implementing the ‘Aspirational Blocks 
Programme (ABP)’ by NITI Aayog. NIRDPR successfully organised Leadership 
Trainings for 973 Block Level Officials (BLOs) from 5 Southern and 8 North 
Eastern States (total 29 batches).  NIRDPR & YASHADA Pune jointly prepared 
9 sectoral modules and trained 190 Master Trainers in these 9 sectors. Also, 

 
 
12 
 
Sectoral Trainings was conducted for all the BLOs of 5 Southern & 8 North 
Eastern States, during Feb 2024.  
 Annual Capacity Building Plan (ACBP) of MoRD: NIRDPR is involved in the 
policy formulation, monitoring and implementation of major flagship programs of 
MoRD, such as MGNREGA, PMAY-G, DDU-GKY, DAY-NRLM, PMGSY, and 
NSAP. The institute has a team of regular faculty specialising in good 
governance, local governance, and various thematic areas of rural poverty 
alleviation and panchayati raj. Considering this expertise, MoRD has assigned 
NIRDPR to conduct domain competency trainings for the staff working in various 
program divisions of MoRD and related state officials. During 2023-24, NIRDPR 
organised 4 training programs covering NRLM, MGNREGA and PMAY-G. In 
2024-25, NIRDPR has organized three programmes under ACBP of MoRD; 
another two are in the pipeline.  
 Conducted eight Training programmes for Presidents & Vice Presidents of 
Atol Councils of Maldives (Local Government Authority) during the period 
from December 2022 to February 2025 – supported by the Ministry of External 
Affairs, Government of India.  
 First of a series of programs on local governance has been organized for 
delegates from Nepal during February to March, 2025. 
 PMAY-G Model House (Double bedroom), constructed using Sustainable 
Housing Technologies, at the Rural Technology Park (RTP), NIRDPR, 
Hyderabad, was inaugurated by Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan, HMRD, on 13th 
August 2024, in the presence of Hon’ble Ministers of State for Rural 
Development, Dr Chandra Sekhar Pemmasani and Shri Kamlesh Paswan. 
 Conducted National Colloquium of SIRD&PRs during 4thand 5th April 2024 at 
NIRDPR Hyderabad, participated by Secretary and Additional Secretary, MoRD.  
 Conducted National level CEO conclave for DDU-GKY at New Delhi in 
January, 2024. 
 Two-day National Level Brainstorming Workshop on Strategies to revamp 
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana was conducted on 29th Feb & 1st March 2024. 
 

 
 
13 
 
 Conducted a 5-day training program on International Approaches and 
Instruments for the Conservation of Biodiversity and Wetlands in collaboration 
with the National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) from 8-12 January 2024.  
 National Stakeholders Consultation Workshop on Panchayati Raj System: 
Retrospect and Prospects & Launch of People’s Plan Campaign 2023 was 
organised from 4th– 5th September 2023.  
 The Institute is in the process of setting up Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Artificial 
Intelligence. CoE will be a collaborative effort between NIRD and State 
Governments. NIRD and States will share costs and governance responsibilities. 
COE will operate on a Hub-and-Spokes model. This model is designed to ensure 
that the CoE serves as a central resource (Hub), to provide solutions to select 
problems impacting many states, while providing tailored support and operational 
flexibility to individual State Governments (Spokes). This approach is similar to 
the institutional arrangement of NIRD and SIRDs wherein NIRD acts as a Hub 
supporting SIRDs as Spoke. 
  
L.  Current Status 
  
1.29 Dept. of Expenditure, Govt. of India conducted in-depth review of four 
autonomous bodies under Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee noted that 
“the Institute’s performance in fulfilling it’s primary role of capacity building of 
rural development functionaries, elected representatives of PRIs, bankers, NGOs 
and other stakeholders has been satisfactory” and recommended that NIRDPR can 
be converted into a Centre of Excellence/Deemed university engaged in training 
and research.  
1.30 An external evaluation of Institutes work is undertaken every 5 years. The last 
such evaluation by IRMA which conducted a post training evaluation study and 
submitted its report in 2018-19 mentioned that “Overall, given the dire need for 
professional inputs in the rural development sector, the training programmes of 
NIRDPR had a positive impact”. 

 
 
14 
 
M.       Recommendation of Department of Expenditure 
  
1.31   The Department of Expenditure with a view to furthering the aim of “minimum 
government, maximum governance” and ensuring economical and efficient use of public 
fund, reviewed the need for the continuity of Autonomous Bodies under the control of 
Department of Rural Development in the year 2020 and recommended in its report AB-
4, as below: 
“It is recommended that NIRD&PR may be disengaged from 
MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of financial support and 
administrative control. It may be converted into a Center of 
Excellence/Deemed University engaged in training and research. 
However, Central government may access its services as a client. 
Government may give grants based on the functions of the body till it is 
converted into a deemed, autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the 
government is recommended with a three-year timeline and a gradual 
budget reduction of 25 % each year.” 
  
1.32   In pursuance of above, the Draft Cabinet Note (DCN) was circulated to the 
relevant stakeholder Ministries and Departments for their feedback on August 28, 2023. 
In response, valuable comments were received from several Ministries and 
Departments, contributing to a comprehensive review process. To ensure thorough 
consideration of all perspectives, multiple rounds of discussions were conducted with 
the National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), as well as 
other concerned Departments and stakeholders. These discussions helped in 
addressing any concerns and refining the DCN further. As a result, necessary changes 
and observations raised by the various Ministries and Departments have been 
incorporated into the final version of the Cabinet Note, ensuring that it reflects a broad 
consensus and aligns with the collective objectives of all involved parties. 
1.33   Keeping in mind the critical role and utility of NIRD&PR in the rural landscape, the 
matter was taken up with the Department of Expenditure to reconsider the proposal for 
disengagement. However, the Department of Expenditure, on February 13, 2025, 
conveyed its disagreement with the proposal. Currently, the process of finalizing the 
Draft Cabinet Note is underway, with the DCN being circulated internally within the 
Ministry. Once all comments are received, the document will be modified accordingly. 

 
 
15 
 
After its finalization, the Draft Cabinet Note will be submitted to the Cabinet for further 
consideration. 
1.34 During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of Expenditure on the 
issue of the terms and conditions of disengagement process, stated as under: 
“The disengagement proposal, which is a Cabinet proposal, will go into 
these details as to how the disengagement process will be conducted and 
on what terms and conditions, and what will happen to the corpus. Now, it 
appears that after inter-ministerial consultation, the Ministry of RD may be 
coming up with a new proposal, but in the earlier proposal, they had also 
requested the Union Cabinet for the sanction of certain additional funds for 
the corpus, so we do not know what the final shape will be. So, once that 
money comes to the institute, the idea was that it should be sufficient to 
take care of the routine costs which the institute will have. Now, in terms of 
the employees of the institute, they will be paid from the corpus itself. That 
is done even today because sometimes money comes in late. So, it is the 
corpus from which it is paid. The corpus has also been built by use of 
resources which the Government of India has given them, either in form of 
land or in terms of salary support for 70 years. This money is used for the 
purpose of the institute including payment of salaries etc. As Secretary 
(Expenditure), I don’t see anything which is untoward in this proposal. I 
guess once the Ministry finalizes the proposal, we will get a better idea on 
these things.” 
 
  

 
 
16 
 
 PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.  Continuation of NIRD&PR’s Engagement with MoRD  
 
The Committee note that NIRD&PR has a long-cherished history of 
existence since 1958 and is also recognized as one of the UN-ESCAP centres of 
Excellence and building capacities of rural development functionaries, elected 
representatives of PRIs, banks, NGOs and other stakeholders. It also acts as a 
‘Think-Tank’ for the MoRD, MoPR and other line Ministries by helping them with 
policy formulation, development and implementation of national-level 
programmes/schemes through its various training and research activities. 
The Committee note that the Department of Expenditure with a view to 
furthering the aim of  “minimum government, maximum governance” and 
ensuring economical and efficient use of public fund, reviewed the need for the 
continuity of Autonomous Bodies under the control of Department of Rural 
Development in the year 2020 and recommended in its report AB-4 that NIRD&PR 
may be disengaged from MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of 
financial support and administrative control and it may be converted into a Center 
of Excellence/Deemed University engaged in training and research. Further, 
Committee note from the report that Central government may access its services 
as a client. Government may give grants based on the functions of the body till it 
is converted into a deemed, autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the 
government is recommended with a three-year timeline and a gradual budget 
reduction of 25 % each year. 
 The Committee observe that NIRD&PR’s work has always been aligned with 
the constitutionally mandated goals of social sector development, decentralized 
governance and inclusive growth. Its focus has been on creating public goods, 
not revenue-generated services. Its structure, processes and priorities have 

 
 
17 
 
therefore evolved to support long-term outcomes, not commercial outputs. The 
Committee strongly believe that any move to delink NIRD&PR from MoRD 
represents not only an administrative change but a fundamental shift away from 
these core national priorities. The Committee also find that NIRD&PR has grown 
under the aegis of MoRD with global recognition, a highly qualified faculty, vast 
infrastructure and an expansive reach. Hence, the Committee opine that any 
disengagement as decided by the Government apprehends to undermine its 
credibility and authority in policymaking is likely to dilute the quality of long-term 
research and training, divert it into unrelated or short-term consultative activities 
and sever its intellectual alignment with the rural development ecosystem. The 
Committee is of the view that disengagement will not reduce Government 
expenditure. Instead, it will shift costs to various agencies with disparate 
mandates, further increasing the burden on MoRD officers for oversight and 
coordination. Moreover, the financial instability due to disengagement may force 
the institution to drift away from supporting the flagship Programmes/Schemes of 
rural development viz., MGNREGA, DAY-NRLM, DDU-GKY, PMAY-G, PMGSY, 
NSAP and Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The Committee are therefore, 
at a loss to understand that such a centre of excellence and serving as apex 
capacity building institution instrumental in nation building and national 
development especially in rural areas since the last seventy years has to be 
abruptly disengaged by the Government with the sole aim of furthering “minimum 
Government and maximum Governance”.  
The Committee, strongly feel that rather than disengagement, the need of 
the hour is to forge deeper strategic collaboration between MoRD and NIRD&PR 
through structural reforms, decentralized decision-making, adequate allocation of 
budgetary grant-in-aid and with greater autonomy and allow the institute to thrive 
and grow within the existing MoRD framework. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that keeping in view the immense contribution made by 
NIRD&PR in the progress and development of nation building in all spheres in 
rural areas the MoRD should take initiatives and come out with a strategic 
plan/new roadmap for the institute and prevail upon the DoE to halt the ongoing 

 
 
18 
 
process of disengagement and allowing the institute to continue and sustain 
itself.  
2. Constitution of a MoRD led Committee to Oversee Administrative and 
Governance matters at NIRD&PR 
The Committee were apprised about the progress and challenges being 
faced by the NIRD&PR during their study visit recently. Over the past four years, 
the institute got paralyzed by the present administration. The administrative 
framework of NIRD&PR has adversely affected the key posts such as DDG 
(Academic), Registrar, and FA lying vacant or being handled by lower-rank 
officers on an in-charge basis. This Centralized control has weakened the 
institution’s operational integrity. While the Administrative Staff College of India 
(ASCI) was appointed to develop a roadmap for transition, its report was 
reportedly ignored. The disengagement plan submitted to MoRD was neither 
internally reviewed nor externally validated, making it the work of a single 
individual rather than a collective institutional vision. Infrastructure has been 
poorly maintained under the guise of cost-cutting, leading to declining training 
ratings and a diminishing brand image. Faculty morale is at an all-time low due to 
adhoc inter-centre transfer policy, unresolved vigilance cases (non-financial in 
nature), long-pending promotions through Centre for Agrarian Studies (CAS) and 
lack of leadership trust. Lastly, the current administration has also tasked 
individual units with preparing revenue generation plans in isolation, with no 
strategic coordination or institutional direction particularly unfeasible for support 
centres not designed to generate revenue. The Committee take serious view of 
the present piquant situation of the institute which is unwarranted at this critical 
juncture and feel that it is more of an impediment thrust upon them with no clear 
directions as to how to proceed.  The Committee also disapprove the attitude of 
the present executive council towards the problems being faced by the 
employees serving and retired who are not able to get their salary/pension in 
time.  In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend the MoRD to 
expeditiously constitute a committee under its supervision to oversee 

 
 
19 
 
administrative and governance matters so as to prevent the situation from going 
bad to worse. 
 
3.     Expeditious Filling up of Vacancies 
The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRD&PR) serves as the apex capacity-building institution in the country. It 
supports the implementation of rural development programmes through its 
multidisciplinary faculty and an extensive outreach network in States.The 
Committee are constrained to note that the institute has eighteen functional 
centres falling under seven schools catering to different thematic areas of 
holistic rural development. In addition, three professional centres are providing 
support to overall functioning of the institute, yet the institute of national 
importance like NIRD&PR has been experiencing huge shortage of manpower in 
the categories of Academic and Non-academic Posts.  The Committee also note 
with concern that as against the total sanctioned strength of 640, the NIRD&PR 
is working with a strength of only 221 leaving as large as 419 vacancies. 
Moreover, recruitment of regular officials in key positions viz., DDG, Registrar 
and Finance Advisor are also pending since long. The Committee are surprised 
to note that these 3 key positions which are very crucial for the day-to-day 
smooth functioning of the institute are lying vacant. In such a situation one 
cannot expect the institute to perform its role and functions effectively. In view 
of these, the Committee strongly recommend that the MoRD should take all out 
efforts to fill up the existing vacancies expeditiously on full time basis for the 
smooth functioning of the institute. 
 
4. Reorganisation of Current Management Structure 
The National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRD&PR) is setup as registered society which has two main governing entities, 
which are the General Council headed by the Minister for Rural Development 

 
 
20 
 
and the Executive Council headed by the Secretary for Rural Development and 
Director General being the Member Secretary and Principal Executive Officer. 
The Committee were enlightened during their recent study visit about the 
centralized control and mismanagement by current administration. In this 
connection, the Committee observe that since the 2025 budget presentation, 
NIRD&PR employees and faculty have sought clarity and administratorship from 
the Director General (DG) regarding a strategy for self-sustainability and 
institutional transition. Unfortunately, there has been no formal communication, 
no inclusive consultation, and no clarity on the way forward. Internal file 
notings and verbal instructions are being used based on the Zero budget 
allocation by Government of India which is creating panic and distrust within the 
organization. The Committee also observe that, despite sufficient Internal 
Generated Revenue (IGR) and corpus fund interest, there are delays in salary 
disbursements, medical reimbursements, and vendor payments-causing 
financial distress, especially among SHG and contractual staff. The Committee, 
also learn that there is no plan or direction from Director General to mobilise 
resources or bringing sponsored projects. There is pressure on individual 
faculty to generate income for her/his monthly salary. This centralized control 
has weakened the institution’s operational integrity and create serious 
apprehensions about the administration's commitment to upholding the 
assurances made to faculty and staff at the time of their recruitment. Therefore, 
in order to ensure effective leadership and institutional stability, the Committee 
strongly recommend for immediate review and replacement of the current 
administration, which has failed to maintain faculty trust or organizational 
coherence till than grant already extended by the Government may be 
continued.  
 
NEW DELHI  
21 July, 2025 
30 Ashadha, 1947 (Saka)   
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and  
Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
21 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
I.              Functions and Powers of General Council 
The General Council shall have the following powers and functions, 
namely, to: 
i. Observe the Provisions of the Memorandum of Association, these Rules 
and such instructions of the Government of India in the Department; 
ii. Exercise general control and issue such directions for the efficient 
management and administration of the affairs of the Institute as may be 
necessary; 
iii. Nominate members of the Executive Council in accordance with clause (i) 
of Rule X; 
iv. To consider and ratify the decisions taken in the Executive Council; 
v. Approve the annual budget of the Institute for submission to the 
Government of India for sanction of Government Grants; 
vi. Consider the Annual Report and audited Annual Accounts, of the Institute 
for the immediately preceding financial year along with the Audit 
Certificate, the Audit Report, and replies of the Institute to the 
observations contained in the Audit Report; 
vii. To add, amend, vary or rescind, with the prior approval of the Government 
of India, any of these Rules: 
viii. Frame Service Bye-laws, Financial Bye-laws, Conduct Rules and other 
Bye-laws/Rules not inconsistent with these Rules and the Memorandum of 
Association, for the management, administration and regulation of the 
business of the Institute for the furtherance of its objects; 
ix. Constitute an Academic Committee to advise on all Academic matters, 
i.e., matters relating to Training, Research and Action Research, 
promotion, dissemination / transfer of technology, promotion and 
marketing of rural products and such standing committees as required, 
with or without the power of co-opt, for disposal of any business of the 
Institute or for advice on any matter pertaining to the Institute; and 
x. Perform such other functions as are entrusted to it under these Rules. 

 
 
22 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
  
II. Functions and Powers of the Executive Council 
i. Subject to the general control and direction of the General Council, the Executive 
Council shall be responsible for the management and administration of the affairs 
of the Institute in accordance with these Rules and the Bye-laws made there 
under for the furtherance of its objects and shall have all powers-administrative 
and financial which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose. 
ii. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing sub-rule, the Executive 
Council shall have the following powers and functions, namely to: 
a. Prepare and execute detailed plans and programmes for the furtherance 
of the objects of the Institute; 
b. Create such posts, appoint and control such staff other than those for 
whose appointment specific provision has been made elsewhere, as may 
be required for the efficient management of the affairs of the Institute and 
regulate the terms and conditions of their services; 
c. Receive, have custody of, and deal with the funds and monies of the 
Institute; 
d. Purchase, hire, take on lease, exchange or otherwise acquire a properly 
movable or immovable or sell, hire, lease, exchange or otherwise transfer 
or dispose of all or any property, movable or immovable, of the Institute 
provided that for the transfer of immovable property the prior approval of 
the Government of India is obtained in that behalf; 
e. Execute Contracts, Collaboration Agreements, general/special instruments, 
service Agreements, Agreements containing Arbitration clauses, indemnity 
bonds, deeds in respect of or connected with sale/lease/license, mortgage, 
hypothecation or other deeds of a legal character of whatever description, 
powers of Attorney, enforce any other legal rights and incur legal 
expenses, provided that these powers are exercised for and on behalf of 
the Institute; 
f. Sue and defend all legal proceedings on behalf of the Institute; 

 
 
23 
 
g. Appoint Committees, with or without the power to co-opt, for disposal of 
any business of the Institute or for advice in any matter pertaining to the 
Institute, provided that in cases of emergency, the Chairman of the 
Executive Council shall have the power to appoint such committees; 
h. Accept the management of any endowment, trust, fund, subscription or 
donation, provided that it is not attended by any condition in consistent, or in 
conflict, with the objects of the Institute; 
i. Advise the General Council on all matters connected with the budget of the 
Institute; 
j. Incur expenditure subject to the provisions of the approved budget provided 
that where, in the opinion of the Chairman, an immediate decision on any 
matter is essential, he may, within the ambit of operational necessity and 
efficiency or to meet an emergency, authorize the incurring of expenditure 
not covered by the provisions of the budget provided that a report would 
be made to the General Council at its next meeting and its ex-post-facto 
approval obtained, wherever necessary; and 
k. To lay down terms and conditions governing scholarships, fellowships, 
deputations, grants-in-aid, research schemes and projects; 
iii. The Executive Council may by resolution delegate to its Chairman, to any 
Standing Committee, or to the Director General or to any other officer of the 
Institute, such of its powers for the conduct of business as it may deem fit, 
subject, if deemed necessary to the condition that the action taken by its own 
Chairman, the Standing Committee or the Director General, or other officers 
under the powers so delegated shall be subject to confirmation at the next 
meeting of the Executive Council. 
  
  
  

 
 
24 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
NIRDPR: LIST OF SCHOOLS AND CENTERS  
Sl. 
No. 
Schools Centres within the School 
1. Development Studies 
& Social Justice 
i. Centre for Human Resource Development (CHRD) 
ii. Centre for Gender Studies and Development 
(CGSD) 
iii. Centre for Equity & Social Development (CESD) 
iv. Centre for Agrarian Studies (CAS) 
v. Centre for PG Studies and Distance Education 
2. Rural Livelihoods and 
Infrastructure 
i. Centre for Wage Employment and Livelihoods 
(CWE&L) 
ii. Centre for Rural Infrastructure (CRI) 
iii. Centre for Entrepreneurship Development and 
Financial Inclusion (CED&FI) 
3. Sustainable 
Development 
i. Centre for Natural Resource Management, Climate 
Change and Disaster Mitigation (CNRM, CC&DM) 
4. Public Policy and 
Good Governance 
i. Centre for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation 
(CPME) 
ii. Centre for CSR, Public Private Partnership and 
People’s Action (CC, PPP & PA) 
iii. Centre for Good Governance & Policy Analysis 
(CGG&PA) 
iv. Centre for Rural Marketing and Promotion of Rural 
Products, Enterprise and Development.  
5. Local Governance i. Centre for Panchayati Raj, Decentralised Planning 
and Social Service Delivery (CPRDP&SSD) 
6. Science, Technology 
and 
Knowledge Systems 
i. Centre for Geo-informatics Applications in Rural 
Development (CGARD) 
ii. Centre for Innovations and Appropriate Technologies 
for Skills and Jobs (CIAT&SJ) 
7. Accountability and 
Transparency (A&T) 
i. Centre for Social Audit (CSA) 
ii. Centre for Internal Audit in Rural Development 
(CIARD) 
Professional Support 
Centres 
i. Centre for Development Documentation & 
Communication (CDC) 
ii. Centre for Information & Communication Technology 
(CICT) 
iii. Centre for Research & Training Coordination and 
Networking (CRTCN) 
Resource Centres (i) NRLM-RC 
(ii) DDU-GKY RC 

 
 
25 
 
 ANNEXURE-IV 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Centres being set up under the SoEPR 
1 Centre for Panchayat Governance, e-Governance and Service Delivery 
2 Centre for Panchayat Finance, Accounts & Audit 
3 Centre for Localization of SDGs, Integrated Panchayat Planning and 
Convergence 
4 Centre for Public Health, Sanitation and Infrastructure Development through 
Panchayats 
5 Centre for Biodiversity, Environmental Upgradation and Built Environment 
through Panchayats 
6 Centre for Skilling & Economic Development through Panchayats 
7 Centre for Social Development (Health, Education, Women & Children) through 
Panchayats 
8 Centre for Conflict Management & Dispute Resolution through Panchayats 
9 Centre for Panchayat Statistics, Panchayat Policy Reforms and Advocacy 
  
  
  

 
 
26 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
MONDAY, THE 17th MARCH, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room 'D',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri Samirul Islam 
13. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
14. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
Secretariat  
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development  
(Department of Rural Development) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness  Designation 
1.  Shri Shailesh Kumar Singh - Secretary (RD) 
2.  Dr. G. Narendra Kumar - Director General, NIRD&PR 
3.  Shri T. K. Anil Kumar - Additional Secretary 

 
 
27 
 
4.  Ms. Rohini R Bhajibhakare - Joint Secretary (RE) 
5.  Ms. Tanuja Thakur Khalkho - JS&FA 
6.  Shri Manoj Kumar - Registrar & Director (Admin.), 
NIRD&PR 
7.  Shri A. S. Chakravarthy - Director (Finance), NIRD&PR 
8.  Dr. Kesava Rao P. - Associate Professor & Head I/C, 
CRTCN 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1.  Shri Manoj Govil Secretary (Expenditure) 
2.  Dr Sajjan Singh Yadav Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri D. Anandan Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for having a briefing by the representatives of the Department 
of Rural Development and NIRD & PR (Ministry of Rural Development) and Department 
of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) with regard to functioning of National Institute of 
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD & PR). 
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the Department of Rural Development and NIRD 
& PR (Ministry of Rural Development) and Department of Expenditure (Ministry of 
Finance) were called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined 
the importance of NIRD & PR. The Chairperson, then asked the representatives of the 
Ministries to introduce themselves individually and place their views on the subject.  The 
Chairperson further drew the attention of the Ministries and others to the directions of 
Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the discussions before the start of the 
meeting.  Therefore, the witnesses introduced themselves to the Committee.  The 
representatives of the Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural 
Development) made their Power Point Presentations and briefed and highlighted on key 
aspects and functioning of National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRD & PR) 
 
4. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were replied by the representatives of the Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development). On certain issues Ministries/Departments could not 
provide immediate reply, so they were requested to send written replies thereto as early 
as possible. 
  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
28 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, THE 16th JUNE, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1706 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Imran Masood 
7. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
11. Shri Samirul Islam 
12. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
Secretariat  
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
XXX   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on ‘Functioning 
of National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) and XXX 
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and after discussion, adopted the 
Draft Report without any modification. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson 
to finalize the draft Report and present the same to the Parliament in the forthcoming 
Monsoon Session. 
 
[Thereafter, the representatives from the XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX were called in] 
 
4. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
5. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX. 
 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
   
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 