 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
       EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
 
GRAM URJA SWARAJ: PROMOTING RENEWABLE ENERGY IN RURAL AREAS 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
21 


 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
GRAM URJA SWARAJ: PROMOTING RENEWABLE ENERGY IN RURAL AREAS 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Introduction  iii  
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
PART I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
A. Introduction 1 
B. Engagement With States 1 
C. Summary of Concept Note on “Making Panchayats Atma Nirbhar” 
through Renewable Energy- Gram Urja Swaraj’ 
1 
D. Incentivising Panchayati Raj Institutions on Adoption of Renewable 
Energy 
3 
E. Special Projects under RGSA 4 
F. Gram Urja Swaraj Portal 4 
G. Key Challenges 5 
H. Engagement With MNRE 5 
I. Recognition of GPS as Entities by MNRE 6 
J. Incentives for Pris for Successful Implementation of Solar Rooftops 6 
K. Technological Interventions 7 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
8 
ANNEXURES  
I Extracts of the Minutes of the twenty-first sitting of the Committee held 
on 25th March, 2025. 
13 
II Minutes of the twenty-sixth sitting of the Committee held 28th May, 2025 15 
III Extracts of the Minutes of the thirty-first sitting of the Committee held on 
24th July, 2025. 
17 
IV Extracts of the Minutes of the thirty-fourth sitting of the Committee held 
on 18th August, 2025. 
20 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
30. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
31. Shri P. Wilson 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Executive Officer 
 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Twenty First Report on ‘Gram Urja Swaraj: 
Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’ of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj (MoPR) on 25th March, 2025. 
3.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on 28th May, 2025 and 24th 
July, 2025. 
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
18th August, 2025. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) and the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for placing 
before them the requisite material and their considered views in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
18 August, 2025 
27 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
1 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
GRAM URJA SWARAJ: PROMOTING RENEWABLE ENERGY IN RURAL AREAS 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
A. Introduction 
1.1     The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) is the nodal Ministry for all 
matters relating to new and renewable energy – which has been vital in bringing new 
initiatives such as Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM 
KUSUM) and National Solar Mission.  
 
1.2 With over 60% of the population living in rural areas, adopting a decentralized 
strategy to address climate change is crucial. Panchayats make substantial expenditure 
towards payment of electricity bills, and renewable energy can offer a sustainable, cost-
efficient alternative.  
 
1.3 The Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has initiated the Gram Urja Swaraj 
campaign with an aim to promote adoption of renewable energy in rural areas and 
enable Panchayati Raj Institutions to become self-sufficient in terms of energy. 
 
B. Engagement with States 
1.4      The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in consultation with MNRE and industry experts, 
had prepared a Concept Note on ‘Making Panchayats ‘Atma Nirbhar’ through 
Renewable Energy’ outlining the implementation mechanisms, financing models, year-
wise targets, and roles of the Central Government, State Government, and Panchayati 
Raj Institutions for adopting renewable energy applications in rural areas. The States 
have been advised to launch a 'Gram Urja Swaraj' campaign for renewable energy 
interventions in rural areas. An Advisory on this matter had been shared with the 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers of States, by the Hon’ble Minister of Panchayati Raj in March 
2022. 
 
1.5 Additionally, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has also issued advisories to States to 
promote implementation of schemes such as PM Surya Ghar, while highlighting the 
roles and responsibilities of PRIs. 
 
C. Summary of Concept Note on “Making Panchayats Atma Nirbhar” through 
Renewable Energy- Gram Urja Swaraj’ 
1.6 While addressing the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference also 
known as COP26 summit in Glasgow, Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has 
made in the form of five nectar elements, ‘Panchamrit’, to deal with climate change. 
First- India will take its non-fossil energy capacity to 500 GW by 2030. Second- India will 

 
 
2 
 
meet 50 percent of its energy requirements from renewable energy by 2030. Third- 
India will reduce the total projected carbon emissions by one billion tonnes from now till 
2030. Fourth- By 2030, India will reduce the carbon intensity of its economy by less than 
45 percent. And fifth- by the year 2070, India will achieve the target of Net Zero.  
1.7 Considering the recent commitment of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India at the 
COP 26 Summit and the enormous potential of renewable energy in India, this Concept 
note has been prepared by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj, in consultation with Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy and other industry experts. The objective of this 
Concept Note is to lay down the major implementation mechanisms, financing models, 
year-wise targets and role of Central Government, State Government and Panchayati 
Raj Institutions in effective adoption of Renewable energy applications, for rural areas of 
the country. Further, it is suggested that a campaign on ‘Gram Urja Swaraj’ be launched 
by States with an aim to achieve targets which have been laid down on adoption of 
renewable energy interventions in rural areas.  
1.8 It is widely acknowledged that considerable funds are expended as electricity 
costs by Panchayats and renewable energy presents itself an option for sustainable and 
cost-efficient energy systems in rural areas. Renewable energy offers an opportunity to 
improve the social, economic, environmental and health indicators of rural population. 
Panchayats could play a critical role in creating awareness, requirement assessment, 
mobilizing resources and personnel etc.  Thus, in the upcoming years, Gram 
Panchayats would become producers of energy instead of only being consumers and 
develop own sources of revenue, and employment opportunities for local youth of the 
villages. 
1.9 Major renewable energy models proposed in the note include ‘solar rooftop’, 
Solar Tree, Solar powered induction cooktops, Solar Street lighting, Solar Pumps, Solar 
Mini/Micro Grids, Micro Hydel Power plants, Wind mills and Bio gas plants. As financing 
of renewable energy initiatives is a major challenge, various implementation models 
have also been proposed in the concept note where Panchayats could actively play a 
role in adoption of renewable energy.  
1.10 In the upcoming years, factors such as India’s demographic dividend, renewable 
energy potential, and recent push to bring enabling policy ecosystem in renewable 
energy sector, are expected to make significant contribution towards augmenting 
income and employment generation in the energy sector in rural areas. Major areas for 
employment generation include: 
(a) Solar energy assessment of potential sites 
(b) Operations and Maintenance 
(c) Construction and installation 
(d) Sales and services  
(e) Training and apprenticeship 
 

 
 
3 
 
1.11 Skill Development has been a major challenge for the country and ‘rural energy’ 
could be one of the areas which could be focused in rural areas in the coming years. 
Thus, it would be appropriate to align or expand the current skill development initiatives 
of the Government of India. Broadly, ‘Equipment manufacture and distribution’ ‘Project 
development’; ‘Installation, commissioning and handover’ and ‘Inspection, servicing and 
maintenance’ are some of the critical areas for skill development in rural areas. 
1.12 The Concept Note also highlights policy issues which need to be considered by 
all stakeholders including  
(a) Panchayats, other Rural Local Bodies (RLBs) and Self-Help Groups 
(SHGs) to get benefits under different Government schemes. 
(b) Enabling adoption of solar rooftop systems for all public buildings such 
as Panchayat Bhawans, Primary health Centres, Community Health 
Centres, Anganwadi Centres to make these establishment self-sufficient 
in terms of their electricity requirements through policy interventions.  
(c) Commensuration of energy selling rate with existing market rates. 
(d) Facilitating Net Metering. 
(e) Promoting solar powered pumps for water supply in rural areas 
 
1.13 In adoption of Solar Energy interventions in rural areas, it is important to develop 
a spirit of collaboration between different stakeholders working towards rapid adoption 
of solar energy (as well as other renewable sources as suited by the State such as 
Hydel energy, wind energy etc.). The State Panchayat Raj Departments can act as a 
nodal agency for the convergence of all the agencies to ensure cross-cutting 
partnership of agencies within and outside the Government. 
1.14 The initiative aims to reduce transmission losses, boost rural adoption of 
renewable energy, and promote community models like solar kitchens and bio-
fertilizers. It supports economic growth, rural employment, and Panchayats' contribution 
to national climate goals and energy self-sufficiency. 
D. Incentivising Panchayati Raj Institutions on adoption of Renewable Energy 
1.15 Incentivization of Panchayats scheme is one of the components of Centrally 
Sponsored scheme of revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) of MoPR. 
Under this scheme, ‘National Panchayat Awards’ are given to the best performing 
Panchayats, annually on 24th April, celebrated as National Panchayati Raj Day to 
commemorate 73rd Constitution Amendment Act, 1992.  
 
1.16 As a part of this initiative, awards are being given to PRIs, under 2 special 
categories including ‘Gram Urja Swaraj Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ and ‘Carbon 
Neutral Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’. 
 

 
 
4 
 
(a) Gram Urja Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar: This award is given to 3 GPs for 
their performance regarding adoption and usage of renewable sources of 
energy.  
(b) Carbon Neutral Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar: This award will be given to 3 
GPs who have done exemplary work towards achieving Net-Zero carbon 
emissions. Similar to Gram Urja Swaraj Puraskar. 
 
1.17 In 2025, the ‘Gram Urja Swaraj Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ and the ‘Carbon 
Neutral Vishesh Panchayat Puraskar’ have been merged to form ‘Climate Action 
Special Panchayat Award’ with an aim to encourage Panchayats to act as climate-
responsive local governments. The Climate Action Special Panchayat Award, was 
conferred to the following GPs on National Panchayati Raj Day NPRD-2025 held at 
Lohna Uttar Gram Panchayat, District Madhubani, Bihar on 24th April, 2025. 
 Rank 1: Dawwa S Gram Panchayat, Gondia District, Maharashtra 
 Rank 2: Biradahalli Gram Panchayat, Hassan District, Karnataka 
 Rank 3: Motipur Gram Panchayat, Samastipur District, Bihar 
The award includes a financial incentive of Rs.1 crore (Rank 1), Rs.75 lakh 
(Rank 2), and Rs.50 lakh (Rank 3) respectively. The awardees were presented with 
specially designed trophies and certificates. 
 
E. Special Projects under RGSA 
 
1.18 MoPR under the revamped Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), supports 
innovation by incubating and developing models of good governance and results-based 
program delivery through Panchayats. Proposals for innovative activities and 
processes, including those by government and reputed non-government organizations, 
are submitted through the State plans. The proposal highlights innovative features, such 
as strengthening Gram Panchayat governance and service delivery, using technology 
for local solutions, increasing Panchayats' own source revenue, and enhancing 
transparency and accountability. Proposals are supported based on its merit and 
sustainability. 
 
1.19 Additionally, RGSA provides project-based support for economic development 
and income enhancement. Under this component, Gram Panchayats or clusters of 
Gram Panchayats are funded for micro projects on economic development and income 
enhancement. Financial assistance in the form of viability gap funding is provided based 
on the merit and sustainability of the proposals. The Ministry has funded three 
innovative and economic development projects related to solar energy adoption in PRIs. 
 
F. Gram Urja Swaraj Portal 
  
1.20 ‘The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has launched ‘Gram Urja Swaraj’ dashboard for 
ascertaining the suitability and inclination of Gram Panchayats towards adopting 
renewable energy projects. The objective of the dashboard is to gather key information 

 
 
5 
 
such as Gram Panchayats interested in adoption of new and renewable energy projects 
facilitating implementation of those projects in collaboration with State Governments, 
DISCOMs and Financial Institutions. 
 
G. Key Challenges 
1.21 Access to financing mechanisms: Renewable energy projects entail significant 
initial costs. Thus, it is important to enable RLBs /SHGs to have ease of access to funds 
to set up mini-solar parks and roof top installations which could help PRIs attain Energy 
Self Reliance. Therefore, financial lending institutions are required to develop 
appropriate financial products with reasonable rate of interest. 
1.22 Complex processes & Lack of awareness: In rural areas, the lack of 
awareness often makes it difficult for beneficiaries to navigate complex registration 
process for government schemes. The Panchayati Raj Institutions could play a major 
role in promoting awareness in the rural communities about the benefits of renewable 
energy schemes such as PM Surya Ghar and support the beneficiaries in registration 
and installation of solar systems in rural areas.   
1.23 Operations & Maintenance Challenges: Maintaining solar systems in rural 
areas is challenging due to logistical issues in remote areas, lack of skilled technicians, 
and financial constraints. These factors lead to delays in repairs and reduced system 
efficiency. 
1.24 Challenges in monitoring progress of implementation of scheme due to lack of 
real-time data on the portal. 
1.25 No bifurcation of data on solar installations in rural and urban areas. As a result, 
it is not possible to monitor the implementation of the scheme in rural areas. 
1.26 PRIs are also facing challenges in receiving incentives under the PM Surya Ghar 
scheme.  
H. Engagement With MNRE  
 
1.27 To strengthen convergence between the Ministries and accelerate the adoption 
of renewable energy through Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), a high-level meeting 
was convened on 11th June 2025 between the Secretary, Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy (MNRE), and the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR), 
along with senior officials from both Ministries.  The Key highlights of the discussion are 
as follows: 
 The Solar potential tool may be utilized for preliminary survey and 
identification of potential rooftops for the scheme, and then, PRIs can 
highlight the benefits of solar rooftop solarization through PM Surya Ghar. 

 
 
6 
 
 The possibility of enabling demand aggregation at scale at the Gram 
Panchayat level may be explored within the PM Surya Ghar Portal to facilitate 
faster and easier demand collection at the grassroots,  
 NIC GIS may collaborate with MNRE to leverage the Solar estimation tool 
and corresponding SVAMITVA data for preliminary inspection. 
 
1.28 A joint advisory (dated 7th July 2025) from Secretary, Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy and Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, was sent to the Chief 
Secretaries of States, requesting convergence of efforts of stakeholders such as 
Energy, Panchayati Raj etc., and expedite implementation of schemes such as PM 
Surya Ghar and PM KUSUM, with active involvement of PRIs.  
 
I. Recognition of GPS as Entities by MNRE 
  
1.29 During the course of the Gram Urja Swaraj initiative, it was also observed that 
the Schemes of the Ministry of the New and Renewable Energy were primarily focused 
on end users at the grassroots level, and the Panchayati Raj Institutions were not 
adequately recognised as beneficiaries in schemes such as Grid Connected Rooftop 
Solar programme. The Grid Connected Rooftop programme has now been subsumed 
into the PM Surya Ghar Scheme.  
 
1.30 Considering the large scope of adoption of solar energy in rural areas, the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been consistently in pursuance with the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy for including Panchayati Raj Institutions in its schemes. 
 
1.31 As a result, MNRE under its schemes such as PM Surya Ghar has, given due 
consideration to the PRIs, since January 2024.   
 
J. Incentives For PRIS for Successful Implementation of Solar Rooftops 
 
1.32 Incentives for local bodies under PM Surya Ghar Scheme: As a result of the 
discussions, MNRE has made provisions for ‘Incentives to Local Bodies’ under the 
PM Surya Ghar Scheme, to promote participation of local bodies in rural areas. 
 
1.33 Under the scheme, Gram Panchayats shall be provided with financial assistance 
in the form of incentive of ₹ 1,000 per installation in their respective jurisdiction.  
 
1.34  Utilising data from SVAMITVA Scheme:  Under the SVAMITVA scheme by the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, rural landowners are issued property cards, and digital maps 
of village properties are being generated. To enhance the operational efficiency of the 
PM Surya Ghar Yojana, the Ministry is collaborating with the MNRE to leverage the 
comprehensive data from the SVAMITVA Yojana. This dataset, encompassing detailed 
land ownership records and digital property maps, will facilitate precise rooftop area 
measurements, identification of suitable concrete roofs, and streamline the assessment 
process for solar panel installations. Furthermore, the mapping of rooftop areas will 

 
 
7 
 
enable more efficient management by consolidating plant installations under one or two 
vendors. 
 
1.35  Representation of Ministry of Panchayati Raj in the Steering Committee of 
PM Surya Ghar: As a part of its collaboration with the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been made a part of the Steering 
Committee for PM Surya Ghar Scheme, chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, 
Government of India since September 2024.  
  
K. Technological Interventions 
 
1.36 Gram Manchitra: In order to encourage the Spatial Planning by the Gram 
Panchayat, Ministry of Panchayati Raj had launched the Geographic Information 
System (GIS) application “Gram Manchitra” (https://grammanchitra.gov.in). This 
application facilitates and supports Gram Panchayats to perform planning at Gram 
Panchayat level using geo-spatial technology. 
 
1.37 Rooftop solarization potential estimation tool: In its novel effort, the Ministry 
has developed a Rooftop solarization potential estimation tool, in the Gram Manchitra 
application. By analyzing digital maps and data on village properties, the tool helps 
estimate the potential for rooftop solar installations, identifying suitable rooftops for solar 
panel installations based on accurate measurements of rooftop areas. The Rooftop 
Solarization Potential Estimation Tool within the Gram Manchitra application can be 
used by various stakeholders, including Gram Panchayat officials, local government 
authorities, planners, solar vendors, and implementing agencies. MNRE and MoPR are 
currently conducting a pilot test utilizing the solar rooftop potential estimation tool  
 
  

 
 
8 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Creation of New Scheme namely “Gram Urja Swaraj” 
Gram Urja Swaraj is a campaign launched by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
to help villages use clean energy like solar, wind, and biogas. It encourages 
Panchayats to use renewable energy to meet their needs and rely less on 
traditional energy. During the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that 
MoPR do not have any scheme and no budget has been allocated for this 
purpose. Representatives of MoPR has also stated that under Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA), panchayats are given awards for good performance.  
Two special awards, Gram Urja Special Panchayat Award and Carbon Neutral 
Special Panchayat Award were introduced under RGSA.  The winner GP get 
reward an amount of Rs 1 crore, Rs 75 lakh and Rs 50 lakh for first, second, and 
third place. The Committee note that panchayats can play an important role in 
making Gram Urja Swaraj success by helping villages to generate their own 
energy, improve livelihoods, and move towards a cleaner and more sustainable 
future.  The Committee, therefore recommend that MoPR should start a dedicated 
scheme with adequate fund to help villages become self-reliant in clean and 
affordable energy by using renewable source like solar power, windmills, biogas 
and small energy grids. This scheme should focus on support to Gram 
Panchayats by giving them financial and technical help, train young people to 
manage these energy systems, encourage people to use energy wisely, and 

 
 
9 
 
involve the whole community. The Committee feel this will enable increased 
Renewable Energy Penetration in rural infrastructure and households. 
2. Creation of Rural Renewable Energy Fund 
The Gram Urja Swaraj Campaign aims to promote renewable energy 
adoption at the Panchayat level to achieve self-reliance in rural energy needs. 
MoPR’s role is limited to collaboration and identification of projects, with funding 
largely routed through the MNRE. This dependency limits MoPRs operational 
autonomy and slows grassroots implementation. The Committee recommend that 
MoPR should establish a dedicated Rural Renewable Energy Fund under its own 
budget to reduce dependence on MNRE and enable Panchayats to directly plan, 
sanction and implement renewable energy projects. Funds can be pooled from 
Finance Commission grants, State Finance Commissions, NABARD’s Rural 
Infrastructure Development Fund, CSR Contributions and development partners. 
The Committee is of the view that this will enable financial independence for 
Panchayats in energy planning and faster implementation through direct MoPR 
funding channels.  The Committee urge the MoPR, for other MNRE projects 
associated with Rural Development and Panchayati Raj better coordination 
should be maintained between both the Ministries.  
3. Enhancing Quality and Durability of Solar Films 
Improving the quality and durability of solar films under the PM Surya 
Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana and PM-KUSUM is important for the scheme’s long-term 
success. The Committee note that low-quality films produce less electricity and 
degrade faster when exposed to heat, rain, and dust, leading to frequent repairs 

 
 
10 
 
and higher costs. This can reduce trust in the program and discourage people 
from using it. The Committee recommend that the MoPR must take strong steps 
for installation of quality standards and durable solar films from approved 
manufacturers and trained installer.  Mandatory use of solar films with UV 
resistance, moisture protection, BIS certification, IEC safety guidelines along with 
10 years warranty would serve the purpose effectively.  Further, Committee urge 
the MoPR should conduct third-party audits for quality checks of solar films as 
the Committee are of the view that using better-quality solar films work more 
efficiently, save money over the period, benefiting both the households and the 
Government’s investment.  Further, in order to have optimal results there is a 
need to employ trained and certified installers to maintain the performance and 
durability of the solar films. 
4. Upgrading Battery Technology for Renewable Energy 
As the India moves towards clean and green energy source like solar and 
wind energy.  To ensure the long-term efficiency, success and reliability on 
renewable energy systems, the energy storage batteries are playing a vital role. 
The Committee observe that batteries currently in use are outdated, have limited 
storage capacity, and stop functioning properly over the period. Frequently 
replacing solar batteries and purchasing new batteries can make using solar 
energy more expensive in the long run and make it harder for people to afford or 
rely on solar energy.  To make renewable energy systems work better and last 
longer the Committee recommend that the MoPR should explore possibility to 
procure latest upgraded battery with provision of its replacement and 

 
 
11 
 
upgradation. The scheme provides financial aid or subsidies to individuals and 
communities who wish to adopt better battery systems. It could also encourage 
research and development in battery technology for long-term improvements. 
This will help make our energy system more reliable and move towards clean, 
green energy. 
5. Training to local youths for Maintenance of Solar Panels 
Solar energy is becoming more popular in the country as it is clean and 
good for the environment.  Regular maintenance is essential to keep solar panels 
working smoothly.  During the course of evidence, the Committee note that there 
is an acute shortage of trained/skilled mechanics to repair and maintain solar 
panels. The Committee therefore recommend that the MoPR should hire special 
agencies or establish training centres to train the people to maintain and repair 
solar panels. These agencies/centres should focus on developing the skills 
needed in this field by training more mechanics targeting local youths and local 
mechanics, so that it will be easier for solar panel owners to find local mechanics 
who can resolve their problem quickly. This way purpose of the scheme will be 
useful for the villagers.  
6. Panchayats as Energy Producers 
The Committee recommends Panchayats should be empowered as energy 
producers, with legal backing in State Panchayati Raj Acts to own renewable 
energy assets and sell surplus power to DISCOMS, creating sustainable local 
revenue streams. Further, Committee also suggests MoPR to act as nodal for 
multi-Ministry Convergence-use MGNREGA (MoRD) for labour components, 

 
 
12 
 
MoHUA for solar street lighting, PM-KUSUM for solar lighting-while forging direct 
partnerships with PSUs and CSR agencies for sponsorship of energy 
infrastructure. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
18 August, 2025 
27 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 
  

 
 
13 
 
Annexure I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, THE 25th MARCH, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1621 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
13. Shri Nagendra Ray 
14. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  -
 Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Lohani Additional Secretary 

 
 
14 
 
3. Dr. Bijaya Kumar Behera Economic Advisor 
4. Shri Alok Prem Nagar Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Vipul Ujwal Director 
7. Shri Ramit Maura Director 
8. Shri Ram Pratap Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX and having a briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj on the subject ‘Gram Urja Swaraj: 
Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’.  XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the efforts that have been taken and to be taken by the Ministry for 
implementation of Gram Urja Swaraj in the rural areas of the country along with the 
roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders at State and Central Government 
level and the progress made so far. 
 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj after taking permission from the 
Chairperson directed the Joint Secretary, MoPR to make a Power Point Presentation on 
the overview of the ‘Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’. 
During the presentation, the Joint Secretary, MoPR highlighted the aims and progress 
made under Gram Urja Swaraj since its inception in the year 2022.  The MoPR has 
prepared a Concept Note in consultation with the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy (MNRE), Industry and States on ‘Making Panchayats Atma Nirbhar through 
Renewable Energy’ and Ministry gives award every year to those Gram Panchayats 
who perform better in this area.  
 
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were replied by the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj. He further stated 
that the no fund has been allocated by the Ministry for the particular programme and the 
Nodal Ministry for same is MNRE. Certain issues which remained unanswered 
alongwith those which warranted elaborate reply, the Ministry were requested to send 
written replies thereto in writing within 15 days.  
 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 

 
 
15 
 
Annexure II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
WEDNESDAY, THE 28th MAY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1255 hrs in Committee Room 'D',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri H. D. Devegowda  
13. Shri Ganesh Si ng 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  -
 Deputy Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Vivek Bharadwaj Secretary 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Lohani Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Bijaya Kumar Behera Economic Advisor 
4. Shri Alok Prem Nagar Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Ram Pratap Director 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
  

 
 
16 
 
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri JVN Subramanyam  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Pankaj Saxena Scientist-G 
3. Ms Suman Chandra Director 
4. Shri Jeevan Kumar 
Jethani 
Scientist-F 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy on the subject ‘Gram Urja 
Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’.  
 
 [Thereafter the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy were called in] 
 
3. After welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson in his opening remarks 
stressed upon the various important aspect of the campaign on the ‘Gram Urja Swaraj; 
promoting renewal energy in rural areas, target fixed, funds allocated, expenditure 
incurred thereon, implementation on ground and progress made so far. The 
Chairperson, then asked the representatives of the Ministries to introduce themselves 
and place their views on the subject.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj requested Chairperson to 
allow the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNER), the Nodal Ministry for 
generation of renewable energy in the country to make their Power Point Presentation. 
With the permission of the Chairperson, the Joint Secretary, MNER then made a Power 
Point Presentation and briefed and highlighted on the overview of the promotion and 
generation of renewable energy in the country.  
5. Thereafter, the Members raised queries on provision/plans for using of nano 
solar panels instead of big solar panels, lack of publicity and promotion regarding the 
scheme, steps taken/proposed to be taken to reduce energy generation cost (per KW) 
through renewable sources. The queries of the Committee were responded to by the 
witnesses. 
6. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy for their valuable information and 
requested them to furnish written information on queries/points raised by the Members 
on which the replies were not readily available with them within 15 days to this 
Secretariat.  
 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
Annexure III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST OF THE COMMITTEE HELD 
ON THURSDAY, THE 24th JULY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1650 hrs in Committee Room 'B',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
15. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
16. Shri Raju Bista 
17. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
19. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
20. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
21. Shri Jugal Kishore 
22. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
23. Shri Imran Masood 
24. Shri Janardan Mishra 
25. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
26. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
27. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
28. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
29. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
30. Shri Samirul Islam 
31. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
32. Shri Sant Balbir Singh  
33. Shri Ganesh Singh 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary  -
 Deputy Secretary 

 
 
18 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Lohani Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Alok Prem Nagar Joint Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy  
  
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Santosh Kumar 
Sarangi 
Secretary 
2. Shri JVN Subramanyam  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Pankaj Saxena Scientist-G 
4. Ms Suman Chandra Director 
5. Shri Jeevan Kumar 
Jethani 
Scientist-F 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for (i) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX; and (ii) oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy on the subject ‘Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable 
Energy in Rural Areas’. 
 
3.  XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX   
 
 [Thereafter, the representatives from the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy were called in] 
 
4. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks outlined 
the importance of new and renewable energy in the country.  The Chairperson, then 
asked the representatives of the Ministries to make their oral evidence and place their 
views on the subject with joint presentation. The Chairperson further drew the attention 
of the Ministries to the directions of Hon’ble Speaker regarding confidentiality of the 
discussions before the start of the meeting. Thereafter, the witnesses introduced 
themselves to the Committee and with the permission of the Chairperson, the Joint 
Secretary, MNRE made a joint Power Point Presentation on the subject ‘Gram Urja 
Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas’ as per the directions of the 
Hon’ble Members of the Committee given in the previous meeting. The presentation 
highlighted action taken by the MNRE in consultation with MoPR are as follows: 
i. Issuance of Joint Advisory to States by both Secretaries, MoPR & MNRE 

 
 
19 
 
ii. Amendments issued for Model Solar Village guidelines under PMSG: MBY 
iii. IEC Material for PM KUSUM & PMSG: MBY schemes shared with MoPR for 
further dissemination to GPs. 
iv. Amendments issued for Incentive to Local Bodies guidelines under PMSG: MBY 
v. Integration Gram Maanchitra Portal with National Portal of PMSG: MBY imitated. 
 
5. Subsequently, Members raised their individual queries. The queries of the 
Members were subsequently replied by the witnesses. On certain issues Ministries 
could not provide immediate reply, they were requested to send written replies thereto 
as early as possible.  
[The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A record of verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
Annexure IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON MONDAY, THE 18th AUGUST, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
11. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
14. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
15. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the newly nominated Members along 
with the other Members to the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption 
of the following Draft Reports: 
a. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX  
b. Draft Report on “Gram Urja Swaraj: Promoting Renewable Energy in Rural Areas” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
3. Above mentioned draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 