 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
   
 
  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT   
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Rural Employment through Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)” (2024-
25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development)] 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
28 


 
 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2025-2026) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on “Rural Employment through Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)” (2024-
25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026/Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-2026) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
24 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
37 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
38 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
49 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extracts of the Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 24.03.2026 
 
55 
II Analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati 
Raj 
57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-26) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Bhumare Sandipanrao Asaram  
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Dr. Kavita Patidar 
27. Smt. Rajathi 
28. Shri Nagendra Ray 
29. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
30. Smt. P.T. Usha 
31. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2025-2026) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty Eighth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the 8th Report of the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (18thLok Sabha) on ‘Rural 
Employment through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA)’ (2024-25) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 03.04.2025 and was 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.04.2025. Replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 03.07.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 24.03.2026. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eighth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)’ (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). 
1.2  The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 03.04.2025 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.04.2025. The Report contained 
17 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 17 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 2, 3, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16     Total: 08
          Chapter-II
            
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 15, 17     
  
 Total: 09 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
 
2 
 
1.4  The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Increase in Allocation of Funds 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
1.6 With regard to increase in allocation of funds, the Committee had 
recommended as under: - 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget 
Estimates under MGNREGA for the Financial Year 2025-26 is static at 
₹86,000 crore since the Revised Estimates for 2023-24. The Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 
provides a legal right to work for the most economically disadvantaged 
sections of the rural population who are willing to work. It is a last resort 
of succour for the jobless section of the society who have no other 
means of livelihood to feed their family members. The scheme serves 
as a critical safety net, particularly for those facing extreme poverty and 
unemployment. The role and importance of MGNREGA was clearly 
visible during the corona pandemic times when it acted as a ray of 
hope for the needy in times of distress. The Committee are unable to 
comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation of fund 
under MGNREGA since 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured 
employment to masses of rural poor and deprived section of the 
society, it is very much essential that adequate Budgetary Allocation 
ought to be made for the effective implementation of the Scheme. The 
Committee urge that the requirement for fund allocation should be 
looked afresh as it is an established procedure that MGNREGA being a 
demand driven scheme, the funds can be raised at RE stage 
accordingly. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development apprise themselves of the still 
existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground level 
more realistically and press upon the Ministry of Finance for increased 
allocation to MGNREGA.”  
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows: - 
“The Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s concern regarding 
the Budget Estimate of ₹86,000 crore under Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) for 
the Financial Year 2025-26.  Here it is submitted that for the financial 
year 2024–25, a budget allocation of Rs. 86,000 crore was made for 
the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, which was the highest ever allocation at 
the Budget Estimate (BE) stage since inception of the scheme. For the 

 
 
 
3 
 
financial year 2025–26, the Government has retained this allocation at 
Rs. 86,000 crore, ensuring continued support for the scheme.   In this 
regard, it is submitted that since Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a 
demand driven wage employment scheme, Ministry will approach 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional funds based on demand 
for employment at ground level. This approach has consistently 
ensured that adequate funds are made available in a timely manner to 
meet the demand for employment at ground level.  
 It may be noted that during the financial year 2024–25, 
approximately 6.33 crore households demanded employment under 
the scheme, out of which 6.32 crore households (about 99.84%) were 
offered employment. Out of the 6.32 crore households offered 
employment, 5.79 crore households (around 91.60%) actually availed 
employment. While the employment demanded closely matches the 
employment offered, the difference between the employment   availed 
and employment demanded is on account of lack of acceptance of 
such offering by workers. This could be on account of getting better 
employment opportunities elsewhere, illness or any other relevant 
factor.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee are concerned to note that the allocation of funds under 
MGNREGA have been kept static at Rs. 86,000 crore since the Revised 
Estimates for 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured employment to masses of 
rural poor and downtrodden of the society, the Committee are of the view that 
proper implementation of the scheme totally hinges upon timely and adequate 
allocation of funds to all the States/UTs. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
are unable to comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation of 
funds under MGNREGA since 2023-24. MGNREGA being a demand driven 
scheme, the Committee in their Report had recommended Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD), that the requirement for fund allocation should be 
looked afresh and the funds can be raised at RE stage accordingly. In their 
Action Taken Reply the DoRD states that “The release of funds to States/UTs 
is a continuous and demand-driven process. The Central Government remains 

 
 
 
4 
 
committed to ensuring the timely availability of funds based on the actual 
requirement for work on the ground. As and when additional financial 
requirements arise, this Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of 
Finance for the provision of requisite funds to ensure uninterrupted 
implementation of the Scheme.” The Committee find the reply stereotypical in 
nature, delineating only the provisions of the scheme without addressing the 
core issue with the seriousness it warrants. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
there is an immediate need for a much more concerted and synchronised 
action between the Nodal Ministry and Ministry of Finance to ensure 
uninterrupted implementation of the scheme. In view of this, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation for increased allocation of funds to MGNREGA 
to achieve its targets. 
II. Disbursement of Unemployment Allowance 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 With regard to the disbursement of Unemployment Allowance, the Committee 
had recommended as follows: - 
"A key issue within MGNREGS is the non-payment of 
unemployment allowances to workers who are not provided with work 
within 15 days. Despite being a mandated provision, most states fail to 
implement it effectively, leaving workers without any financial relief. To 
address this issue the Committee, believe that a real-time tracking 
system must be introduced to ensure automatic processing and timely 
disbursement of unemployment allowances to intended beneficiaries. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend DoRD that it should 
ensure all possible measures including taking up the matter at the 
highest level with the concerned States/UTs so that the State 
Governments do not fail in their statutory duties to provide the timely 
unemployment allowance to the MGNREGA workers." 
  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under: - 
 "As per Section 7(1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 “If an applicant for employment 
under the Scheme is not provided such employment within fifteen days 
of receipt of his application seeking employment or from the date on 

 
 
 
5 
 
which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance 
application, whichever is later, he/she shall be entitled to a daily 
unemployment allowance in accordance with this section.” Payment of 
unemployment allowance is the liability of the State Government.  
 To ensure that States fulfill their statutory obligations through 
proper implementation of all provisions of the act including section 7(1), 
this Ministry has taken various steps which includes, Mid-Term Review 
meetings, Common Review Mission, Empowered Committee meetings, 
Labour budget revision meetings, National Level monitoring visits, 
monthly review meetings, field visits, etc. In addition to this, advisories 
and updated guidelines including Annual Master Circular are issued 
from time to time to States/UTs for adhering to the provisions of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
 It is also mentioned that as per Para 12(1), unemployment 
allowance is to be calculated automatically through the Management 
Information System (MIS) and the Programme Officer may reject the 
same only under circumstances of force majeure. Additionally, as 
outlined in Para 12(2) and (3), there are clear provisions for 
accountability at the levels of the Programme Officer and District 
Programme Coordinator including written justifications and inclusion in 
the Annual Report to the State Council. 
 The Ministry remains committed to engaging with all 
stakeholders including State Governments and technical agencies to 
ensure that Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers receive their due 
entitlements in a timely and effective manner. In line with this 
commitment, the Department will continue to work closely with all 
stakeholders to uphold the rights of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers 
and ensure the effective implementation of the provision of 
unemployment allowance across the country." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11  The Committee took note of the relevant section 7(1) of the Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA which categorically entails the provision of daily 
unemployment allowance to such labourers under MGNREGA who do not get 
work within fifteen days of his/her applications receipt. Having taken into 
account of extremely non-satisfactory implementation of this provision and 
also taking cognizance of the role of State in this regard, the Committee had 
recommended the DoRD to ensure the actual enforcement of this provision at 
ground level. In their action taken reply, the Department of Rural Development 

 
 
 
6 
 
have submitted that advisories have been issued to the States for compliance 
with the provisions of the Act. The Committee find this response of the 
Department of Rural Development unacceptable and stereotypical in nature. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that MGNREGA being a Centrally 
Sponsored scheme with Department of Rural Development as the nodal 
agency, simply shrugging off the non-implementation of the provisions by 
shifting the entire onus upon the States is perhaps not a pragmatic approach 
reflected by the Department. Much more is expected from the Department of 
Rural Development to pro-actively ensure the in-toto application of the 
provision of the unemployment allowance and make it applicable in reality by 
ensuring stricter mechanism of monitoring and supervision. Thus, the 
Committee reiterate its recommendation regarding the actual enforcement of 
this provision at the ground level to achieve the main objective of the scheme 
i.e. to enhance the livelihood security in Rural areas. 
III. Revision of Wage Rates 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.12  In the context of revision of wage rates, the Committee had recommended as 
below: - 
“One of the major concern of the Committee is about the failure 
of wages to keep up with inflation. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) wages remain below 
subsistence levels, making it difficult for workers to sustain themselves. 
The base wage rates under the MGNREGS should be revised to 
ensure they align with current economic realities and provide respectful 
wages to rural workers. At least ₹400 per day should be provided as 
wages, as the current rates are inadequate to meet even basic daily 
expenses. Without a fair wage, the scheme fails in its objective of 
providing economic security to rural workers. To address the economic 
disparities and to ensure that wages keep pace with inflation, the 
Committee again strongly recommend that, the base wage rates must 
be revised immediately and linked to an appropriate inflation index. 
Wage rates under MGNREGS should be revised in line with inflation 
and the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL) to 

 
 
 
7 
 
prevent stagnant wages and discourage the use of machinery over 
manual labour.” 
 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“Central Government has a clear statutory framework for 
determining wage rates under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005. Section 
6(1) of the Act empowers the Central Government to notify the wage 
rates for beneficiaries, while Section 6(2) specifies that until the Central 
Government sets a wage rate, the minimum wages fixed by the State 
Government for agricultural labor under the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948, will apply. Since the financial year 2011-12, the wage rate under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has been determined using the Consumer 
Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) as the basis for annual 
revisions.  
The CPI-AL, calculated and notified by the Labour Bureau, 
Shimla, is a well-established and widely accepted measure for tracking 
inflation in the agricultural sector. It captures changes in the cost of 
living for agricultural laborers, ensuring that Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
wages remain inflation-linked. The Government revises wage rates 
annually, applying the incremental value derived from CPI-AL to the 
base rate. Furthermore, if the calculated wage rate for a state is lower 
than that of the previous year, the previous year's wage rate is 
protected, ensuring that beneficiaries do not experience wage 
reductions. This mechanism ensures consistent alignment with inflation 
and protects workers' incomes.  
The Government remains committed to improving the livelihoods 
of rural masses dependent on Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. While the 
current mechanism ensures inflation-adjusted wages, the concerns 
raised by the Committee regarding the revision of the base year is 
noted.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 The Committee noted that one of the pertinent issues that had bothered 
the flagship scheme of MGNREGA and has been for long, a matter of debate, 
was concerning with the disparity of wages guaranteed under MGNREGA and 
the minimum wage rates in the States. Delving into the issue with serious 
concern, the Committee felt that it was high time that for the welfare of the 
beneficiaries of MGNREGA and keeping in consideration the ever-increasing 
cost of living, a semblance of equity was required to be immediately brought 

 
 
 
8 
 
between the different wage rates, and hike in wages under MGNREGA be 
made accordingly. Thus, the Committee had strongly implored upon the 
Department of Rural Development to consider the revision of base wage rates 
under MGRNEGA promptly. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, 
the reply of the Department in this regard reflects a very casual approach 
towards an issue of such enormity. The Department of Rural Development 
have merely quoted the Section 6 of the MGNREGA Act, 2005 by virtue of 
which the Central Government may notify the wages under MGNREGA. The 
Committee do not find their reply helpful in any way to resolve the issues of 
revision of wage rates and disparity of wages under MGNREGA. Therefore, 
the Committee feel that instead of enlightening the Committee with the 
wordings of Section 6, the Department of Rural Development is expected to 
devise an innovative and robust mechanism to resolve the issue of disparity 
of wages and hence, the Committee strongly reiterate its recommendation 
regarding the revision of wage rates and at the same time also strongly urge 
DoRD to take all effective measures to ensure the provision of providing at 
least Rs. 400 as minimum wage to all beneficiaries, earnestly for socio-
economic betterment of rural workers across the country. 
IV. Pendencies in Wage and Material Component 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
1.15  In the context of pendencies in wage and material component, the Committee 
had recommended as below: - 
“The Committee are concerned about the persistent delays in 
the disbursement of the Centre’s share of funds under the wage and 
material components of MGNREGS across multiple States and Union 
Territories. As per the information provided by the Department of Rural 
Development during the examination of the DFG of the Ministry as of 
15.02.2025, the pending liabilities stand at ₹12,219.18 crore in wages, 
₹11,227.09 crore in material components and total pending liabilities 

 
 
 
9 
 
are ₹23,446.27 crore. This accounts for 27.26% of the current budget, 
meaning that more than one-fourth of the allocated funds will be used 
to clear previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual working budget 
for the current financial year is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore, 
significantly limiting the scheme’s capacity to function effectively and 
meet its primary objective of preventing rural distress and ensuring 
livelihood security. Therefore, the Committee urge the Department of 
Rural Development to take immediate steps to ensure the timely 
release of the Centre’s share of funds under wages and materials. The 
Department must strengthen coordination with State Governments and 
adopt effective measures to prevent further delays in disbursement.” 
 
1.16 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) which is a demand driven wage 
employment Scheme provides livelihood security, i.e. fall-back options 
for livelihood for the rural households, when no better employment 
opportunity is available.  
 Under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, during the financial year 
2024–25, a total of 286.29 crore person days were generated and 1.55 
crore new job cards were issued. During FY 2024-25 total of 5.79 crore 
households were provided employment and an amount of Rs. 
85,058.99 crore was released, which includes Rs. 63,487.06 crore for 
the wage component and Rs. 21,571.93 crore for material and admin 
components. While wage payments are directly credited by the Central 
Government to the account of beneficiaries through the Direct Benefit 
Transfer protocol the Material and Admin components are released to 
the States/UTs.  
 For the financial year 2024–25, a budget allocation of Rs. 
86,000 crore was made for the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, which was 
the highest ever at the Budget Estimate (BE) stage since the scheme's 
inception. For the financial year 2025–26, the Government has retained 
this allocation at Rs. 86,000 crore, ensuring continued support for the 
scheme. Fund release to the States/Union Territories under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS is a continuous process and Central Government is 
committed to making funds available to States and Union Territories 
based on the demand for employment on the ground. As and when 
additional financial requirements arise, this Ministry continues to 
engage with the Ministry of Finance for the provision of additional funds 
to ensure uninterrupted implementation of the Scheme.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17 MGNREGA has long been plagued with financial troubles. The 
Committee were surprised with revelation that an amount of Rs. 12,219.18 

 
 
 
10 
 
crore was lying as pending wages while Rs. 11,227.09 crore remained 
uncleared against the material component for a welfare oriented schematic 
intervention like MGNREGA. This accounts for 27.26% of the current budget, 
meaning that more than one- fourth of the allocated funds will be used to 
clear previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual working budget for the 
current financial year is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore. The Committee feel that 
both the aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand driven nature of the scheme and 
creation of assets under the scheme are severely hampered through such 
pendencies. While being deeply concerned with the adverse impact of such 
pendency and its impact on upliftment of rural labourers, the Committee had 
strongly recommended DoRD to take immediate steps to ensure the timely 
release of the Centre’s share of funds under wages and materials, strengthen 
coordination with State Governments and adopt innovative measures to 
prevent further delays in disbursement. The response furnished by DoRD is 
lacking of any concrete measure that have been taken and furthermore, it is 
silent particularly upon the existing pendencies. Simply, it has again 
demonstrated the same old stereotypical approach by stating that “funds are 
released to the States/UTs is a continuous and demand-driven process”. It is 
unfathomable as to how a specific query of the Committee can be sidelined 
and remained silent and evasive on such important matter. There is an 
imperative need to gear up the machinery of the Department to entail all 
measures for its rectification expeditiously. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
reiterate their recommendation for the eradication of wage and material 
pendencies under MGNREGA through efficacious measures of financial 
prudence to achieve the goals of the scheme at the earliest. 

 
 
 
11 
 
V. Increase in Compensation Rate for Delayed Wages 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.18  In the context of increase in compensation rate for delayed wages, the 
Committee had recommended as below: - 
“The Committee are concerned about the chronic delays in 
wage payments which continue to plague the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, creating uncertainty 
for workers who cannot afford to wait for their earnings. The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that the current compensation rate for delayed 
wages (0.05% of unpaid wages) should be increased to ensure timely 
remuneration for workers. To resolve this, both Stage 1 (FTO 
generation) and Stage 2 (crediting of wages to accounts) must be 
expedited to ensure that payments reach workers without unnecessary 
delays. Furthermore, the Committee also believe that the Department 
of Rural Development should also publish a transparent report detailing 
the total pending wages, approved payments, and outstanding 
amounts, ensuring greater accountability. Material wage payments, 
which are equally crucial for sustaining MGNREGS projects, also face 
significant delays, affecting local suppliers and laborers. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that timely disbursement of these 
payments is essential to maintain trust in the scheme and ensure 
uninterrupted work execution. By addressing these gaps, the 
Department of Rural Development can reinforce MGNREGS as a 
reliable and effective social safety net for rural workers.” 
 
1.19 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“Under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), Schedule II 
stipulates that if the payment of wages is delayed beyond fifteen days 
from the closure of the muster roll, workers are entitled to 
compensation at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid wages per day of 
delay. This provision is aimed at ensuring accountability and timely 
disbursal of wages to rural workers under the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS. 
 The Act empowers the Central Government, under Section 
29(1), to amend Schedule I or Schedule II through a notification. This 
includes the authority to revise the rate of compensation for delayed 
payments. Any such revision is subject to careful evaluation of various 
factors, including administrative feasibility, financial implications and 
the broader objective of ensuring prompt wage payments under the 
scheme. 
Ministry continues to monitor the effectiveness of the existing 
framework in consultation with stakeholders. It remains committed to 
strengthening mechanisms for timely wage payments under the 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 

 
 
 
12 
 
It is also submitted that to ensure timely wage payments, the 
Government of India has issued a detailed Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) to the States. The Ministry in coordination with the 
States/UTs has been making concerted efforts to improve the timely 
payment of wages. States/UTs have been advised to generate pay 
orders in time. The Ministry has taken various steps to ensure timely 
payment of wages to workers under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
These include: 
(i) Upscaling of National Electronic Fund Management System 
(Ne-FMS) 
(ii) Intensive consultation with State Governments and other 
stakeholders to strategize timely payment of wages, verification 
of pending compensation claims etc. 
(iii) Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure for monitoring 
of timely payment and payment of compensation. 
(iv) During various meetings with States/UTs, which include 
Meeting for finalisation of Annual Action Plan, Mid-Term Review 
Meetings, Monthly Review Meetings and visit of Senior Officers 
to States/UTs, matters regarding the timely payment of wages 
and payment of delay compensation is regularly reviewed. 
(v) Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) under MGNREGS- 
To ensure timely payment of wages to the workers under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and to address the issues arising due 
to frequent change of Bank account numbers by the 
beneficiaries and subsequent non-updation by the Programme 
Officers, it was decided to implement Aadhar Payment Bridge 
System (APBS). Through APBS, rejection of transactions due to 
the frequent changing of accounts could be minimized and 
genuine workers can get their wages in time. It also helps in 
weeding out fake beneficiaries under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.  
(vi) National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App- In order to 
ensure transparency and accountability in the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), the Ministry has decided 
that States/UTs shall ensure capturing of attendance at the 
worksite through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) 
App  with two-time stamped, geo-tagged photographs of the 
workers in a day for all the works (except Individual Beneficiary 
Work) through NMMS w.e.f 1st January. 2023.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.20 The Committee find that the Department of Rural Development in their 
reply have reiterated the existing statutory provisions and administrative 
measures undertaken to improve the timeline of wage payments. The 

 
 
 
13 
 
Committee acknowledge and appreciate the steps taken by the Department, 
however, note that the reply does not specifically address the core 
recommendation regarding revision of the compensation rate for delayed 
wages; the reply merely states that the existing framework is being monitored 
and that any revision would be subject to evaluation, without indicating any 
concrete timeline, proposal or consultative process. The Committee reiterate 
that delayed wage payments undermine the very objective of MGNREGS 
which is intended to provide timely livelihood support to rural households. 
The existing compensation rate of 0.05% per day is too nominal to serve as an 
effective deterrent against systemic delays, and does not adequately 
compensate workers for whom timely wages are critical for subsistence. The 
Committee, further recommend that the DoRD undertake a time-bound review 
of the compensation rate in consultation with States and other stakeholders 
and submit a concrete proposal for revision at the earliest/within three 
months. The Department may establish a clear accountability framework for 
delays at both stages of wage disbursement, publish a transparent report of 
total pending wages and compensation and ensure timely material payments 
with proper monitoring. These recommendations would reinforce MGNREGS 
as a robust social safety net by addressing the root causes of delays while 
leveraging the Government’s established tools and commitments. 
Implementation could begin with a stakeholder workshop to evaluate 
feasibility, ensuring minimal disruption to ongoing operations. 
VI. Rectification of Technical Glitches in NMMS 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 

 
 
 
14 
 
1.21  In the context of rectification of technical glitches in NMMS, the Committee 
had recommended as below: - 
“National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App was launched 
on 21 May, 2021 with an aim to ensure more transparency in the 
implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the States/UTs, a 
provision of capturing of attendance at worksite through National 
Mobile Monitoring System App (NMMS App) with two time Geo-tagged 
photographs of the beneficiaries in a day had been started for all the 
worksites (except Individual Beneficiary Scheme/Project) and made 
these attendance in public domain which increases citizen oversight of 
the programme besides potentially enabling faster processing of 
payments. The Committee note with concern that the National Mobile 
Monitoring System (NMMS), introduced to track attendance, has faced 
significant failures, particularly in offline mode. Since many rural areas 
suffer from poor network connectivity, a stable offline mode must be 
developed immediately to prevent wage denials caused by technical 
failures. Workers should not be penalized due to system malfunctions. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that capturing 
attendance on NMMS should be put on hold till the technical glitches 
occurred in the system is not rectified completely.” 
 
1.22 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“In order to ensure transparency and accountability in the 
implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), the Ministry has 
decided that States/UTs shall ensure capturing of attendance at the 
worksite through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App with 
two-time stamped, geo-tagged photographs of the workers in a day for 
all the works (except Individual Beneficiary Work) through NMMS w.e.f 
1st January 2023.  
 Further, to avoid any inconvenience to the workers due to 
NMMS, it has been decided that in case any worksite is not located in 
network covered area or attendance could not be uploaded due to any 
other network issue then attendance can be captured in offline mode 
and can be uploaded once the device comes into network covered 
area. In case of exceptional circumstances owing to which attendance 
could not be uploaded, the provision for exemption also exists at the 
Gram Panchayat level & Block level after taking approval of the Block 
level & DPC level accordingly. 
 To make the NMMS App more robust and user friendly, new 
enhancements have been done such as the provision of Eye blink 
facility, Head Count facility, Mate ID mapping with Muster roll and 
relaxation in proximity range in linear types of community works 
(permissible) etc. in the NMMS application. Usage of NMMS app has 
also helped to ensure timely payment of wages to the workers. 
 Any issues brought to the notice of Ministry concerning NMMS 
are attended on top priority basis and efforts are to made to resolve the 
same at the earliest. Further, continuous awareness campaigns and 

 
 
 
15 
 
training programs are being organized across States/UTs to familiarize 
workers/officials with the NMMS app.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.23 National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) app is a mobile and internet-
based platform. Due to non-availability of smart phones, irregular power 
supply and poor internet connectivity especially in rural and remote areas, the 
attendance of many MGNREGA workers is not getting recorded by the app. 
This is leading to a delay in the payment of the wages. The Committee, 
therefore, opine that NMMS app, though a right step in eradicating 
irregularities to certain extent, still has a long way to go in terms of its 
execution. The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the efforts made by 
DoRD to resolve the same at the earliest and to make the NMMS app more 
robust and user friendly. However, the Committee, are of the view that 
technology has to be user-friendly, smooth and appropriate and the burden 
on the worker should be less or minimal. A stable offline mode must be 
developed immediately to prevent wage denials caused by system 
malfunctions. So, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that DoRD 
should create awareness and provide adequate facilities to the MGNREGA 
beneficiaries to get them acquainted with the usage of the NMMS along with 
some other alternative should also remain in place for marking the attendance 
till the technical glitches occurred in the system is not rectified completely. 
VII. Job card Deletion 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
1.24  In the context of job card deletion, the Committee had recommended as 
below: - 

 
 
 
16 
 
“The Committee note that a persistent challenge in the 
implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme has been the deletion of job card. According to the 
Data furnished by the Department of Rural Development that in year 
2021-22 approximately 50.31 lakh job cards were deleted due to minor 
spelling errors or mismatches in Aadhar details from thereon the 
figures have not come down significantly and thousands of eligible 
workers are regularly being denied work under MGNREGS. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend that a system must be introduced 
by Department of Rural Development to allow manual verification and 
corrections so that workers are not unjustly removed from the program. 
The Committee also note that the Ministry has issued Standard 
operating Procedure (SoP) to all States/UTs with clear guidelines 
regarding deletion and restoration of job cards. The SoP emphasizes 
the importance of due process, including the publication of draft lists of 
job cards marked for deletion, verification at Gram Sabhas and the 
right of appeal for affected workers. The Committee hope that these 
measures are followed in the right earnest to ensure that the genuine 
beneficiaries are not excluded enabling the eligible rural households to 
reap the benefits of the scheme while preventing misuse of job cards.” 
 
1.25 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“A detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) on job card 
deletion and restoration has been issued by the Ministry of Rural 
Development to all States/UTs vide letter dated 24th January 2025. 
The SoP outlines the following: 
• Clearly defined conditions and procedures for the 
deletion/cancellation of job cards/workers. 
•  Grievance redressal mechanisms to address worker concerns. 
•  Provision for appeal to safeguard workers’ interests - job card 
holders/workers who wish to appeal against the decision of the 
Programme Officer resulting in the deletion of their job card/worker 
may file an appeal with the Block Development Officer. 
  States/UTs have been requested to ensure strict compliance 
with the SoP and to implement its provisions at all levels. They are also 
advised to instruct all relevant field functionaries to adhere to the 
guidelines detailed in the document. 
 Simultaneously, necessary provisions are being developed in 
NREGASoft in alignment with the SoP.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.26 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA), 2005, guarantees 100 days of wage employment in a financial 
year to every rural household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled 

 
 
 
17 
 
manual work. Job cards are unique identity documents issued to eligible 
households, allowing registered workers (wage seekers) to demand and 
receive work. Deletion of job cards or individual workers from them is a 
sensitive process aimed at maintaining the scheme's integrity by removing 
ineligible entries, but it must strictly adhere to legal safeguards to protect 
workers' right to work. Arbitrary or unverified deletions have been a concern, 
leading to recent central guidelines. The Committee acknowledge and 
appreciate the Department of Rural Development's SOPs on job card deletion 
and restoration dated January 24, 2025, which includes clearly defined rules, 
grievance redressal mechanisms and appeal provisions to the Block 
Development Officer to safeguard workers interest. The directive for strict 
compliance by States/UTs and the ongoing development of aligned provisions 
in NREGASoft are welcome steps toward curbing arbitrary deletions, 
particularly those stemming from minor Aadhaar mismatches or spelling 
errors, which led to the removal of approximately 50.31 lakh job cards in 2021-
22 alone. However, the Committee, are of the view that while the reply outlines 
procedural frameworks, it lacks specifics on timelines for NREGASoft 
integration, monitoring mechanisms for state-level adherence, and metrics for 
evaluating the SOP's impact on reducing wrongful exclusions. With deletions 
continuing to affect thousands of eligible workers and exacerbating rural 
unemployment, these gaps necessitate stronger enforcement and oversight. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that DoRD should 
take all measures to speed up NREGASoft updates to prevent delays in 
payments and exclusions, boost monitoring and training to ensure even 
implementation across States/UTs and strengthen grievance redressal and 

 
 
 
18 
 
appeal processes by setting a 30-day appeal deadlines and adding a helpline 
and portal for fast Aadhaar issue reviews to give quick relief to affected 
workers. The Committee also desire from the Department to conduct an 
independent impact assessment of effectiveness of SOPs and based on the 
evaluation revise the SOPs if needed, with incentives (e.g., additional funding 
allocations) for states achieving over 90% compliance in verifications and 
appeals. 
  

 
 
 
19 
 
VIII. Increase in Number of Days under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
1.27  In the context of increase in number of days under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended as below: - 
“While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their 
deliberations, the Committee were apprised about demands from 
various quarters of the country regarding the increase in the number of 
days from 100. The Committee also take cognizance of the provision of 
the scheme through which State Governments can request an 
additional 50 days of work under MGNREGS to meet the need for work 
in cases of exigencies arising out of natural calamities. The Committee 
take note of this existing provision and is of the view that the 
beneficiary of the scheme being the numerous rural people. The 
scheme needs to be revamped, keeping in view the changing times 
and emerging challenges. The Committee urge the Ministry to explore 
the options that could increase the number of guaranteed working days 
under MGNREGA to at least 150 days from the current 100 days. In 
light of this, the Committee strongly recommend the Department of 
Rural Development to review the scheme of MGNREGA in such a way 
like diversifying the nature of works that could ensure an increase in 
the number of guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days.” 
 
1.28 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“The existing provision of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, 
provides for guarantee of at least one hundred days of wage 
employment in every financial year to every eligible rural household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
 The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of 
wage employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every 
Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided that these 
households have no other private property except for the land rights 
provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
 In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an 
additional 50 days of wage employment in a financial year in 
drought/natural calamity-affected notified rural areas. Further, as per 
Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for 
providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed 
under the Act from their own funds.  
  Details of National average days of employment provided per 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial 
years 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 2023-24 and 2024-25 are given 
below. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
20 
 
 
  
 
 
A
s
 As per NREGASoft 
  
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of 
employment per household in each financial year in the last five 
financial years has remained around 50 days. Therefore, the Ministry is 
emphasizing generating awareness about the provisions of the 
Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
 It is also mentioned that this Ministry reiterates its commitment 
to the objectives of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The Ministry continues 
to engage with all stakeholders, including the State Governments, to 
address these concerns within the framework of the existing legislation 
and available resources.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.29 The Act was notified in 2005 and the entire country was covered by 
April, 2008. Almost 17 years have elapsed since the full implementation of the 
Act. With each passing year, the need for change has been felt in the Act so 
as to keep pace with the changing demands and emerging challenges. 
Therefore, the Committee are of the firm view that the scheme needs to be 
revamped. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommended Department of 
Rural development (DoRD) to further diversify the nature of works under 
MGNREGA in such a manner and through such mechanisms that could 
ensure an increase in the number of guaranteed days of work from existing 
100 days to 150 days. The Department’s emphasis on awareness generation 
and stakeholder consultations is commendable but insufficient as a 
standalone strategy. It fails to address systemic barriers such as delayed 
 Financial Year 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21  
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
50.23 52.08 47.83 50.07 51.52 

 
 
 
21 
 
fund releases, limited work diversification, and inadequate infrastructure for 
demand registration. As per the data furnished by the DoRD, the average days 
of employment per household in each financial year during the last five 
financial years has been hovering around 50 days, which is woefully 
inadequate and reflect a persistent shortfall that deprives rural families of the 
full entitlement amid escalating unemployment and climate vulnerabilities. 
Keeping all these things in view, the Committee reiterate the earlier 
recommendation and call upon the DoRD to relook in the issue and come up 
with the effective and innovative measures e.g., launch a time bound pilot 
programs in at least 100 districts with the highest rural unemployment rates, 
incorporate diversified permissible works such as climate-resilient agriculture 
(e.g., watershed management, agroforestry), propose a 25% hike in 
MGNREGA's budgetary outlay for FY 2026-27 to support the additional 50 
days, with 15% earmarked as performance-linked grants to States exceeding 
75 average days per household  and last but not the least, mandatory 
integration of convergence with schemes like Jal Jeevan Mission and PM-
KUSUM. The Committee view these recommendations as imperative to 
reclaim MGNREGA's promise, transforming it from a distress-driven program 
into a proactive engine for inclusive growth. 
IX. Aadhaar-Based Payment System under MGNREGS 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.30  In the context of Adhaar-based payment system under MGNREGS, the 
Committee had recommended as below: - 
“The Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS) facilitates the 
direct transfer of wages to the bank accounts of unskilled workers 
under MGNREGS, even in cases where beneficiaries frequently 
change bank accounts or fail to update their new account details with 
the concerned Programme Officer. This system has been effective in 

 
 
 
22 
 
eliminating fraudulent claims and ensuring that only genuine 
beneficiaries receive wage payments while acknowledging and 
appreciating the role of ABPS in enhancing transparency and 
efficiency. The Committee still firmly believe that this technological 
intervention should not be made mandatory due to operational 
challenges that have led to exclusions of genuine beneficiaries. In 
several instances, workers have been wrongfully removed from the 
system due to discrepancies between their Aadhaar details and job 
card records. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development ensure that the Aadhaar-Based 
Payment System remains optional and that alternative payment 
mechanisms are made available. This would ensure that workers 
without Aadhaar or those facing biometric authentication issues 
continue to receive their rightful wages without compromising the 
integrity of the scheme.” 
 
1.31 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD: - 
“To ensure timely payment of wages to the workers under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and to reduce the rejection of transactions 
due to the frequent changing of accounts, and subsequent non-
updation by the Programme Officers, it was decided to implement 
Aadhar Payment Bridge System (APBS). APBS conversion is a major 
reform process where benefits are credited directly into the bank 
accounts based on the Aadhaar of the workers under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS, through Aadhaar Payment Bridge System, cutting several 
layers in the delivery process. APBS helps in better targeting, 
increasing the efficiency of the system and reducing the delays in 
payments, ensuring greater inclusion by curbing leakages and thereby, 
controlling expenditure and promoting greater accountability & 
transparency and helps to maximize the performance of DBT. 
As on 30.06.2025, Aadhar seeding has been done for 11.99 
crore active workers, which is 99.63% of total active workers (12.03 
crore). In case of non-eligible workers, whose APBS enablement is still 
pending, states/UTs have been requested to sensitize all banks to 
ensure timely seeding of Aadhar numbers of NREGS beneficiaries into 
NPCI mapper. In this regard, it is also submitted that if any transaction 
returns from NPCI/Bank with any valid reason for rejection under ABPS 
then that transaction can be regenerated from NACH (National 
Automated Clearing House) payment mode. Therefore, there also 
exists an alternative solution at NREGASoft in the form of NACH 
Payment mode (i.e. Account Based) for the regeneration of failed 
transactions under ABPS. States/UTs have been continuously 
sensitized regarding this. 
From 1st January, 2024 till 25th Feburary,2025 only 0.41% of 
transactions have been rejected with reasons such as no such account 
or account closed in case of APBS, whereas the rate of rejection was 
as high as 8.50% in case of NACH payment mode.” 
 

 
 
 
23 
 
  

 
 
 
24 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.32 The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the efforts being 
undertaken by the DoRD in switching to completely Aadhar Payment Bridge 
System (APBS) for the beneficiaries under MGNREGA. The aim to bring in 
greater accountability and transparency, better targeting and reduce 
misappropriation of funds through the usage of technology is a welcome step 
and perhaps the need of the hour.  However, the Committee remain concerned 
about the residual risks of exclusion for genuine beneficiaries—such as 
discrepancies in Aadhaar-job card linkages, biometric failures, or unseeded 
cases (affecting ~0.37% of workers)—which could undermine the scheme's 
universal access mandate under MGNREGA. The reported 8.50% rejection 
rate in NACH payment mode, while higher, highlights the need for robust 
backups without over-reliance on APBS. One should always remember that 
the target community of MGNREGA are mainly less educated, technologically 
challenged and having less fiscal management know-how. To build on these 
advancements and to mitigate ongoing operational and practical challenges, 
the Committee therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that APBS 
remains optional with flexible alternatives like easy switch to NACH or pilot 
UPI for high-risk workers (e.g., elderly workers or those in remote areas with 
poor biometric success rates). This would ensure that workers and especially 
high-risk workers without Aadhaar or those facing biometric authentication 
issues continue to receive their rightful wages without compromising the 
integrity of the scheme. Also, the payment of wages should be made on time 
as delayed payment in MGNREGS causes significant distress to rural house-

 
 
 
25 
 
holds, leading to deferred consumption, increased debt and reduced work 
demand. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Employment Opportunities for Vulnerable Workers under MGNREGS 
2.1 Ensuring fair and gainful employment opportunities for SC/ST and women 
workers is crucial for the success of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). Despite its objective to uplift marginalized 
communities, participation of SC/ST and women workers remains inconsistent 
across districts. A district-wise study must be conducted to ensure that these 
communities receive equal work opportunities and benefits under the scheme, 
thereby fulfilling its intended goal of social and economic inclusion. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that there should be a level playing field in terms of providing 
equal work opportunities to ensure gainful employment for most marginalized and 
vulnerable sections of the society for their overall holistic development. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.2 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) expresses its gratitude to the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee for valuable observations regarding the participation of 
Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Women workers under the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS) and appreciates the emphasis on ensuring equitable access to employment 
opportunities for marginalized sections of society. 
  The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA), 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood 
security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one 
hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage 
employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household 
in a forest area, provided that these households have no other private property 
except for the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days 
of wage employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified 
rural areas. Further, as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may 
make provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the period 
guaranteed under the Act from their own funds.  

 
 
 
27 
 
  To provide adequate employment opportunities to rural households including 
Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled Tribes (ST) households under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS, the Central Government has initiated several measures to generate 
awareness about the scheme. These include, (i) to initiate  appropriate Information 
Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns including wall paintings for the wide 
dissemination of the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005, (ii) to expand scope and coverage of demand registration 
system to ensure that demand for work under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA does not go 
unregistered, (iii) prepare plans in a participatory mode and approve them in the 
Gram Sabha, (iv) Organization of ‘Rozgar Diwas’. 
  It is also mentioned that the households can register themselves under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and seek employment at multiple fora including the Gram 
Panchayats. The field authorities have been instructed to organize Rojgar Diwas at 
least once every month for covering willing unskilled labourers. 
The rate of participation of Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) 
in Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the last five financial years and current financial 
year 2025-26 (as on 27.06.2025) is given below: 
 
Financial Year 2025-26 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 
Percentage of SC persondays 
(%)  17.87 18.63 19.18 19.55 19.17 19.87 
Percentage of ST persondays 
(%) 18.71 18.09 17.61 18.02 18.33 17.95 
 
With regard to women participation in Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, it is 
mentioned that the act provides that priority shall be given to women in such a way 
that at least one-third of the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and 
requested for work. Further Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a gender-neutral scheme 
which promotes participation of women by providing wage parity with men, provision 
of separate schedule of rates of wages for women, facilities for crèche, work-side 
sheds for children, and child care services. In convergence with National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), women mates have also been introduced, which again 
facilitate the participation of women. The Scheme also endeavors to provide 
employment near the residence of the beneficiaries. 
The rate of participation of women workers in Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
during the last five financial years and current financial year 2025-26 (as on 
27.06.2025) is given below: 
 
Financial Year 2025-26 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 
Percentage of women 
Persondays (%) 56.38 58.09 58.9 57.47 54.82 53.19 
(As per NREGASoft) 
Data from the past years indicates that a significant proportion of total 
persondays generated under the scheme have consistently been contributed by 
SC/ST and women workers. The National average participation of women has 
consistently exceeded 50% and SC/ST participation has been robust in states with 
higher SC/ST populations. 

 
 
 
28 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 

 
 
 
29 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Skill Development under Project “UNNATI 
2.3 The project “UNNATI” was launched in FY 2019-20 with an aim to enhance 
the skill base of 2 lakh Mahatma Gandhi NREGA beneficiaries in five years i.e., upto 
March,2025. According to the data furnished by Department of Rural Development, 
about 79,643 candidates have been trained so far. The Committee acknowledge and 
appreciate this fact but are of the view that the project has suffered from poor 
outreach and ineffective implementation at ground level. Therefore, to maximize its 
impact, the Committee recommend that, there must be a structured monitoring 
system in place to track the progress of skill training programmes, job placements, 
and income improvements among beneficiaries. Without proper oversight, the 
project risks becoming another underutilized initiative that fails to achieve its 
objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Project “UNNATI”, which was launched in December 2019 is a skill 
development initiative targeting adult member (18-45 years) of rural households who 
have completed 100 days of work under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA from FY 2018-
2019 onwards. The aim of the project is to enhance the livelihoods of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA workers by imparting skills to support either self-employment or 
wage employment. The project is implemented in convergence with the Rural Skills 
Division for DDU-GKY, RSETI and Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for 
Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK). 
  The initially approved period of the project was up to 31st March 2023 but the 
progress of the scheme was impacted due to Covid-19 pandemic during the 
Financial Years 2020-21 and 2021-22 as majority of training centres of DDU-
GKY/RSETI/KVK were closed. Another contributing factor was the eligibility criteria 
of beneficiary as “Households completed 100 days in FY 2018-19 were only eligible 
for training." 
  Accordingly, the tenure of project was extended upto 31.03.2025 and base 
year for selecting beneficiary was revised and all the households who have 
completed 100 days of employment after FY 2018-19 were made eligible to be 
trained under program UNNATI from Financial year 2023-2024. 
  The pace of the project has significantly increased over the last two years, 
starting from FY 2022-2023 and total of 90,894 beneficiaries have been trained till 
31st March, 2025. The Project is under continuous monitoring at the MoRD level, 
which involves reviewing the progress of all States/UTs. Furthermore, the progress 
of the UNNATI project in relation to trained beneficiaries and the tracking of UNNATI 
candidates, including attendance, account verification through PFMS, wage list and 
FTO is monitored on NREGAsoft. 

 
 
 
30 
 
  
The Rural Skills Division,DoRD is already having a mechanism for tracking 
candidates placed in the DDU-GKY scheme. In order to monitor the beneficiaries 
who are self-employed under Project UNNATI through RSETI & KVK, the Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA division is developing a detailed State-wise report in coordination 
with the Rural Skills Division of the DoRD, which is currently in progress. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Strengthening of Social Audits and Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
2.5 The Committee emphasize the critical role of social audits in ensuring 
transparency, accountability, and public oversight in the implementation of 
government schemes. Given their significance, the Committee are of the firm view 
that there should be an increase in financial allocation for conducting comprehensive 
social audits across all welfare programs. The scope of social audits must be 
expanded to cover all major government schemes, with greater community 
participation to strengthen grassroots monitoring and evaluation. To achieve this, 
capacity-building initiatives should be introduced to train and educate citizens on the 
audit process, equipping them with the necessary skills to actively participate and 
oversee and to assess the implementation of schemes in their areas. Furthermore, 
the stringent measures must be enforced to enhance transparency and prevent 
mismanagement. This includes the mandatory use of audio and video recordings 
during social audit processes, ensuring that irregularities are systematically 
documented and addressed. The Committee reiterate that, to improve transparency 
and accountability, social audits must be strengthened across all districts, with their 
findings made public. The Committee note that Social Audit Units (SAUs), the 
State/UT Government have planned Social Audit of 2.57 lakh Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) during 2024-25 and as on 27.02.2025, 1.79 lakh (67%) GPs have been 
audited at least once by SAUs/State/UT Governments in FY 2024-25. The 
Committee desire that a Social Audit Calendar should be introduced by Department 
of Rural Development to ensure regular audits, while a test audit system must be 
implemented to verify existing audits in case of complaints. If discrepancies or 
corruption are found, strict corrective actions should be taken against responsible 
officials. In this regard the Committee note that out of the 740 districts where the 

 
 
 
31 
 
MGNREGS is operational only 585 ombudsmen are in place. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry should take all the necessary steps for the recruitment of 
ombudsmen in the remaining districts for the effective redressal of grievances and 
complaints. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Ministry of Rural Development has taken several steps to strengthen the 
Social Audits and Grievance Redressal Mechanism particularly under the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA). 
 
1. Institutional Mechanism, Social Audit Calendar and Funding Support 
 
Section 17 of the MGNREGA mandates the Gram Sabha to monitor the 
implementation of works and conduct regular social audits of all projects undertaken 
within the Gram Panchayat. To facilitate this, States are required to establish 
independent Social Audit Units (SAUs). These units facilitate the Social Audits by 
Gram Sabha.  
As per the Audit of Scheme Rules and the Audit Guidelines (AMC Para 
10.6.1), up to 0.5% of the 6% permissible administrative expenditure may be 
earmarked for the activities of the Social Audit Units. Funds are released to SAUs 
based on the submission of proposals in the prescribed format and subject to 
fulfillment of requisite conditions. 
At present, 27 States and 1 Union Territory have established SAUs. The 
Union Territories of Puducherry, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, and 
Ladakh have completed the registration process for setting up SAUs. The State of 
Goa and the Union Territories of Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep are 
yet to operationalize their SAUs. 
The conduct of Social Audits under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is being 
carried out as per the Social Audit Calendar. In the financial year 2024-25, it was 
planned to conduct social audits in 2.57 lakh Gram Panchayats (GPs) out of a total 
of 2.69 lakh GPs. As of 22.05.2025, social audits have been conducted in 2.10 lakh 
GPs (78.08%) at least once by the Gram Sabhas. 
States/UTs have been repeatedly advised during review meetings to expedite 
the establishment of SAUs, ensure the timely and effective conduct of Social Audits 
in every Gram Panchayat, and submit Action Taken Reports (ATRs) in a time-bound 
manner. 
 
2. Use of Technology to Enhance Transparency 
  
To strengthen transparency and documentation the Ministry has initiated the 
integration of NREGASoft (Social Audit MIS) with the Panchayat Nirnay App. This 
will enable the real-time capture of geo-tagged and time-stamped photographs of 
Social Audit Gram Sabhas, ensuring better tracking and verification of the audit 
process. The scaling up is currently underway and is expected to significantly 
enhance the credibility and impact of social audits. 
  

 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
3. Broadening the Scope of Social Audit 
  
Recognizing the need to expand the application of social audits beyond 
MGNREGA, a Joint Task Force on Streamlining Social Audit has been constituted 
under the chairpersonship of the Additional Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
(Local Governance Audit). The Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Task Force include: 
a. Modifying the current Auditing Standards of Social Audit so that it can be 
applicable to programmes of multiple Departments and Ministries mandating social 
audits. The task force may examine whether social audit can now be broad-based to 
cover the entire gamut of activities for the delivery of services and benefits at the 
grassroots level, not necessarily linked to individual schemes/funding sources.  
b. Developing norms for ensuring the financial, administrative and functional 
independence and autonomy of the Social Audit Units across the implementing 
Department/ Ministry.  
c. Defining norms of fund allocation and fund releases to Social Audit Units.  
d. Building minimum standards of training and capacity building of Social Audit 
Unit Resource Persons. 
e. Defining an inter-departmental administrative mechanism for reviewing social 
audits and action taken on social audit findings on a period basis and its reporting to 
the Legislature and the C&AG.  
  
4.  Strengthening of Grievance Mechanism 
  
As per Section 30, Schedule 1 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act 2005, there shall be an Ombudsperson for each district 
for receiving grievances, enquiring into and passing Awards as per the guidelines 
issued from time to time. In this regard, States have been directed to appoint an 
Ombudsperson in each district to receive complaints via electronic or physical mode.  
As per the NREGASoft, as on 22.05.2025, Ombudspersons have been 
appointed in 592 out of a total of 741 districts. 
For the recruitment of Ombudspersons in the remaining districts, this Ministry 
has advised the States/UTs during Monthly Review Meetings/Empowered 
Committee Meetings/Annual Action Plan meetings to expedite the appointment of 
Ombudspersons in all districts where vacancies exist.   
The recommendations of the Committee regarding increased financial 
allocation, greater community participation, capacity building and the mandatory use 
of audio-visual documentation have been noted and will be given due consideration 
in future planning, policy guidelines and budgetary proposals. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Inspection of Works under MGNREGS 

 
 
 
33 
 
2.7 The Committee believe that the use of photo and video documentation for 
work inspections must be mandated under MGNREGS to ensure authenticity in field 
reports. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that Department of Rural 
Development must come up with innovative technological interventions to ensure 
that engineers involved under MGNREGS work should be required to upload visual 
proof of site visits through some App, allowing for real-time tracking of inspections. 
This would help prevent fraudulent work claims and ensure that funds are being 
utilized efficiently. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Ministry appreciates the Committee's insightful recommendation 
regarding the integration of photo and video documentation to enhance the 
transparency and authenticity of work inspections under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
This Ministry fully agrees that leveraging technology is essential to curb fraudulent 
claims and to ensure effective utilization of public funds. In this regard, the Ministry 
has already initiated steps towards strengthening real-time monitoring mechanisms. 
Notably: 
1. Geo-tagging of the Assets: Geo-tagging in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has 
been started from 1st September 2016. The purpose of this is to know the actual 
status of the works being executed under the scheme. (as on 28.05.2025) more than 
6.32 crore assets have been geo-tagged, details of which have been made available 
in public domain.  
2. NMMS (National Mobile Monitoring System): In order to ensure transparency 
and accountability in the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), the Ministry has 
decided that States/UTs shall ensure capturing of attendance at the worksite through 
National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App  with two-time stamped, geo-
tagged photographs of the workers in a day for all the works (except Individual 
Beneficiary Work) through NMMS w.e.f 1st January. 2023. This real-time monitoring 
tool helps ensure that work execution is properly recorded and verified. 
3. GIS based Planning of GPs: The Ministry has initiated an integrated holistic 
planning of the Gram Panchayats based on watershed development principles (ridge 
to valley approach) using Geographical information system (GIS).  
4. SECURE (Software for Estimate Calculation Using Rural Rates for 
Employment): SECURE is implemented in 703 districts across 28 States and 4 UTs. 
Now, administrative and technical sanctions of works can be accorded online 
through SECURE, thus bring transparency and speeding up the process. 
5. Quality Monitoring Cell: Ministry regularly interact with all States/UTs for 
establishing Quality Monitoring Cell at State and District level for ensuring the quality 
and execution of the works as per the estimates.  
6. Area Officer App:  It is a digital initiative of the Government of India to ensure 
transparent and effective monitoring of rural development scheme implementation at 
the grassroots level. It provides a unified platform for officials at all levels to plan and 
manage field visits, select worksites for inspection, and record real-time 

 
 
 
34 
 
observations. The app enables State/UT officials to upload field visit reports and 
capture time-stamped, geo-tagged photos of worksites for further analysis and 
follow-up. Using AI/ML, the system also flags suspicious works for inspection, 
supporting targeted oversight. Overall, Area Officers App enhances transparency, 
automates routine tasks, enables data-driven decision-making, and empowers 
citizens in public service delivery. 
It is also mentioned that this Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the 
implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., 
Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget meetings, Labour Budget Revision meetings, 
Programme Review meetings. Central Employment Guarantee Council and State 
Employment Guarantee Councils periodically monitor implementation of the 
programme. State Technical Cells are constituted at various level in the States to 
regularly monitor the progress of works.  
The Ministry remains committed to strengthening transparency, accountability 
and efficiency in Mahatma Gandhi NREGS implementation through continuous 
innovation and robust use of digital technologies. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Conversion of Kaccha (Temporary) Work into Pakka (Permanent) Work under 
MGNREGS 
2.9 The Committee express concern about the completion of Kaccha (temporary) 
work under MGNREGS. Therefore, the Committee recommend that, once kaccha 
(temporary) work is completed, it should be converted into pakka (permanent) work 
wherever necessary to prevent repetitive work cycles and wastage of resources. 
Leaving kaccha work incomplete leads to unnecessary duplication of efforts and 
financial mismanagement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment Scheme, with an objective to 
provide not less than one hundred days of unskilled manual work as a guaranteed 
employment in every financial year to every household in rural areas as per demand, 
resulting in creation of productive assets of prescribed quality and durability.  
As per Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Section 4 (3), Para 4 (1), the 
focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works as categorized below: 
I. Category: A: Public works relating to Natural Resource Management: 
II.Category: B (Community assets or Individual assets) for vulnerable sections (only 
for households in Paragraph 5)  
III.Category C: Common Infrastructure 3[Including for NRLM] Compliant Self-Help 
Groups 

 
 
 
35 
 
IV.Category : D: Rural Infrastructure 
According to the above, there are 266 types of permissible works under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA out of which 182 works are related to Natural Resource 
Management (NRM). There are also 166 works pertinent to Agriculture & allied 
category out of total 266 permissible works. It has been mentioned in Para 4(2) of 
the Schedule I of the act that “Provided that the District Programme Coordinator shall 
ensure that at least 60% of the works to be taken up in a district in terms of cost shall 
be for creation of productive assets directly linked to agriculture and allied activities 
through development of land, water and trees.” 
Under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, there is no classification of works as kucha or 
pucca. The primary objective of the scheme is to create productive and durable 
assets that contribute to the sustainable enhancement of livelihoods for both 
communities and individuals. 
A number of works undertaken under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGs, 
particularly in the NRM and agriculture & allied categories are predominantly earthen 
in nature. The works such as Land Development, Field/ Contour/ Peripheral/ Graded 
bund, Contour/Staggered/Water absorption trench, Farm Pond, Renovation of water 
body, different types of canal & water course, Water harvesting pond, Fishery Pond, 
Embankment, Spur, plantation etc. are mostly earthen in nature and part of NRM & 
agriculture & allied category.  
 
These assets are developed based on local demands and are implemented 
on both community and individual lands. The focus remains on ensuring that the 
works undertaken under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA lead to long-term benefits, 
improving the economic resilience and resource base of rural areas. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Stability of Income for Vulnerable Communities under MGNREGA 
2.11 The Committee are of the firm view that for climate mitigation and disaster 
relief, the current work limit of 150 days under the Drought Relief Provision must be 
increased to 200 days to provide sustainable livelihood options for affected families. 
The Department of Rural Development has issued a directive to provide 150 days of 
wage employment under MGNREGA for Scheduled Tribe households living in forest 
areas. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the work limit under the 
Forest Rights Act (FRA) should also be extended from 150 to 200 days to ensure 
income stability for vulnerable communities. 
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
 
36 
 
2.12 The Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s concern and appreciates the 
recommendation to enhance livelihood support for vulnerable communities through 
an increase in the permissible work limit under the Forest Rights Act (FRA) from 150 
to 200 days under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
At present, the Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of 
wage employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe 
Household in a forest area, provided that these households have no other private 
property except for the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days 
of wage employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified 
rural areas. Further, as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may 
make provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the period 
guaranteed under the Act from their own funds.  
It is also pertinent to mention that if the job seeker is a single woman, disabled 
person, aged person, released bonded labourer, or belongs to a Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Group, they must be issued a special job card of a distinct colour, 
which ensures them special protection in terms of work allocation, work evaluation, 
and worksite facilitation, as applicable. 
Further, as per Schedule I of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005, works creating individual assets shall be prioritized on land or 
homestead owned by households belonging to the: 
(a)   Scheduled Castes 
(b)   Scheduled Tribes 
(c)   Nomadic tribes 
(d)   denotified tribes 
(e)   other families below the poverty line 
(f)    women-headed households 
(g)   physically handicapped headed households 
(h)   beneficiaries of land reforms 
(i) the beneficiaries under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana- Gramin] 
(j)  beneficiaries under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007), and after exhausting the eligible 
beneficiaries under the above categories, on lands of the small or marginal farmers 
as defined in the Agriculture Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 subject to 
the condition that such households shall have a job card with at least one member 
willing to work on the project undertaken on their land or homestead. 
This step aims to strengthen income stability and address the specific 
vulnerabilities of forest-dependent communities. 
Details of National average days of employment provided per Scheduled 
Tribe (ST) households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years 
2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 2023-24 and 2024-25 are given below. 
 
Financial Year 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 
National average days of 
employment provided per 
Scheduled Tribe (ST) 
households  
55.03 54.93 51.94 57.51 58.99 
 

 
 
 
37 
 
Ministry has observed that the National Average of employment days 
provided to Scheduled Tribe (ST) households has remained approximately 55 days 
over the past five years. As a result, the Ministry is prioritizing efforts to raise 
awareness about the provisions of the Scheme and to ensure that sufficient 
employment opportunities are available for eligible Scheduled Tribe (ST) under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
  

 
 
 
38 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
Survey on Effectiveness of MGNREGA 
2.13 The Committee believe that a comprehensive national survey should be 
conducted to assess the effectiveness of MGNREGS. This survey should focus on 
worker satisfaction, wage delays, participation trends and financial irregularities 
within the scheme. Therefore, the Committee recommend for independent and 
transparent survey across the country to gain valuable insights about the program’s 
shortcomings and accordingly introduce necessary policy reforms to increase the 
effectiveness of MGNREGS. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.14 Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) of NITI Ayog has 
undertaken the Evaluation Study of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, 2005 in the 14 States/UTs of 
Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Odisha, Assam, Meghalaya, Punjab, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra 
and Rajasthan. The study covers various aspects of Program Implementation 
including: 
1. Employment Generation within the scheme 
2. Impact of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS on increasing household income and 
reducing wage disparities, particularly for marginalized groups.  
3. Examination of inter-state variation in employment demanded, availed and 
whether these variations follow the prevailing poverty levels in the states.  
4. Evaluation of the role of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in reducing distress migration 
from rural to urban areas by providing employment opportunities locally 
5. Assessment of the impact of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS on enhancing livelihood 
security and resilience to economic and other shocks in rural households.  
6. Measurement of the extent to which Mahatma Gandhi NREGS promotes social 
inclusion by targeting marginalized groups.  
7. Measurement of the socio-economic benefits of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
investments in rural infrastructure development. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
Inclusion of New Works under MGNREGA 
2.15 During the deliberations of the Committee, one of the pertinent issue that kept 
on coming up was the demand of suitable review and widening the ambit of 
‘permissible works’ under MGNREGA so as to include few contemporary required 

 
 
 
39 
 
areas such as disaster relief and climate-resilient activities. Hence, the Committee 
strongly urge DoRD to look into the matter of inclusion of disaster relief and climate-
resilient activities under the permissible ambit of MGNREGS so that the rural 
populace too is prepared to meet the challenges posed due to climate change. 
Furthermore, activities such as the construction of protection walls in hilly areas and 
embankments to mitigate coastal and riverbank erosion should be incorporated into 
the scope of MGNREGS to enhance disaster resilience and environmental protection 
in vulnerable regions. The Committee therefore, recommend that the amount 
allocated for construction of embankment under MGNREGS in flood-prone areas 
should be raised from Rs. 10 lakh to 25 Lakh. Additionally, the Local Representative 
of Parliament should be empowered to propose and approve works that they deem 
necessary for their respective constituencies, ensuring that local priorities and 
developmental needs are effectively addressed under MGNREGS. 
      
Reply of the Government 
2.16 As per Section 29 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), Central Government may add new works 
to the permissible list of works under Schedule 1 of the Act. Adding new works under 
Schedule 1 of the Act is a regular exercise and new works are added on the basis of 
merit in alignment with the focus and objectives of the Act. 
The demand from States to add work to the list of permissible works is 
examined in consultation with stakeholders and experts. Also, the list of permissible 
works is reviewed annually by a Committee of Central Government having different 
States as members of the Committee. Accordingly, at present, there are 266 
permissible works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.  
Some of the recently added works to the list of permissible works under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA are given below: 
i. Construction of biogas plant for individual; 
ii. Unskilled wage component towards the construction of bio-gas plant for 
community; 
iii. Maintenance of tunnel constructed by Border Road Organization (BRO); 
iv. Maintenance of bridges constructed by Border Road Organization (BRO); and 
v. Construction of Liquid Waste Chamber for individuals  
  
Regarding the recommendation to increase the funds limit for embankment 
construction in flood-prone areas from ₹10 lakh to ₹25 lakh, the Ministry appreciates 
the Committee's concern for enhancing disaster resilience. In this regard, it is 
mentioned that Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand driven wage employment 
scheme with bottom-up planning. The works are identified, approved and prioritized 
out of shelf of work by the Gram Panchayat, recommended by Gram Sabha in each 
State/UT as per the provision of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 

 
 
 
40 
 
Guarantee Act. Accordingly, the works are approved and taken up by Panchayat as 
per the demand. The planning of works is done as per the estimated person days to 
be generated for the work in a financial year at the time of assessment of Labour 
Budget. The Ministry does not provide any work-wise allocation of funds to the 
States/UTs, nor does it set any targets or plans for specific works at the Gram 
Panchayat level. 
As for ensuring greater local participation, it is important to highlight that 
institutional mechanisms such as DISHA (District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committee) already exist to empower elected representatives, including 
Members of Parliament. DISHA Committees are mandated to ensure effective 
coordination and monitoring of development Scheme, including Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS, at the district level. These committees provide a platform for Hon'ble MPs to 
raise local issues, propose development works, and oversee implementation, 
thereby ensuring that the specific needs of their constituencies are addressed in a 
participatory and transparent manner. 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 

 
 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
  

 
 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
4.1 The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget Estimates under 
MGNREGA for the Financial Year 2025-26 is static at ₹86,000 crore since the 
Revised Estimates for 2023-24. The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) provides a legal right to work for the most economically 
disadvantaged sections of the rural population who are willing to work. It is a last 
resort of succour for the jobless section of the society who have no other means of 
livelihood to feed their family members. The scheme serves as a critical safety net, 
particularly for those facing extreme poverty and unemployment. The role and 
importance of MGNREGA was clearly visible during the corona pandemic times 
when it acted as a ray of hope for the needy in times of distress. The Committee are 
unable to comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation of fund under 
MGNREGA since 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured employment to masses of 
rural poor and deprived section of the society, it is very much essential that adequate 
Budgetary Allocation ought to be made for the effective implementation of the 
Scheme. The Committee urge that the requirement for fund allocation should be 
looked afresh as it is an established procedure that MGNREGA being a demand 
driven scheme, the funds can be raised at RE stage accordingly. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Rural Development apprise 
themselves of the still existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground 
level more realistically and press upon the Ministry of Finance for increased 
allocation to MGNREGA.  
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The Ministry acknowledges the Committee’s concern regarding the Budget 
Estimate of ₹86,000 crore under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) for the Financial Year 2025-26.  
Here it is submitted that for the financial year 2024–25, a budget allocation of Rs. 
86,000 crore was made for the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, which was the highest 
ever allocation at the Budget Estimate (BE) stage since inception of the scheme. For 

 
 
 
43 
 
the financial year 2025–26, the Government has retained this allocation at Rs. 
86,000 crore, ensuring continued support for the scheme.   In this regard, it is 
submitted that since Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand driven wage 
employment scheme, Ministry will approach Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
additional funds based on demand for employment at ground level. This approach 
has consistently ensured that adequate funds are made available in a timely manner 
to meet the demand for employment at ground level. 
It may be noted that during the financial year 2024–25, approximately 6.33 
crore households demanded employment under the scheme, out of which 6.32 crore 
households (about 99.84%) were offered employment. Out of the 6.32 crore 
households offered employment, 5.79 crore households (around 91.60%) actually 
availed employment. While the employment demanded closely matches the 
employment offered, the difference between the employment availed and 
employment demanded is on account of lack of acceptance of such offering by 
workers. This could be on account of getting better employment opportunities 
elsewhere, illness or any other relevant factor. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 A key issue within MGNREGS is the non-payment of unemployment 
allowances to workers who are not provided with work within 15 days. Despite being 
a mandated provision, most states fail to implement it effectively, leaving workers 
without any financial relief. To address this issue the Committee, believe that a real-
time tracking system must be introduced to ensure automatic processing and timely 
disbursement of unemployment allowances to intended beneficiaries. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend DoRD that it should ensure all possible measures 
including taking up the matter at the highest level with the concerned States/UTs so 
that the State Governments do not fail in their statutory duties to provide the timely 
unemployment allowance to the MGNREGA workers. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  As per Section 7(1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 “If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not 
provided such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking 
employment or from the date on which the employment has been sought in the case 
of an advance application, whichever is later, he/she shall be entitled to a daily 

 
 
 
44 
 
unemployment allowance in accordance with this section.” Payment of 
unemployment allowance is the liability of the State Government.  
  
To ensure that States fulfill their statutory obligations through proper 
implementation of all provisions of the act including section 7(1), this Ministry has 
taken various steps which includes, Mid-Term Review meetings, Common Review 
Mission, Empowered Committee meetings, Labour budget revision meetings, 
National Level monitoring visits, monthly review meetings, field visits, etc. In addition 
to this, advisories and updated guidelines including Annual Master Circular are 
issued from time to time to States/UTs for adhering to the provisions of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA. 
It is also mentioned that as per Para 12(1), unemployment allowance is to be 
calculated automatically through the Management Information System (MIS) and the 
Programme Officer may reject the same only under circumstances of force majeure. 
Additionally, as outlined in Para 12(2) and (3), there are clear provisions for 
accountability at the levels of the Programme Officer and District Programme 
Coordinator including written justifications and inclusion in the Annual Report to the 
State Council. 
The Ministry remains committed to engaging with all stakeholders including 
State Governments and technical agencies to ensure that Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
workers receive their due entitlements in a timely and effective manner. In line with 
this commitment, the Department will continue to work closely with all stakeholders 
to uphold the rights of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers and ensure the effective 
implementation of the provision of unemployment allowance across the country. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.5 One of the major concern of the Committee is about the failure of wages to 
keep up with inflation. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS) wages remain below subsistence levels, making it difficult for 
workers to sustain themselves. The base wage rates under the MGNREGS should 
be revised to ensure they align with current economic realities and provide respectful 
wages to rural workers. At least ₹400 per day should be provided as wages, as the 
current rates are inadequate to meet even basic daily expenses. Without a fair wage, 
the scheme fails in its objective of providing economic security to rural workers. To 
address the economic disparities and to ensure that wages keep pace with inflation, 
the Committee again strongly recommend that, the base wage rates must be revised 
immediately and linked to an appropriate inflation index. Wage rates under 

 
 
 
45 
 
MGNREGS should be revised in line with inflation and the Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL) to prevent stagnant wages and discourage the use 
of machinery over manual labour. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 Central Government has a clear statutory framework for determining wage 
rates under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005. Section 6(1) of the Act empowers the Central 
Government to notify the wage rates for beneficiaries, while Section 6(2) specifies 
that until the Central Government sets a wage rate, the minimum wages fixed by the 
State Government for agricultural labor under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, will 
apply. Since the financial year 2011-12, the wage rate under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA has been determined using the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural 
Labour (CPI-AL) as the basis for annual revisions.  
The CPI-AL, calculated and notified by the Labour Bureau, Shimla, is a well-
established and widely accepted measure for tracking inflation in the agricultural 
sector. It captures changes in the cost of living for agricultural laborers, ensuring that 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wages remain inflation-linked. The Government revises 
wage rates annually, applying the incremental value derived from CPI-AL to the base 
rate. Furthermore, if the calculated wage rate for a state is lower than that of the 
previous year, the previous year's wage rate is protected, ensuring that beneficiaries 
do not experience wage reductions. This mechanism ensures consistent alignment 
with inflation and protects workers' incomes.  
The Government remains committed to improving the livelihoods of rural 
masses dependent on Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. While the current mechanism 
ensures inflation-adjusted wages, the concerns raised by the Committee regarding 
the revision of the base year is noted. 
 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.7 The Committee are concerned about the persistent delays in the 
disbursement of the Centre’s share of funds under the wage and material 
components of MGNREGS across multiple States and Union Territories. As per the 
information provided by the Department of Rural Development during the 
examination of the DFG of the Ministry as of 15.02.2025, the pending liabilities stand 
at ₹12,219.18 crore in wages, ₹11,227.09 crore in material components and total 
pending liabilities are ₹23,446.27 crore. This accounts for 27.26% of the current 
budget, meaning that more than one-fourth of the allocated funds will be used to 

 
 
 
46 
 
clear previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual working budget for the current 
financial year is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore, significantly limiting the scheme’s 
capacity to function effectively and meet its primary objective of preventing rural 
distress and ensuring livelihood security. Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Department of Rural Development to take immediate steps to ensure the timely 
release of the Centre’s share of funds under wages and materials. The Department 
must strengthen coordination with State Governments and adopt effective measures 
to prevent further delays in disbursement. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) which is a demand driven wage employment Scheme provides 
livelihood security, i.e. fall-back options for livelihood for the rural households, when 
no better employment opportunity is available.  
Under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, during the financial year 2024–25, a 
total of 286.29 crore persondays were generated and 1.55 crore new job cards were 
issued. During FY 2024-25 total of 5.79 crore households were provided 
employment and an amount of Rs. 85,058.99 crore was released, which includes Rs. 
63,487.06 crore for the wage component and Rs. 21,571.93 crore for material and 
admin components. While wage payments are directly credited by the Central 
Government to the account of beneficiaries through the Direct Benefit Transfer 
protocol the Material and Admin components are released to the States/UTs.  
For the financial year 2024–25, a budget allocation of Rs. 86,000 crore was 
made for the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, which was the highest ever at the Budget 
Estimate (BE) stage since the scheme's inception. For the financial year 2025–26, 
the Government has retained this allocation at Rs. 86,000 crore, ensuring continued 
support for the scheme. Fund release to the States/Union Territories under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS is a continuous process and Central Government is committed to 
making funds available to States and Union Territories based on the demand for 
employment on the ground. As and when additional financial requirements arise, this 
Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of Finance for the provision of 
additional funds to ensure uninterrupted implementation of the Scheme. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.9 The Committee are concerned about the chronic delays in wage payments 
which continue to plague the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme, creating uncertainty for workers who cannot afford to wait for 

 
 
 
47 
 
their earnings. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the current compensation 
rate for delayed wages (0.05% of unpaid wages) should be increased to ensure 
timely remuneration for workers. To resolve this, both Stage 1 (FTO generation) and 
Stage 2 (crediting of wages to accounts) must be expedited to ensure that payments 
reach workers without unnecessary delays. Furthermore, the Committee also believe 
that the Department of Rural Development should also publish a transparent report 
detailing the total pending wages, approved payments, and outstanding amounts, 
ensuring greater accountability. Material wage payments, which are equally crucial 
for sustaining MGNREGS projects, also face significant delays, affecting local 
suppliers and labourers. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that timely 
disbursement of these payments is essential to maintain trust in the scheme and 
ensure uninterrupted work execution. By addressing these gaps, the Department of 
Rural Development can reinforce MGNREGS as a reliable and effective social safety 
net for rural workers. 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 Under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), Schedule II stipulates that if the payment of wages is 
delayed beyond fifteen days from the closure of the muster roll, workers are entitled 
to compensation at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid wages per day of delay. This 
provision is aimed at ensuring accountability and timely disbursal of wages to rural 
workers under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
The Act empowers the Central Government, under Section 29(1), to amend 
Schedule I or Schedule II through a notification. This includes the authority to revise 
the rate of compensation for delayed payments. Any such revision is subject to 
careful evaluation of various factors, including administrative feasibility, financial 
implications and the broader objective of ensuring prompt wage payments under the 
scheme. 
Ministry continues to monitor the effectiveness of the existing framework in 
consultation with stakeholders. It remains committed to strengthening mechanisms 
for timely wage payments under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
It is also submitted that to ensure timely wage payments, the Government of 
India has issued a detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to the States. The 
Ministry in coordination with the States/UTs has been making concerted efforts to 
improve the timely payment of wages. States/UTs have been advised to generate 
pay orders in time. The Ministry has taken various steps to ensure timely payment of 
wages to workers under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. These include: 
 (i) Upscaling of National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) 
 (ii) Intensive consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders to 
strategize timely payment of wages, verification of pending compensation claims etc. 
(iii) Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure for monitoring of timely payment 
and payment of compensation. 

 
 
 
48 
 
 (iv) During various meetings with States/UTs, which include Meeting for finalisation 
of Annual Action Plan, Mid-Term Review Meetings, Monthly Review Meetings and 
visit of Senior Officers to States/UTs, matters regarding the timely payment of wages 
and payment of delay compensation is regularly reviewed. 
  
(v) Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS) under MGNREGS- To ensure timely 
payment of wages to the workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and to address 
the issues arising due to frequent change of Bank account numbers by the 
beneficiaries and subsequent non-updation by the Programme Officers, it was 
decided to implement Aadhar Payment Bridge System (APBS). Through APBS, 
rejection of transactions due to the frequent changing of accounts could be 
minimized and genuine workers can get their wages in time. It also helps in weeding 
out fake beneficiaries under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.  
 (vi) National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App- In order to ensure 
transparency and accountability in the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), the Ministry has 
decided that States/UTs shall ensure capturing of attendance at the worksite through 
National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App  with two-time stamped, geo-
tagged photographs of the workers in a day for all the works (except Individual 
Beneficiary Work) through NMMS w.e.f 1st January. 2023. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.11 National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App was launched on 21 May, 
2021 with an aim to ensure more transparency in the implementation of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS in the States/UTs, a provision of capturing of attendance at worksite 
through National Mobile Monitoring System App (NMMS App) with two time Geo-
tagged photographs of the beneficiaries in a day had been started for all the 
worksites (except Individual Beneficiary Scheme/Project) and made these 
attendance in public domain which increases citizen oversight of the programme 
besides potentially enabling faster processing of payments. The Committee note with 
concern that the National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS), introduced to track 
attendance, has faced significant failures, particularly in offline mode. Since many 
rural areas suffer from poor network connectivity, a stable offline mode must be 
developed immediately to prevent wage denials caused by technical failures. 
Workers should not be penalized due to system malfunctions. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that capturing attendance on NMMS should be put 
on hold till the technical glitches occurred in the system is not rectified completely. 

 
 
 
49 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 In order to ensure transparency and accountability in the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS), the Ministry has decided that States/UTs shall ensure capturing of 
attendance at the worksite through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App 
with two-time stamped, geo-tagged photographs of the workers in a day for all the 
works (except Individual Beneficiary Work) through NMMS w.e.f 1st January. 2023.  
Further, to avoid any inconvenience to the workers due to NMMS, it has been 
decided that in case any worksite is not located in network covered area or 
attendance could not be uploaded due to any other network issue then attendance 
can be captured in offline mode and can be uploaded once the device comes into 
network covered area. In case of exceptional circumstances owing to which 
attendance could not be uploaded, the provision for exemption also exists at the 
Gram Panchayat level & Block level after taking approval of the Block level & DPC 
level accordingly. 
To make the NMMS App more robust and user friendly, new enhancements 
have been done such as the provision of Eye blink facility, Head Count facility, Mate 
ID mapping with Muster roll and relaxation in proximity range in linear types of 
community works (permissible) etc. in the NMMS application. Usage of NMMS app 
has also helped to ensure timely payment of wages to the workers. 
Any issues brought to the notice of Ministry concerning NMMS are attended 
on top priority basis and efforts are to made to resolve the same at the earliest. 
Further, continuous awareness campaigns and training programs are being 
organized across States/UTs to familiarize workers/officials with the NMMS app. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
4.13 The Committee note that a persistent challenge in the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme has been the 
deletion of job card. According to the Data furnished by the Department of Rural 
Development that in year 2021-22 approximately 50.31 lakh job cards were deleted 
due to minor spelling errors or mismatches in Aadhar details from thereon the figures 
have not come down significantly and thousands of eligible workers are regularly 
being denied work under MGNREGS. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that a system must be introduced by Department of Rural Development 
to allow manual verification and corrections so that workers are not unjustly removed 
from the program. The Committee also note that the Ministry has issued Standard 
operating Procedure (SoP) to all States/UTs with clear guidelines regarding deletion 

 
 
 
50 
 
and restoration of job cards. The SoP emphasizes the importance of due process, 
including the publication of draft lists of job cards marked for deletion, verification at 
Gram Sabhas and the right of appeal for affected workers. The Committee hope that 
these measures are followed in the right earnest to ensure that the genuine 
beneficiaries are not excluded enabling the eligible rural households to reap the 
benefits of the scheme while preventing misuse of job cards. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 A detailed Standard Operating Procedure (SoP) on job card deletion and 
restoration has been issued by the Ministry of Rural Development to all States/UTs 
vide letter dated 24th January 2025. The SoP outlines the following: 
• Clearly defined conditions and procedures for the deletion/cancellation of job 
cards/workers. 
• Grievance redressal mechanisms to address worker concerns. 
• Provision for appeal to safeguard workers’ interests - job card holders/workers 
who wish to appeal against the decision of the Programme Officer resulting in the 
deletion of their job card/worker may file an appeal with the Block Development 
Officer. 
States/UTs have been requested to ensure strict compliance with the SoP 
and to implement its provisions at all levels. They are also advised to instruct all 
relevant field functionaries to adhere to the guidelines detailed in the document. 
Simultaneously, necessary provisions are being developed in NREGASoft in 
alignment with the SoP. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
4.15 While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their deliberations, the 
Committee were apprised about demands from various quarters of the country 
regarding the increase in the number of days from 100. The Committee also take 
cognizance of the provision of the scheme through which State Governments can 
request an additional 50 days of work under MGNREGS to meet the need for work in 
cases of exigencies arising out of natural calamities. The Committee take note of this 
existing provision and is of the view that the beneficiary of the scheme being the 
numerous rural people. The scheme needs to be revamped, keeping in view the 
changing times and emerging challenges. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
explore the options that could increase the number of guaranteed working days 

 
 
 
51 
 
under MGNREGA to at least 150 days from the current 100 days. In light of this, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Department of Rural Development to review the 
scheme of MGNREGA in such a way like diversifying the nature of works that could 
ensure an increase in the number of guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 The existing provision of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, provides for guarantee of at least 
one hundred days of wage employment in every financial year to every eligible rural 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage 
employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household 
in a forest area, provided that these households have no other private property 
except for the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days 
of wage employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified 
rural areas. Further, as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may 
make provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the period 
guaranteed under the Act from their own funds.  
Details of National average days of employment provided per households 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years 2020-21, 2021-22, 
2022-23 2023-24 and 2024-25 are given below. 
  
 Financial Year 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
50.23 52.08 47.83 50.07 51.52 
As per NREGASoft 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of employment per 
household in each financial year in the last five financial years has remained around 
50 days. Therefore, the Ministry is emphasizing generating awareness about the 
provisions of the Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
It is also mentioned that this Ministry reiterates its commitment to the 
objectives of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The Ministry continues to engage with all 
stakeholders, including the State Governments, to address these concerns within the 
framework of the existing legislation and available resources. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 

 
 
 
52 
 
4.17 The Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS) facilitates the direct transfer of 
wages to the bank accounts of unskilled workers under MGNREGS, even in cases 
where beneficiaries frequently change bank accounts or fail to update their new 
account details with the concerned Programme Officer. This system has been 
effective in eliminating fraudulent claims and ensuring that only genuine beneficiaries 
receive wage payments while acknowledging and appreciating the role of ABPS in 
enhancing transparency and efficiency. The Committee still firmly believe that this 
technological intervention should not be made mandatory due to operational 
challenges that have led to exclusions of genuine beneficiaries. In several instances, 
workers have been wrongfully removed from the system due to discrepancies 
between their Aadhaar details and job card records. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development ensure that the Aadhaar-
Based Payment System remains optional and that alternative payment mechanisms 
are made available. This would ensure that workers without Aadhaar or those facing 
biometric authentication issues continue to receive their rightful wages without 
compromising the integrity of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 To ensure timely payment of wages to the workers under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS and to reduce the rejection of transactions due to the frequent changing of 
accounts, and subsequent non-updation by the Programme Officers, it was decided 
to implement Aadhar Payment Bridge System (APBS). APBS conversion is a major 
reform process where benefits are credited directly into the bank accounts based on 
the Aadhaar of the workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, through Aadhaar 
Payment Bridge System, cutting several layers in the delivery process. APBS helps 
in better targeting, increasing the efficiency of the system and reducing the delays in 
payments, ensuring greater inclusion by curbing leakages and thereby, controlling 
expenditure and promoting greater accountability & transparency and helps to 
maximize the performance of DBT. 
As on 30.06.2025, Aadhar seeding has been done for 11.99 crore active 
workers, which is 99.63% of total active workers (12.03 crore). In case of non-eligible 
workers, whose APBS enablement is still pending, states/UTs have been requested 
to sensitize all banks to ensure timely seeding of Aadhar numbers of NREGS 
beneficiaries into NPCI mapper. In this regard, it is also submitted that if any 
transaction returns from NPCI/Bank with any valid reason for rejection under ABPS 
then that transaction can be regenerated from NACH (National Automated Clearing 
House) payment mode. Therefore, there also exists an alternative solution at 
NREGASoft in the form of NACH Payment mode (i.e. Account Based) for the 
regeneration of failed transactions under ABPS. States/UTs have been continuously 
sensitized regarding this. 

 
 
 
53 
 
From 1st January, 2024 till 25th Feburary,2025 only 0.41% of transactions 
have been rejected with reasons such as no such account or account closed in case 
of APBS, whereas the rate of rejection was as high as 8.50% in case of NACH 
payment mode. 
[O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
 
54 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O.M. No.H-11013/06/2024-RE-II (e-390575) dated 03.07.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25 March, 2026 
04 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
 
55 
 
ANNEXURE I 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2025-
26) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, 24th MARCH, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT   
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
3. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
4. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
5. Shri Jugal Kishore 
6. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
10. Shri Ramashankar Vidharthi Rajbhar 
11. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
12. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
13. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
15. Dr. M. Dhanapal 
16. Smt. Rajathi 
17. Shri Nagendra Ray 
18. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
19. Smt. P. T. Usha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon  - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of (i) Draft Report on action 

 
 
 
56 
 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 8th Report on 
Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (MGNREGA)” (2024-25) pertaining to the Department of Rural Development 
(Ministry of Rural Development); (ii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX; and for XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
XXXX XXXX XXXX. 
 
3. Above mentioned draft reports were taken up for consideration and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid draft reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
 
[XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
 
4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
5.  XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 
7. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
8. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 [XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
57 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:                17
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 2, 3, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16  
          Total: 8
                Percentage: - 47%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL         
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage: - 0% 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 15, 17     
  
Total: 9 
        Percentage: - 53% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
          Percentage: - 0% 
 