 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
     EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
19 


 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'.] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 210   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____ 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025)  
INTRODUCTION  
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
32 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
53 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
54 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
74 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Extracts of Minutes of the thirty-third Sitting of the Committee held 
on 8th August, 2025 
 
75 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj. 
76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
          Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. ---Vacant--- 
30. ---Vacant--- 
31. ---Vacant--- 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt. Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 19th Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj (18thLok Sabha) on 'Demands 
for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
2.  The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10.06.2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 08.08.2025. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
8th August, 2025 
17 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka)   
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development (2024-
25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fifth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development) for the year 2025-2026. 
1.2  The Fifth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 12.03.2025 and 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. The Report contained 
22 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 22 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Government. These have been examined and categorised as 
follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
     Serial Nos. 1, 3, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21    
          Total: 10
          Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL      
        Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, 20, 22    
   
 Total: 12 
   Chapter-IV   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government. In case 
where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the recommendations in 
letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Fiscal Prudence 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.6 With regard to the fiscal Prudence, the Committee had recommended  as 
under:- 
           “The Committee note with concern the significant unspent 
balances in multiple schemes under the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD), which remains a matter of serious concern. As 
of the latest financial review, the accumulated unspent funds under 
various schemes are PMAY-G: ₹15,825.35 crore, PMGSY: ₹3,545.77 
crore, NSAP: ₹1,813.34 crore, NRLM: ₹2,583.16 crore, MGNREGA: 
₹1,627.65 crore and DDU-GKY: ₹1,313.43 crore. 
This substantial accumulation of unutilized funds reflects not 
only weaknesses in fiscal planning within DoRD but also gaps in the 
implementation mechanisms of rural development schemes. The 
Committee acknowledge and appreciate the gradual reduction in 
unspent balances over time. However, the continued non-utilization of 
funds, along with pending wage and material liabilities and delays in 
installment releases, adversely affects the efficiency of scheme 
implementation and hinders the achievement of desired outcomes. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the DoRD develop 
innovative strategies and adopt a more effective approach to enhance 
fiscal prudence. It is essential that funds are optimally utilized within the 
planned timeframes, ensuring that rural development programs 
function smoothly and effectively contribute to their intended 
objectives.” 
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“MGNREGA:- It is reiterated that the release of funds to 
States/UTs is an ongoing process, and the Central Government 
remains committed to ensuring timely availability of funds in 

 
 
3 
 
accordance with demand for work generated on the ground. 
Continuous efforts have been made in order to ensure complete 
utilization of the available funds by all the States/UTs. An unspent 
balance of ₹159.49 crore only (0.19%) remained for FY 2024-25, 
against a Budget Estimate of ₹86,000 crore. However, the Ministry 
ensures the release of the next instalment only after the utilization of 
funds against the previous central release. 
 To ensure optimal fund utilization, the Ministry of Finance has 
introduced SNA-SPARSH module in FY 2024–25 for “Just-in-Time” 
release of Material and Administrative funds under the Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS. This reform enhances fund flow efficiency, 
transparency, and financial prudence by enabling real-time, demand-
based fund disbursement through seamless integration with Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS), State Integrated Financial 
Management System (IFMS), and RBI’s e-Kuber system. By 
minimizing idle fund parking and improving cash management, SNA-
SPARSH ensures accountability, the timely availability of funds and 
enhances prudent financial management. 
PMAY-G:- Liquidation of Unspent balance have an indirect 
impact in progress of the scheme. To minimize the Unspent Balances 
& ensuring better implementation of the scheme, the following steps 
are being taken by this Ministry:- 
i. Micro monitoring of house sanction and completion using 
latest IT tools and technologies. 
ii. Continuous review at the levels of Secretary/ Deputy 
Director General level. 
iii. Focus on completion of those houses where 3rd or 2nd 
installment of funds has been released  
iv. Separate review of States with high target, poor 
performing States and delayed houses. 
v. Timely release of funds as per requirements of 
States/UTs. 
vi. The Aadhar Based Payment System (ABPS) has been 
integrated with PFMS by linking the beneficiaries’ Aadhar numbers with 
their bank accounts and other financial details in the PFMS database. 
This allows for a seamless flow of funds from the government to the 
beneficiaries through ABPS. 
PMGSY:-  PMGSY is not a DBT module scheme. Under 
PMGSY, funds are released to States as an advance against the Value 
of Projects (VoP) sanctioned. As such some amount of funds will 
always remain with the States. However, to avoid parking of funds, 
further funds are released to states only when they spend 75% of the 
previously released funds. The same is tracked through PFMS and 

 
 
4 
 
fully ensured.  Further, the Ministry of Finance has issued fresh 
guidelines for releasing the funds against expenditure to be called "Just 
in Time" release through SNA-SPARSH.  Once this is fully 
implemented, the funds will be released against the expenditure and no 
amount will be available in the bank account of the State/UT. At the 
beginning of the year, a Mother Sanction will be issued indicating the 
drawing limit of each State/UT which can be revised upward and 
downward depending upon the funds flow. The actual release will take 
place against the bills pushed on PFMS by the State Finance MIS 
portal called “Integrated Financial Management and Information 
System(IFMIS)”.  In this scenario, no unspent balance will be available 
with states. Upon onboarding on SNA-SPARSH, the unspent balance 
available in the account of the state nodal account will have to be 
returned in the Consolidated Funds of India/State/UTs in the proportion 
of existing funding pattern based on the pre-defined Standard 
Operating Procedure. Some States like Assam, Rajasthan, Meghalaya 
and Chhattisgarh have already on-boarded and others will also follow 
suit very soon. 
DAY-NRLM:- With the implementation of guidelines on 
"Procedure for Release of funds under the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of the funds released" by 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India (Gol), each instalment is now 
limited to 25% of the allocation and proposal for next instalment can be 
raised only on spending of 75% of the available funds including State 
Share. In case State share is not released, proposal for next instalment 
cannot be processed. All the sub-schemes of DAY-NRLM has been on 
boarded at PFMS platform in all states and all the expenditures is 
being done through PFMS. This enhances transparency in transfer of 
fund and unspent balances at all levels. 
In addition to the above, this Division rolled out a new electronic 
fund management system namely e-FMAS (e-Financial Management 
and Accounting System) through which expenditure position of the 
State can be monitored daily-wise. It will help this Division to monitor 
State-wise expenditure and unspent balance position more vigilantly 
and guide lagging States for timely utilization of funds. 
Further, to control the unspent balance, Finance Review 
Meetings are held with States to review the progress of the expenditure 
and resolve any impediments in smooth flow of funds and pace of 
expenditure. Performance Review Meetings with the States are also 
held regularly at highest level under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(RD) which are attended by the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries of all States. 
  

 
 
5 
 
It is also pertinent to mention that this Division is also in process 
to implement SNA-SPARSH model in the States to comply the principle 
of ‘just-in-time’ release. Once, the implementation of SNA-SPARSH 
completed with all the States, there not be any unspent balances with 
the States. 
DDU-GKY:- Implementation of SNA-SPARSH under DDUGKY 
has been initiated which will minimise the accumulation of unutilised 
funds to a great extent. However recommendations given by the 
committee have been noted for compliance. 
NSAP:- To foster transparency and swiftness in transactions, 
NSAP pension schemes were included under Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) schemes in December 2014. At present, almost all States/ UTs 
are DBT compliant except Andhra Pradesh and Nagaland. NSAP-PPS, 
a web portal linked with Pubic Financial Management System (PFMS) 
as well as UIDAI for Aadhaar authentication/ de-duplication, has been 
operationalized and all States/UTs have been requested to on-board 
the portal to serve as a single beneficiary management system. 
State/UTs can generate the pension payment order monthly by using 
NSAP-PPS and disburse the pension in the respective account of the 
beneficiary through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). Fund requirement of 
the States/UTs is arrived at based on the digitized number of 
beneficiaries of State cap of beneficiaries, whichever is lower.  Further, 
funds are released to the State/UT in 4 equal tranches and before 
release of each tranche State/UT concerned has to submit relevant 
documents/ information in compliance with scheme guidelines/ 
procedures laid down by DoE. These measures help in optimum 
utilization of the allocated budget.  
 As regards financial achievement in FY 2024-25, the entire 
allocation of Rs.9652 crore was released to States/UTs under NSAP 
schemes. BE 2025-26 for NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore. As there is no 
change in State/UT wise ceiling of beneficiaries under NSAP schemes, 
allocated BE 2025-26 appears to be sufficient to meet the 
requirement.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.8 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2025-26), the 
Committee were concerned to note the substantial accumulation of unspent 
balances in almost all the schemes of the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD).  As on 14.02.2025, PMGSY, NSAP and DDU-GKY had unspent 
balances to the tune of Rs. 3,545.77 crore, Rs. 1,813.34 crore and Rs. 1,313.43 
crore respectively.  The unspent balance for MNREGA was Rs. 1,627.65 crore 
(as on 15.02.2025) and for NRLM it was Rs. 2,583.16 crore (as on 31.01.2025), 
whereas for PMAY-G, it was as high as Rs. 15,825.35 crore (as on 12.02.2025). 

 
 
6 
 
The Committee found the accrual of such unspent balances unacceptable 
which raised questions over the financial management of the Department. 
While emphasising the need for optimum utilization of funds within the 
planned timeframes for the welfare of rural masses, the Committee in their 
Report had recommended Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to 
develop innovative strategies and adopt a more effective approach to enhance 
fiscal prudence. The Action Taken Reply submitted by DoRD states that “the 
principle of ‘Just in Time’ release through Single Nodal Agency-State and 
Public Financial Management System (SNA-SPARSH) module is being strictly 
followed in respect of all payments to the extent possible” and once, the 
implementation of SNA-SPARSH is completed it will minimise the unspent 
balances with all the States.  While acknowledging such recent 
initiatives/measures that have been put in place by the DoRD, the Committee 
once again urge DoRD to gear up its machinery to keep accelerating their 
efforts for the redressal of piling up of unspent balances for smooth 
functioning of rural development programs. Unutilised fund in the scheme can 
lead to several negative consequences such as distorted picture of public 
expenditure, missed opportunities for development, potential misappropriation 
and negative impact on department’s financial health. 
II. Stagnation of Funds in MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.9 With regard to stagnation of funds in MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended  as follows:- 
"The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget 
Estimates under MGNREGA for the Financial Year 2025-26 have 
remained unchanged at ₹86,000 crore since the Revised Estimates for 
2023-24. 
 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (MGNREGA) provides a legal right to work for the most 
economically disadvantaged sections of the rural population who are 
willing to work. It is a last resort of succour for the jobless section of the 
society who have no other means of livelihood to feed their family 
members. The scheme serves as a critical safety net, particularly for 
those facing extreme poverty and unemployment. 
  
The role and importance of MGNREGA was clearly visible 
during the corona pandemic times when it acted as a ray of hope for 
the needy in times of distress. The Committee are unable to 
comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation of fund 
under MGNREGA since 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured 
employment to masses of rural poor and deprived section of the 

 
 
7 
 
society, it is very much essential that adequate Budgetary Allocation 
ought to be made for the effective implementation of the Scheme. 
 
The Committee urge that the requirement for fund allocation 
should be looked afresh as it is an established procedure that 
MGNREGA being a demand driven scheme, the funds can be raised at 
RE stage accordingly. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development apprise themselves of the still 
existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground level 
more realistically and press upon the Ministry of Finance for increased 
allocation to MGNREGA."  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
  "  The Budget allocation under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has 
steadily risen. In the budget allocation for the FY 2024-25, the BE 
allocated was Rs. 86,000 crore which is the highest ever allocation to 
the scheme at the BE stage.  For the FY 2025-26, BE continues to 
stand at Rs 86,000 crore, which shows the Government’s commitment 
to provide adequate funds to the scheme. 
The release of funds to States/UTs is a continuous and demand-
driven process. The Central Government remains committed to 
ensuring the timely availability of funds based on the actual 
requirement for work on the ground. As and when additional financial 
requirements arise, this Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry 
of Finance for the provision of requisite funds to ensure uninterrupted 
implementation of the Scheme." 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.11  The Committee are concerned to note that the allocation of funds under 
MGNREGA have been kept static at Rs. 86,000 crore since the Revised 
Estimates for 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured employment to masses of 
rural poor and downtrodden of the society, the Committee are of the view that 
proper implementation of the scheme totally hinges upon timely and adequate 
allocation of funds to all the States/UTs. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
are unable to comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation of 
funds under MGNREGA since 2023-24. MGNREGA being a demand driven 
scheme, the Committee in their Report had recommended Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD), that the requirement for fund allocation should be 
looked afresh and the funds can be raised at RE stage accordingly. In their 
Action Taken Reply the DoRD states that “The release of funds to States/UTs 
is a continuous and demand-driven process. The Central Government remains 
committed to ensuring the timely availability of funds based on the actual 
requirement for work on the ground. As and when additional financial 
requirements arise, this Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of 

 
 
8 
 
Finance for the provision of requisite funds to ensure uninterrupted 
implementation of the Scheme.” The Committee find the reply stereotypical in 
nature, delineating only the provisions of the scheme without addressing the 
core issue with the seriousness it warrants. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
there is an immediate need for a much more concerted and synchronised 
action between the Nodal Ministry and Ministry of Finance to ensure 
uninterrupted implementation of the scheme. In view of this, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation for increased allocation of funds to MGNREGA 
to achieve its targets. 
III. Revision of Wage Rate and Bringing Parity in Wages 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.12  In the context of revision of wage rate and bringing parity in wages, the 
Committee had recommended as below:- 
“A long-standing concern of the Committee regarding 
MGNREGA have been the revision of wage rates and the disparity in 
wages across different States and Union Territories. Despite multiple 
recommendations on this matter, the Department of Rural 
Development has not implemented any significant changes. 
The Committee emphasize the need for the Department to 
address this issue with a balanced and pragmatic approach. It is 
essential to ensure that wage rates are revised appropriately, keeping 
in mind the rising cost of living and the economic conditions of rural 
workers. 
Furthermore, the current linkage of MGNREGA wages to the 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Laborers (CPI-AL) may not 
accurately reflect inflation trends. The Committee believe that this 
index does not fully capture the real impact of inflation, and therefore, 
the method of wage calculation must be reviewed and updated on a 
priority basis to reflect actual economic conditions at the ground level. 
Since MGNREGA is primarily funded by the Central 
Government, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Rural 
Development consider the implementation of a uniform wage rate 
across all States and Union Territories. This would help ensure fairness 
and consistency in wage payments under the scheme. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development take immediate steps to revise 
MGNREGA wage rates by linking them to a more appropriate pricing 
index and explore the feasibility of establishing a standardized wage 
rate under MGNREGS at the national level.” 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, Central Government may, by 
notification, specify a separate wage rate for the beneficiary of the 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The rate is revised on the basis of 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL).  
  
Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA vide Gazette Notification S.O. 82(E) dated 14th 
January, 2011 in exercise of the power conferred by Section 6(1) of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, using CPI-AL as index and kept the wage 
rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs.100 whichever is more 
as the base for indexation for the States.  
 For protecting the wage against inflation, it has been decided to 
index the wage rate notified under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA to the 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) while 
maintaining the distinction between the notified wage rate under the 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and the minimum wage Act.   
 However, State Governments can provide wage over and 
above the wage rate notified by the Central Government. Using the 
present methodology of wage rate calculation, the central government 
has notified the wage rate and it has increased by around 5% 
(average) over the last year and around 29% (average) in the previous 
5 years.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee acknowledge the fact that MGNREGA is a demand driven 
scheme, but at the same time find that, the rate of wages paid under 
MGNREGA is inadequate and not in consonance with the rising inflation and 
cost of living, be it is urban or rural setting. At the same time, the Committee 
are also deeply concerned about the existing disparity between the wage rate 
assured in different States/UTs. Taking up works under MGNREGA is a sort of 
last resort for poor rural populace who do not have any other option of 
livelihood or job option to utilise but wages of such nominal nature only 
discourage them and propel them to migrate and seek work in areas giving 
better remuneration. Therefore, the Committee have strongly recommended 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to take immediate steps to revise 
MGNREGA wage rates by linking them to a more appropriate pricing index 
and explore the feasibility of establishing a standardized wage rate under 
MGNREGS at the national level. However, the action taken reply furnished by 
the DoRD in this regard is still of the same mould as earlier. The Committee 
do not approve the stereo type reply of the Government stating that Section 6 

 
 
10 
 
(1) of MGNREGA and the procedure for the calculation of present wage rates 
based on Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) and the 
State/UTs were allowed to provide wage over and above the wage rate notified 
by the Central Government.  The Committee do not find their reply helpful in 
any way to resolve the issues of revision of wage rates and disparity of wages 
under MGNREGA and expect from the DoRD to review it earnestly and furnish 
positive reply in this regard. It is essential to ensure that wage rates are 
increased appropriately by linking it with an index commensurate with 
national inflation on the one hand and bringing parity in wages on the other 
hand for benefitting MGNREGA beneficiaries across all the States/UTs 
urgently. Thus, in light of the above rationale, the Committee once again 
emphasize the need for the Department to address both the issue with a 
balanced and pragmatic approach and also make a strong appeal to review its 
stand and bring onboard all the stakeholders so as to increase the wage rates 
at the earliest to achieve the main aim of the scheme i.e. to enhance livelihood 
security in rural areas and at the same time  devise a innovative mechanism 
to notify a unified wage rate under MGNREGA across the country to end the 
disparity across States/UTs for good, particularly when the Scheme is mostly 
funded by the Centre.  
IV. Wage and Material Pendencies under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
1.15 Concerning the wage and material pendencies under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee are concerned about the persistent delays in 
the disbursement of the Centre’s share of funds under the wage and 
material components of MGNREGA across multiple States and Union 
Territories. As per the information provided by the Department of Rural 
Development, as of 15.02.2025, the pending liabilities stand at 
₹12,219.18 crore in wages, ₹11,227.09 crore in material components 
and total pending liabilities are ₹23,446.27 crore. This accounts for 
27.26% of the current budget, meaning that more than one- fourth of 
the allocated funds will be used to clear previous years' dues. 
Consequently, the actual working budget for the current financial year 
is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore, significantly limiting the scheme’s 
capacity to function effectively and meet its primary objective of 
preventing rural distress and ensuring livelihood security. 
The Committee find accrual of such liabilities as severe 
impediments hampering the beneficiaries’ plight. While the Committee 
acknowledge the reasons cited by the Department of Rural 
Development, such as non-receipt of required documents, these delays 
in wage payments and fund disbursement create significant hardships 
for rural workers. Given the scale of MGNREGA, which serves millions 

 
 
11 
 
of job cardholders across the country, such financial bottlenecks not 
only impact rural livelihoods but also discourage the most vulnerable 
sections of society from seeking employment under the scheme. 
 This, in turn, increases distress migration to urban areas in 
search of alternative employment opportunities. Therefore, the 
Committee urge the Department of Rural Development to take 
immediate steps to ensure the timely release of the Centre’s share of 
funds under wages and materials. The Department must strengthen 
coordination with State Governments and adopt effective measures to 
prevent further delays in disbursement.” 
 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
            “The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005 is a demand driven wage 
employment programme. Fund release to the States/UTs is a 
continuous and dynamic process.  Funds are released to the 
States/UTs on the basis of "agreed to" Labour Budget (LB) and 
performance of the States/UTs during the financial year. Funds are 
released to the States/UTs normally in two tranches with more than 
one instalment in one tranche based on agreed Labour Budget (LB), 
opening balance, pending liabilities of the previous financial year, if 
any, and overall performance. The first instalment of first tranche is 
released to the States/UTs in 1st half of April month of the financial 
year. The 2nd Tranche is released on submission of proposal in the 
prescribed format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the 
prescribed conditions. The proposal can be submitted after a State / 
UTs has utilized 75 percent of the total available funds. If the proposal 
for 2nd Tranche is submitted after 30th September, then the Audit 
Report and Audited UC of the previous financial year are also required. 
Quantum of funds to be released as part of second tranche depends 
upon the performance of the State/UTs.  
  The Central Government has cleared all pending wage liabilities 
(₹17,251.21 crore) of FY 2024–25 across all States and Union 
Territories and fund is also being released to all States/UTs for meeting 
wage payment requirements for the ongoing financial year 2025–26 in 
a phased manner. It may be noted that the release of funds to 
States/UTs is a continuous and demand-driven process. The Central 
Government remains fully committed to ensuring the timely availability 
of funds in accordance with the demand for work generated on the 
ground under MGNREGA.” 
 

 
 
12 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.17  MGNREGA has long been plagued with financial troubles. The 
Committee were surprised with revelation that an amount of Rs. 12,219.18 
crore was lying as pending wages while Rs. 11,227.09 crore remained 
uncleared against the material component for a welfare oriented schematic 
intervention like MGNREGA. This accounts for 27.26% of the current budget,  
meaning that more than one- fourth of the allocated funds will be used to clear 
previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual working budget for the current 
financial year is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore. The Committee feel that both the 
aspect of MGNREGA, i.e. a demand driven nature of the scheme and creation 
of assets under the scheme are severely hampered through such pendencies. 
While being deeply concerned with the adverse impact of such pendency and 
its impact on upliftment of rural labourers, the Committee had strongly 
recommended DoRD to take immediate steps to ensure the timely release of 
the Centre’s share of funds under wages and materials, strengthen 
coordination with State Governments and adopt effective measures to prevent 
further delays in disbursement. The response furnished by DoRD is lacking of 
any concrete measure that have been taken and furthermore, it is silent 
particularly upon the existing pendencies under material components. Simply, 
it has again demonstrated the same old stereotypical approach by stating that 
“funds are released to the States/UTs is a continuous and demand-driven 
process”. It is unfathomable as to how a specific query of the Committee can 
be sidelined and remained silent and evasive on such important matter. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate their recommendation for the 
eradication of pending liabilities under MGNREGA through robust measures of 
financial prudence at the earliest.        
V. Aadhaar-Based Payment System under MGNREGA 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
1.18 With regard to the Aadhaar-based payment system under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended  as under:- 
“The Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS) facilitates the 
direct transfer of wages to the bank accounts of unskilled workers 
under MGNREGA, even in cases where beneficiaries frequently 
change bank accounts or fail to update their new account details with 
the concerned Programme Officer. This system has been effective in 
eliminating fraudulent claims and ensuring that only genuine 
beneficiaries receive wage payments. 
The Committee acknowledge and appreciates the role of ABPS 
in enhancing transparency and efficiency. However, the Committee 
firmly believe that this technological intervention should not be made 
mandatory due to operational challenges that have led to exclusions of 

 
 
13 
 
genuine beneficiaries. In several instances, workers have been 
wrongfully removed from the system due to discrepancies between 
their Aadhaar details and job card records. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development ensure that the Aadhaar-Based Payment System 
remains optional and that alternative payment mechanisms are made 
available. This would ensure that workers without Aadhaar or those 
facing biometric authentication issues continue to receive their rightful 
wages without compromising the integrity of the scheme.” 
1.19  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “ABPS is a route for a payment instruction to follow and finally 
payment gets credited into the bank account of the beneficiary linked to 
Aadhaar at last time by the beneficiary. Earlier, ABPS (Aadhaar Based 
Payment System) conversion was done by MoRD through NPCI 
Mapper uploads. Now, this functionality is available at the block and 
GP levels in NREGASoft, enabling Aadhaar authentication and ABPS 
conversion directly by POs. This streamlined process has removed 
conversion bottlenecks, with Program Officers now performing daily 
updates at the block level. 
  As of now, 11.78 crore Aadhaar (99.58%) have been seeded in 
NREGASoft, and 11.52 crore workers (97.77%) are ABPS-enabled. 
Nearly 99.9% of wage payments are made via DBT, with support 95% 
through ABPS as of March 2025. It is also informed that if any 
transaction returns from NPCI/Bank with any valid reason for rejection 
under ABPS then that transaction can be regenerated from NACH 
(National Automated Clearing House) payment mode. Therefore, there 
already exists an alternative solution at NREGASoft in the form of 
NACH Payment mode (i.e. Account Based) for the regeneration of 
failed transactions under ABPS. The effectiveness of ABPS is evident 
from the fact that from 1st january,2024 till 25th Feburary,2025 mere 
0.41% of transactions have been rejected with reasons such as no 
such account or account closed in case of ABPS system, whereas the 
rate of rejection was as high as 8.50% in case of NACH payment 
mode. This figure clearly demarcates that ABPS system ensures 
greater transparency and ensures on time payment to the workers.  
  Further, the Ministry has also strengthened the verification 
procedures to ensure that all job cards issued are genuine and meet 
the required criteria. For this, a detailed SOP has been issued to all 
States/UTs for deletion and restoration of jobcards. The SoP outlines 
standardized procedures to ensure compliance with the MGNREG Act, 
promoting transparency, accountability and fairness in the deletion or 
restoration of job cards and workers. 

 
 
14 
 
  The Ministry continues monitoring and addressing delays and 
exclusions due to unseeded Aadhaar, tech issues, or lack of 
awareness. It is intensifying training, awareness efforts, and KYC 
compliance, while also upgrading tech and grievance redressal 
systems. The Committee’s recommendation to mandate ABPS 
supports transparency and efficiency, and the Ministry remains 
committed to inclusivity, ensuring timely and secure wage 
disbursement under MGNREGS.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the usage of Aadhaar-
Based Payment System (ABPS) in enhancing greater transparency and 
efficiency by eliminating fraudulent claims and ensures on time payment to the 
workers.  However, the Committee opine that this technological intervention 
should not be made mandatory due to operational challenges that have led to 
exclusions of genuine beneficiaries. Keeping this in view, the Committee 
recommended Department of Rural Development (DoRD) that ABPS remains 
optional and alternative payment mechanisms are made available to ensure 
that the workers have not been wrongfully removed from the system due to 
discrepancies between their Aadhaar details and job card records. The 
Committee therefore, feel that any mechanism to be activated needs to take 
care of all the challenges and till the time all the major hurdles associated with 
ABPS are not tackled sufficiently, including creation of awareness among the 
beneficiaries, the system should not be made mandatory. Alternative 
mechanism should always operate side by side to ensure that the primary goal 
of MGNREGA to provide wages does not get defeated due to lack of proper 
implementation of technology. Hence, the Committee once again urge DoRD to 
strike a fine balance between the usage of technology and sorting out the 
glitches associated with it immediately to ensure timely and secure wage 
disbursement under MGNREGA. 
 
VI. Number of Guaranteed Workdays under MGNREGA 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
1.21 With regard to the number of guaranteed workdays under MGNREGA, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their 
deliberations, the Committee were apprised about demands from 
various quarters of the country regarding the increase in the number of 
days from 100. The Committee also take cognizance of the provision of 
the scheme through which State Governments can request an 

 
 
15 
 
additional 50 days of work under MGNREGA to meet the need for work 
in cases of exigencies arising out of natural calamities. 
The Committee take note of this existing provision and is of the 
view that MGNREGA is a last ‘fall-back’ option for numerous rural 
people, and the amount of expenditure under it also elicits a keen 
interest in the scheme by the poor and marginalized. The scheme 
needs to be revamped, keeping in view the changing times and 
emerging challenges. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the ‘need of the hour’ 
is to further diversify the nature of works under MGNREGA in such a 
manner and through such mechanisms that could also propel the 
number of guaranteed working days under MGNREGA to at least 150 
days from the current 100 days. In light of this, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Department of Rural Development to review the 
scheme of MGNREGA in such a way that could ensure an increase in 
the number of guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days.”  
1.22  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, is an Act to provide for the 
enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of 
the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage 
employment in every financial year to every household whose adult 
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
 The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of 
wage employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every 
Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided that these 
households have no other private property except for the land rights 
provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an 
additional 50 days of wage employment in a financial year in 
drought/natural calamity-affected notified rural areas. Further, as per 
Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for 
providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed 
under the Act from their own funds. States like Odisha, Chhattisgarh, 
Maharashtra, Kerala etc. have a provision to provide over and above 
100 days of wage employment from their own resources.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.23 The Committee opine that a long standing demand from various 
quarters of the country has been that of increasing of days of guaranteed work 
under MGNREGA from the existing 100 days. The Act was notified in 2005 and 
the entire country was covered by April, 2008. Almost 17 years have passed 

 
 
16 
 
since the full implementation of the Act and “much water has flown under the 
bridge” by now. With each passing year, the need for change has been felt in 
the Act so as to keep pace with the changing demands of the time. The 
burgeoning population of the country with majority residing in the villages and 
a huge number of rural populace still trying to fulfill the basic necessity, 
guaranteed days of work, perhaps, is a huge solace for such class of society. 
Keeping this in view, the Committee recommended Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD) to further diversify the nature of works under MGNREGA 
in such a manner and through such mechanisms that could also propel the 
number of guaranteed working days under MGNREGA to at least 150 days 
from the current 100 days. The Committee once again find the reply of DoRD 
routine and generic in nature, mere highlighting the formulated provisions of 
the Act. Although the State Governments may make provisions for additional 
days, still the Committee are of the firm opinion that the mandatory increase in 
number of guaranteed days should be brought about by the DoRD by moving 
an amendment in the Act in order to make it applicable for the entire country, 
so that the demand of needy beneficiaries may not hinge upon the will of the 
State Governments. Moreover, the yardstick needs to be rationalised through 
the efforts of DoRD and considering the long period since the enactment of 
MGNREGA, perhaps an upward revision in the guaranteed number of days of 
work is much due at the Central level itself. Therefore, the Committee reiterate 
the earlier recommendation and call upon the DoRD to relook in the issue and 
suitably increase the number of guaranteed days of work under MGNREGA 
from the present 100 days as a sincere step by the Ministry to enhance the 
livelihood security for the rural populace. 
VII. Backlog of Pending Houses under PMAY-G 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
1.24 In the context of backlog of pending houses under PMAY-G, the Committee 
had recommended as below:- 
 “The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development has 
been implementing the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin 
(PMAY-G) since April 1, 2016, as one of the Government's flagship 
schemes aimed at achieving the vision of ‘Housing for All by 2024’. The 
overall target of the scheme was to construct 2.95 crore houses by 
2024, which included 2.04 crore houses from the Socio-Economic 
Caste Census (SECC) 2011-based Permanent Wait List (PWL) and 
0.91 crore houses from the finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey list. 
  The Union Cabinet, in its meeting on August 9, 2024, approved 
the continuation of PMAY-G for five more years to construct 2 crore 
additional houses, which would cover the remaining eligible 
households from the SECC 2011 PWL and saturation of the updated 
Awaas+ (2018) list. Additionally, the houses targeted for completion by 

 
 
17 
 
March 31, 2024, under the previous phase, must now be completed by 
March 2025, as per the Cabinet's approval. 
While the Committee appreciate the extension of PMAY-G, it 
expresses serious concern over the allocation of houses under the 
extended phase. As of October 22, 2024, a total of 2.66 crore houses 
have been completed, while 29 lakh houses remain pending. A backlog 
of 1,46,54,267 houses still exists, including 62,54,267 from the SECC-
2011 list and approximately 84 lakh from the Awaas+ list. The 2 crore 
houses approved under the extended phase already account for this 
backlog of 1.46 crore houses, meaning that, in reality, only 53.45 lakh 
new houses have been allocated under this phase. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the total number of 
houses planned under the extended phase of PMAY-G be increased to 
at least 3.46 crore, accounting for both the backlog of 1.46 crore 
houses and an additional 2 crore houses to ensure fresh allocations 
beyond the existing backlog. Additionally, given the rise in construction 
costs and inflationary pressures, the Committee recommend that the 
per-unit cost of houses under PMAY-G be increased to ₹4 lakh to 
ensure that beneficiaries receive quality housing that meets minimum 
standards of safety and durability. 
During the course of its examination, the Committee was 
informed that all houses under the scheme will only be completed by 
2029, a timeline the Committee consider highly concerning, as it will 
cause unnecessary hardship to intended beneficiaries. The Committee 
also note that in the meantime, the Awaas+ 2024 survey, conducted 
through the Awaas+ 2024 Mobile App, is being used to identify 
additional eligible rural households under modified exclusion criteria. 
As of February 14, 2025, 80,32,731 households have been surveyed 
by States and Union Territories, raising expectations that many more 
rural families will be able to secure pucca houses under the scheme. 
  Given the scale of delays and the existing backlog, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to take urgent and proactive measures to 
identify and address the causes of delays. It is imperative to ensure 
continuous coordination with States and Union Territories to facilitate 
the timely completion of incomplete and pending houses within the 
revised deadline. The successful implementation of PMAY-G is crucial 
for achieving universal housing coverage, and the Committee strongly 
emphasize that all necessary actions must be taken without further 
delays to prevent hardship to rural beneficiaries.” 
1.25  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows:- 

 
 
18 
 
           “The PMAY-G had an initial target of construction of 2.95 crore 
houses during FY 2016-24. The initial target was arrived at on the 
basis of the eligible households as per the Socio Economic Caste 
Census (SECC) 2011database, after verification by the Gram Sabhas, 
as of 31.03.2016.However, the States and Union Territories (UTs) have 
remanded the ineligible households and as of 31.03.2024, a total of 
2.11 crore households remained as eligible in the SECC 2011 based 
Permanent Wait List (PWL) of the PMAY-G. The Ministry had allocated 
target of 2.04 crore houses from the Socio Economic Caste Census 
(SECC) 2011 based Permanent Wait List (PWL) and 0.91 crore houses 
from the finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey list till 31.03.2024.  
With the approval of the Union Cabinet for implementing the 
next phase of the PMAY-G during FY 2024-25 to 2028-29, the existing 
SECC 2011 PWL of all States have been saturated with overall target 
allocation of 2.11 crore houses. In addition, the Ministry has allocated 
overall target of 3.84 crore houses till 23.04.2025, including target of 
0.89 crore houses allocated during FY 2024-25 from the new allocation 
of 2 crore houses approved by the Union Cabinet. The finalized 
Awaas+ 2018 survey list of 22 States and Union Territories is already 
saturated. In addition, a proposal is under consideration for saturating 
the remaining States by allocation of balance houses/ beneficiaries in 
Awaas+ 2018 survey list as target during FY 2025-26. A total of 0.62 
crore houses is to be allocated to the 10 remaining unsaturated States 
to saturate their existing Awaas+ 2018 survey list. 
The Awaas+ 2024 survey window is open till 30.04.2025. After 
saturation of existing SECC 2011 PWL and finalized Awaas+ 2018 
survey list, approximately a target of 54 lakh houses would remain to 
be allocated from the Awaas+ 2024 survey lists during this phase of the 
PMAY-G (till FY 2028-29). 
The recommendations of the Standing Committee for increasing 
target of this phase of the PMAY-G from 2 crore houses to 3.46 crore 
houses, have been noted. However, there is no proposal under 
consideration of the Ministry to increase the target for this phase of the 
PMAY-G (FY 2024-29). 
In addition, the unit assistance under the PMAY-G is Rs. 1.20 
lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in Hill States (Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Union Territories of J&K and Ladakh) and North Eastern 
States. At present, there is no proposal for revision in the existing unit 
assistance provided under the PMAY-G. 
The major shortcomings faced till date by the PMAY-G are delay 
in construction of houses due to COVID-19 induced restrictions, delay 
on part of States/ UTs in releasing of Central & State Share from State 
Treasury to State Nodal Account of PMAY-G, delay in allotment of land 

 
 
19 
 
to landless beneficiaries by the States/UTs, cases of unwillingness of 
beneficiaries, permanent migration, disputed succession, unavailability 
of building materials and at times General/ Assembly/ Panchayat 
elections. 
The Ministry is taking the following steps to ensure timely 
completion of houses under PMAY-G:  
i. Regular review of progress at the level of Ministry. 
ii. Launch of dedicated PMAY-G analytic Dashboard for monitoring 
and supervision of the scheme. 
iii. Timely allocation of targets to the States/UTs and release of 
adequate funds. 
iv. Regular follow ups with the State to ensure release of central 
and state share of funds and provision of land to landless beneficiaries 
in rural areas. 
v. Awards to the best performing States/UTs, Districts based on 
performance index dashboard, thereby creating healthy competition 
and motivation among the States/UTs for achieving the set targets.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee had noted the issue of backlog of pending houses within 
the stipulated deadlines under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin( PMAY-
G) was a long standing one and required an immediate attention without any 
further delay. Increase in per-unit assistance under PMAY-G which has 
remained static for a considerable period of time had also been a long 
standing demand brought before the Committee on numerous occasion during 
their deliberations. The Committee had strongly recommended that the total 
number of houses planned under the extended phase of PMAY-G be increased 
to at least 3.46 crore, accounting for both the backlog of 1.46 crore houses and 
an additional 2 crore houses to ensure fresh allocations beyond the existing 
backlog. Additionally, given the rise in construction costs and inflationary 
pressures, the Committee had also recommended that the per-unit cost of 
houses under PMAY-G be increased to ₹4 lakh to ensure that beneficiaries 
receive quality housing that meets minimum standards of safety and 
durability. Responding to the recommendations, DoRD in their Action Taken 
Reply have detailed the existing provisions under the Scheme and have 
submitted that at present there is no proposal under consideration to increase 
the target for the extended phase of the PMAY-G (FY 2024-29) and also 
reiterated that at present , there is no proposal for revision in the existing unit  
assistance provided under the PMAY-G. The Committee still feel that more 
cohesive approach and proper synergy between all stakeholders is required to 
achieve the set target as well as the intended objective of the said Yojana. The 
Committee also feel that a genuine demand of the beneficiaries who are facing 
hard time to construct a house with such meagre assistance amount under 

 
 
20 
 
PMAY-G has not been addressed. Therefore, the Committee once again urge 
the DoRD to take urgent and proactive measures to identify and address the 
causes of delays coupled with suitable hike in per unit assistance under 
PMAY-G to help the intended beneficiaries to complete the construction of 
their houses at a faster rate.   
 
VIII.   Pending Projects under PMGSY 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.27 With regard to pending projects under PMGSY, the Committee in this regard 
had recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note that the progress and development of the 
entire country is heavily dependent on robust rural connectivity. The 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched with the 
objective of providing all- weather road connectivity to unconnected 
habitations, thereby boosting rural infrastructure and economic 
development. However, it has been observed that a significant number 
of projects under PMGSY remain incomplete within their designated 
timeframe, leading to delays in infrastructure development and the 
benefits reaching the intended beneficiaries. 
Such delays even cause an escalation in the project cost due to 
the inflationary aspect affecting the expenditure on raw materials. Rural 
roads is a State subject, and the responsibility for the execution and 
maintenance of PMGSY projects lies with the State Governments, who 
serve as the implementing authorities. While the Committee 
acknowledge this, they emphasize the need for stronger coordination 
mechanisms to ensure the timely release of funds by State 
Governments, enabling smoother project execution. 
Additionally, the Committee note that delays in obtaining 
clearances from various Ministries, such as the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, have further prolonged the 
implementation of many PMGSY projects. This bureaucratic bottleneck 
has been a significant hurdle in the timely execution of road 
construction projects, affecting the rural populace who rely on improved 
connectivity for economic and social mobility. 
In light of the above facts, the Committee recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development (DoRD) take proactive measures to 
expedite the completion of pending PMGSY projects by ensuring 
effective coordination with State Governments, streamlining approval 
processes, and facilitating better convergence with other Ministries. 
The Committee stress that it is imperative for the DoRD to address 
these issues on a priority basis to ensure that PMGSY projects are 

 
 
21 
 
completed within stipulated timelines and deliver their intended benefits 
to rural communities.” 
1.28 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) aims to 
provide all-weather road connectivity to unconnected habitations in 
rural areas. Over the years, significant progress has been made under 
PMGSY-I, PMGSY-II, and PMGSY-III. However, certain projects 
remain pending due to various challenges such as land acquisition 
issues, difficult terrain, contractor delays, and legal hurdles.  The 
Ministry remains committed to completing all pending projects under 
PMGSY within the stipulated timelines. With continuous monitoring, 
policy flexibility, and strategic interventions, efforts are being made to 
overcome the existing challenges and ensure seamless rural road 
connectivity across the country. 
The progress of implementation of rural roads under PMGSY is 
regularly reviewed by way of Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), the 
Performance Review Committee (PRC)Meetings, Pre-Empowered 
/Empowered Committee Meetings with the States. At District level, the 
District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) 
headed by a Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the implementation 
of various schemes of Government of India including PMGSY. In 
addition to this, special review meetings/monthly review meetings are 
also held by Secretary/Additional Secretary/Joint Secretaries, Ministry 
of Rural Development with Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries of 
the States. In these meetings, hand holding of the State is done and 
efforts are made to remove the obstacles. 
Further, the Ministry of Rural Development has taken the 
following initiatives to ensure completion of the sanctioned PMGSY 
Projects within the timeline prescribed in the programme guidelines: 
  
i. The Operational Manual of the PMGSY has been 
amended to ensure that all works sanctioned under the scheme 
commence on the ground within 72 days from the date of sanction. 
ii. States have been requested to augment their executing 
capacity and contracting capacity, and their compliance in this regard is 
regularly reviewed. 
iii. Bidding document provisions have been rationalised. 
iv. Training is being imparted to field engineers and 
contractors, as well as their staff, for capacity building. 
v. Information Technology is being utilised for monitoring 
the progress of work.” 
  

 
 
22 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The Committee noted that the progress and development of the entire 
country is very much dependant on the robust connectivity to every corner of 
the country. This scheme is aimed at this very aspect but somehow or the 
other it has been witnessed over a period of time that the projects under 
PMGSY do not get completed within the set time-frame. Such delays even 
cause the escalation in the project cost due to the inflationary aspect affecting 
the expenditure in the raw materials. It has been also witnessed that the nodal 
agencies of the projects fail to get requisite clearances from different 
Ministries like forests which also have a prolonging effect on the completion of 
PMGSY projects. In light of the above facts, the Committee with profound 
concern recommended DoRD take proactive measures to expedite the 
completion of pending PMGSY projects by ensuring effective coordination 
with State Governments, streamlining approval processes, and facilitating 
better convergence with other Ministries. The Committee also stressed that it 
is imperative for the DoRD to address these issues on a priority basis to 
ensure that PMGSY projects are completed within stipulated timelines and 
deliver their intended benefits to rural communities. The DoRD in their Action 
Taken Reply  have stated that “certain projects remain pending due to various 
challenges such as land acquisition issues, difficult terrain, contractor delays, 
and legal hurdles. The Ministry remains committed to complete all pending 
projects under PMGSY within the stipulated timelines. With continuous 
monitoring, policy flexibility, and strategic interventions, efforts are being 
made to overcome the existing challenges and ensure seamless rural road 
connectivity across the country”. The Committee acknowledge and appreciate 
the efforts being undertaken by the DoRD in this regard. However, the 
Committee still emphasize the need for stronger coordination mechanisms to 
ensure the timely release of funds by State Governments, enabling smoother 
project execution and at the same time, more innovative approach and proper 
synergy between all stakeholders is also required to remove all bottlenecks for 
timely execution of road construction projects. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate the earlier recommendation and call upon the DoRD to take 
efficacious efforts to ensure the completion of targets under PMGSY with full 
alacrity. 
IX. Road Survey under PMGSY-IV 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
1.30 With regard to the road survey under PMGSY-IV, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana-IV (PMGSY-IV) has been launched for the financial years 2024-
25 to 2028-29, with a total outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central Share: 

 
 
23 
 
Rs. 49,087.50 crore, State Share: Rs. 21,037.50 crore). Under this 
scheme, 25,000 unconnected habitations with a population size of 
500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill States/UTs, special category areas 
(Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/Blocks, Desert areas), and 
100+ in LWE-affected districts will be covered as per the 2011 Census. 
It is proposed that 62,500 km of all-weather roads will be provided to 
these unconnected habitations. Additionally, the construction of 
required bridges along the alignment of these roads will also be 
undertaken. 
The Committee, however, express concern that the PMGSY-IV 
road survey is currently based on the outdated 2011 Census, which 
does not reflect the present population, settlement expansions, and 
evolving infrastructure needs. Since the new Census has not yet been 
conducted, the survey lacks an accurate picture of ground realities, 
leading to ineligible habitations receiving priority while genuine 
beneficiaries are overlooked. 
The Committee therefore recommend that, to ensure equitable 
rural connectivity, the road survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised 
based on the latest available population data or an interim assessment. 
This will help identify true beneficiaries, address infrastructural gaps, 
and ensure that roads are allocated fairly to areas most in need. 
Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommend that the local 
Member of Parliament (MP) must be consulted before the survey, and 
each survey must be vetted and approved by the local parliamentary 
representative. If the authorities fail to do so, it would raise serious 
concerns about the transparency and inclusivity of the survey process. 
The Committee emphasize that parliamentary oversight is crucial in 
ensuring that the road network benefits those who need it the most and 
that no eligible habitation is left out due to bureaucratic lapses or 
outdated data.” 
1.31  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
            “The CCEA has approved PMGSY-IV with the following 
stipulations/ norms:- 
  "Construction of 62,500 Km of all-weather roads (single lane) to 
provide connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of 
population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill States/ UTs, special 
category areas (Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/ Blocks, 
Desert areas), and 100+ in LWE affected districts, as per Census 
2011". 
 Further, Programme guidelines of PMGSY provide that the 
population of all habitations within a radius of 500 meters (1.5 km of 
path distance in case of Hills) may be clubbed together to determine 

 
 
24 
 
the population size. In the block bordering the international boundary in 
the hill States (as identified by Department of Home Affairs), however, 
all habitations within a path distance of 10 km may be treated as a 
cluster for this purpose. This cluster approach would enable the 
provision of connectivity to a larger number of Habitations, particularly 
in the Hill/ Mountains areas. 
  
 As per the PMGSY-IV norms, the District Rural Roads Block and 
District level has to be prepared, based on the conducted surveys to 
identify habitations through the Gram Sadak Survey App, and placed 
before the District Panchayats. In all these stages the suggestions and 
proposals from Hon’ble Members of Parliament are to be given due 
importance.  
 Ministry of Rural Development vide letter dated 29.01.2025 
(English) and 10.02.2025 (Hindi) (Copy Attached at reply to 
recommendation Serial No. 14) has directed States/ UTs that  during 
the survey process itself, the Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) should 
apprise the Hon’ble Members of Parliament (both Lok Sabha and 
Rajya Sabha as per PMGSY norms) regarding the ongoing survey and 
give due consideration to their suggestions for inclusion of habitations 
in DRRP and CNCPL as per the eligibility norms of the programme, 
para 5.5 of the programme guidelines mention the following:- 
 5.5 After the CNCPL is prepared and verified it shall be placed 
before the district Panchayat. The Member of Parliament/ MLA shall be 
given a copy of the CNPL and their suggestions and the suggestions of 
lower level Panchayati Raj Institutions shall be given fullest 
consideration by the District Panchayat while according its approval. 
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding 
the eligible habitations should be duly recorded in MP-I format before 
submission of proposals to district Panchayat for the approval. This will 
ensure that the eventual selection of the habitations is comprehensive 
and it strengthens the planning and implementation under the 
programme.  
 Further, this ministry vide letter dated 15.03.2025 has directed 
the States/UTs to circulate the letter dated 29.01.2025 and 10.02.2025 
along with a copy of PMGSY guidelines (English and Hindi) to all 
Hon’ble Member of Parliament for kind information.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.32 One of the issue that arose before the Committee was that of the base 
upon which the current PMGSY beneficiaries have been selected. At present, 
the beneficiaries listed under PMGSY are on the basis of deprivation 
parameters under Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC, 2011). It has been 

 
 
25 
 
observed by the Committee that a long period has since elapsed and within 
the same family of beneficiaries, newer generations of beneficiaries have 
cropped up. This development leads to ineligible habitations receiving priority 
while true beneficiaries are overlooked. In view of this scenario, the Committee 
feel that this issue acquires great relevance and hence recommended DoRD 
that the road survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised based on the latest 
available population data or an interim assessment. This will help identify 
genuine beneficiaries, address infrastructural gaps, and ensure that roads are 
allocated fairly to areas most in need. The response furnished by DoRD in their 
Action Taken Reply is lacking of any concrete measure that have been taken 
and furthermore, it is silent particularly upon conducting the road survey 
under PMGSY-IV based on the latest available population data to identify 
genuine beneficiaries. This certainly seems to be a grey area and merits a 
pragmatic and practical solution. The Committee firmly believe that the 
objective of the scheme will remain unfulfilled if habitations remained left 
behind after the culmination of this scheme. Hence, it becomes necessary that 
the Department of Rural Development ponders over this issue and review their 
policy while approaching the Ministry of Finance to introduce a suitable new 
vertical in their domain for the inclusion of habitations as per latest available 
population data. Keeping this in view, the Committee once again urge DoRD to 
formulate or review its policy suitably in order to incorporate new emerging 
needy beneficiaries under PMGSY-IV to ensure that no eligible habitation is left 
out due to existing bottlenecks or obsolete data. 
 
X. Reduction in NIRD&PR’s Budget 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
1.33 With regard to the reduction in NIRD&PR’s budget, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 “NIRD, established in 1958 as an autonomous organization of 
the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, acts as a 
‘think-tank’ for the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) and the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) by providing critical inputs for 
policymaking through research, creation of a knowledge base, and 
capacity building of rural development officials and development 
practitioners. NIRD has played a facilitating role in rural development 
flagship programs of MoRD since the inception of the current Ministry. 
NIRD was registered as a society funded by the Ministry of Rural 
Development. In 2014, the subject of Panchayati Raj was added to 
NIRD, making it the National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR). 

 
 
26 
 
 The Committee note that for the year 2024-25, the Budget 
Estimate (BE) was Rs. 108 crore, which was later reduced to Rs. 73.68 
crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, and the actual expenditure 
remained the same. However, the Committee are perplexed at the 
Budget Estimate for 2025-26 being only Rs. 1 lakh. From this, it can 
only be inferred that a major development regarding the future of the 
institute is being planned. 
 
The Committee are concerned about the fate of the 200-odd 
employees of this historical institute. In this regard, the Committee 
have been informed that the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure, has recommended the disengagement of this 
autonomous organization from the MoRD, with a proposal that the 
institute be converted into a Centre of Excellence or a deemed 
university-type setup, generating its own funds. This proposal is still at 
the discussion stage with NIRDPR. 
The Committee desire that, until a concrete decision is taken, 
the budget allocation be reviewed to ensure the continued functioning 
of this institute and to allay the fears and anxiety of its employees.”  
1.34  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“The Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), 
Government of India undertook an exercise to rationalize various 
Central Autonomous Bodies established by the Government of India in 
line with Rule 229 of General Financial Rules, 2017. A review of the 
recommendations, carried out by Department of Expenditure, noted in 
its report AB-4 as below:- 
“The Institute has expanded itself over time in terms of it’s 
mandate. Its performance in fulfilling it’s primary role of capacity 
building of rural development functionaries, elected representatives of 
PRIs, bankers, NGOs and other stakeholders has been satisfactory. 
The plethora of activities undertaken needs to be continued as 
NIRD&PR acts as a think-tank providing consultancy services for rural 
schemes & programmes. Moreover, it has emerged as an 
internationally recognized center of excellence. It has also taken steps 
towards long term financial stability by establishing a corpus fund.  
It is recommended that NIRD&PR may be disengaged from 
MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of financial support and 
administrative control. It may be converted into a Center of 
Excellence/Deemed University engaged in training and research. 
However, Central government may access it’s services as a client. 
Government may give grants based on the functions of the body till it is 

 
 
27 
 
converted into a deemed, autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the 
government is recommended with a three year timeline and a gradual 
budget reduction of 25 % each year.” 
  In compliance of recommendation of Ministry of Finance, a 
draft cabinet note was circulated among stake holders Ministries/ 
Department for inter-ministerial consultation on 28.08.2023 and after 
receiving comments from various Ministries, revised draft cabinet note 
has been sent to DoE for comments on 03.04.2025. Reply from DoE is 
awaited.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.35 The Committee note that National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR) is an autonomous organisation under the Ministry 
of Rural Development (MoRD) which has a long cherished history of existence 
since 1958. It has played a facilitating role in rural development flagship 
programs of MoRD since the inception of the current Ministry. The Committee 
are concerned to note that the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure 
(DoE), has recommended the disengagement of this autonomous organization 
from the MoRD, with a proposal that the institute be converted into a Centre of 
Excellence or a deemed university-type setup, generating its own funds. The 
Committee were perplexed with revelation that the Budget Estimate (BE) for 
2025-26 is drastically reduced to only Rs. 1 lakh in comparison to the Budget 
Estimate (BE) for the year 2024-25 which was Rs. 108 crore and was later 
reduced to Rs. 73.68 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, and the actual 
expenditure remained the same. From this, it can only be inferred that a major 
development regarding the future of the institute is being planned and the fate 
of the 200-odd employees of this historical institute is compromised. Keeping 
this in view, the Committee desired that, until a concrete decision is taken, the 
budget allocation be reviewed to ensure the continued functioning of this 
institute and to allay the fears and anxiety of its employees. The DoRD in their 
Action Taken Reply have clearly stated that “It is recommended that NIRD&PR 
may be disengaged from MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of 
financial support and administrative control. It may be converted into a Center 
of Excellence/Deemed University engaged in training and research. However, 
Central Government may access it’s services as a client. Government may 
give grants based on the functions of the body till it is converted into a 
deemed, autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the government is 
recommended with a three year timeline and a gradual budget reduction of 25 
percent each year.” In this context, the Committee, strongly urge DoRD to 
prevail upon the Department of Expenditure (DoE) to halt the ongoing process 
of disengagement and allowing the institute to continue and sustain itself. The 
Committee, further urge DoRD to constitute a Committee under its supervision 
to oversee administrative and governance matters to ensure deliver of goods. 

 
 
28 
 
Expeditious filling up of vacancies on full time basis for the smooth 
functioning of the institute is desirable and the Committee also emphasize on 
immediate review of the current administration which has failed to maintain 
faculty trust or organizational coherence and take suitable remedial steps in 
this regard till than grant already extended by the Government may be 
continued.  
 
XI. Increased Allocation of Funds 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
1.36 In the context of increased allocation of funds, the Committee had 
recommended as below:- 
 “The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% 
Centrally Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme, providing social 
security assistance to senior citizens, widows, disabled persons, and 
bereaved families upon the death of the primary breadwinner. The 
scheme has been continued under the 15th Finance Commission 
Cycle (2021-26). 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimates for NSAP have 
remained static at Rs. 9,652 crore for the last three financial years, 
including the current year. The Committee are unable to comprehend 
the rationale behind not increasing the allocation of funds for NSAP 
since 2022-23. Given the importance of ensuring adequate financial 
support for the beneficiaries, the Committee feel that the budgetary 
allocation must be reviewed. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development submit a new proposal for Cabinet consideration, 
seeking an upward revision of fund allocation for NSAP. This would 
ensure that all eligible beneficiaries receive the intended assistance, 
and the needs of vulnerable sections are effectively addressed.” 
1.37  In their action taken reply to the above recommendation, DoRD have stated 
as follows:- 
           “The Govt. has approved continuation of NSAP in its present 
form upto 2025-26. An evaluation study of NSAP schemes for 
assessing its overall impact and to suggest road map/ 
recommendations for continuation of the scheme has been initiated, for 
contemplating the proposal for continuing NSAP beyond March, 2026.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.38 The Committee are concerned to note that the allocation of funds under 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) have been kept static at Rs. 
9,652 crore for the last three financial years, including the current year.  Since 

 
 
29 
 
the scheme ensured relief to beneficiaries who belong to extremely 
marginalised and economically distressed section of the society, the 
Committee are of the view that social programmes of such stature are a 
blessing for such sections of the society and their proper implementation 
totally hinges upon timely and adequate allocation of funds to all the 
States/UTs. Keeping this in view, the Committee are unable to comprehend the 
rationale for not increasing the allocation of funds under NSAP since 2022-23. 
NSAP being a social security scheme, the Committee in their Report had 
recommended Department of Rural Development (DoRD), to submit a new 
proposal for Cabinet consideration, seeking an upward revision of fund 
allocation for NSAP so that the needs of vulnerable sections are effectively 
addressed. In their Action Taken Reply the DoRD states that “The Govt. has 
approved continuation of NSAP in its present form upto 2025-26. An evaluation 
study of NSAP schemes for assessing its overall impact and to suggest road 
map/ recommendations for continuation of the scheme has been initiated, for 
contemplating the proposal for continuing NSAP beyond March, 2026.” The 
Committee take into account the submission made by DoRD in this regard but 
are still of the firm view that the DoRD should not shy away from placing the 
proposal once again before the Cabinet for upward revision of fund allocation 
for NSAP to ensure adequate financial support for the beneficiaries.    
XII.   DISHA Meetings 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
1.39 With regard to DISHA meetings, the Committee in this regard had 
recommended  as under:- 
“The Committee are aware that District and State-level DISHA 
meetings are to be conducted once every three months and six 
months, respectively, to ensure strict oversight of government schemes 
and to provide a detailed review of their progress through interactions 
between public representatives and government officials. The primary 
objective of these meetings is to monitor the effective utilization of 
government funds for the welfare of the common masses. Given their 
critical role in governance, these meetings hold paramount importance 
as a valuable accountability mechanism. 
However, the Committee have repeatedly noted glaring 
irregularities by District and State authorities in holding these meetings 
as mandated. Despite numerous requests by Members of Parliament, 
the follow-up on conducting DISHA meetings effectively has been 
ignored. As of February 15, 2025, only 462 district-level meetings have 
been conducted for the 2024-25 financial year, which is far below the 
expected frequency. 
 Since it is imperative for Members of Parliament to regularly 
review the implementation status of government schemes in their 

 
 
30 
 
constituencies, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Rural Development establish a robust mechanism to 
ensure regular convening of DISHA meetings. At a minimum, at least 
two meetings per year should be mandatorily conducted, with the 
compulsory attendance of all concerned officers to ensure effective 
monitoring and accountability.” 
1.40 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as below:- 
“Timely convening of the DISHA meeting is crucial for ensuring 
effective governance and promoting the holistic development of the 
districts. Recognizing the critical importance of DISHA, Ministry of 
Rural Development (MRD) is persistently working to ensure that these 
meetings are convened on a regular basis. All States/UTs have been 
urged to take necessary actions and instruct the relevant Member 
Secretaries (District Collectors, Magistrates, Deputy Commissioners) to 
ensure that District Level DISHA meetings are held as per DISHA 
guidelines. The Hon'ble Members of Parliament have also been 
requested from time to time to hold mandated DISHA meetings in their 
respective districts.” 
 Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.41 The Department of Rural Development has constituted District 
Development co-ordination and Monitoring Committee called 'DISHA' by 
replacing Vigilance and Monitoring Committee in June 2016. The sole aim of 
these meetings is to ensure effective governance and promoting holistic 
development of the districts. Recognizing the critical role of DISHA, timely 
convening of the meetings hold paramount importance as a valuable 
accountability mechanism. However, time and again, during their 
deliberations, the Committee were apprised about the glaring irregularity and 
casual approach elicited by the District/State authorities in the mandated 
regular holding of DISHA meetings. Despite numerous requests by Members 
of Parliament, the follow-up on conducting DISHA meetings effectively has 
been ignored. Moreover, concerned Officials also bypass these meetings and 
instead send junior level officers in their place who are not much aware of the 
developments around the schemes being implemented in the area.    Also, with 
respect to coverage of DISHA committee meetings and the required 
documents to be produced for quality discussion making in these meetings as 
well as processes to be followed for conducting such meetings are far from 
satisfactory. In light of the above facts, the Committee with profound concern 
recommended DoRD to establish a robust mechanism to ensure regular 
convening of DISHA meetings. At a minimum, at least two meetings per year 
should be mandatorily conducted, with the compulsory attendance of all 
concerned officers to ensure effective monitoring and accountability. The 
Committee, find the action taken reply furnished by the DoRD in this regard is 

 
 
31 
 
routine and generic in nature, merely giving assurances and not providing any 
concrete remedial measures or steps to be followed to increase and optimize 
the number of DISHA meetings. The Committee are of the firm view that, 
regular happening of DISHA meetings make the district level officials cautious 
about their role and responsibility and the mechanisms of accountability have 
been strengthened. Also, regularity of these meetings has activated the 
system of reporting on the performance of schemes from the ground. This has 
created a sense of competitiveness among the line departments and officials 
who are implementing the schemes for better performance in order to get 
appreciation and recognition from the administration. Thus, in light of the 
above rationale, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
make a strong appeal to the DoRD to take serious note of this matter and 
ensure that the Meetings of DISHA Committees are held regularly as per the 
provision with the attendance of concerned Officers and accountability may be 
fixed on the erring officials and other remedial measure may also be taken in 
this regard. 
 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The role of the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) is very crucial for 
the holistic development of rural areas of the country, and as such, adequate 
budgetary allocation is to be made for sustaining the momentum of the 
implementation of various ongoing important schemes and for taking up new 
important schemes by the Department. The Committee observe that as against the 
funds of Rs. 1,73,804.01 crore allocated at the RE stage of 2024-25, actual 
expenditure was Rs. 1,13,284.55 crore only, which is 34.82% less than the funds 
allocated at the RE stage. This indicates that either the budgetary planning of the 
Government was not prudent enough or there is a problem at the actual 
implementation stage of the schemes. At the fag end of the completion of the 
financial year, the Committee desire to know how the DoRD plans to utilize the 
allocated funds fully. 
The Committee further observe that there is a meagre hike of 2.27% in the 
total budgetary allocation of the DoRD for the financial year 2025-26, amounting to 
Rs. 1,88,754.53 crore, as against Rs. 1,84,566.19 crore allocated during the financial 
year 2024-25. The Committee feel that this meagre hike is not adequate enough to 
accelerate the sustainable momentum of rural progress. It has also been observed 
that, barring DAY-NRLM, funds for other major schemes like MGNREGA, PMGSY, 
PMAY-G, and NSAP, by and large, have been kept static. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the DoRD to chalk out quarterly and monthly expenditure plans well in 
advance in consultation with all stakeholders and undertake all possible measures to 
ensure the adequacy of funds at each stage of scheme implementation. It should 
also be ensured that no scheme of rural development gets hampered either due to a 
shortage of funds or the slow pace of implementation of targeted schemes. 
    
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 MGNREGA:- Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is a demand-driven wage 
employment programme, and funds are released to States/UTs based on the 

 
 
33 
 
approved Labour Budget (LB) and the performance of States/UTs during the 
financial year. 
 The Budget allocation under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has steadily risen. In 
the budget allocation for the financial year during the FY 2024-25, the BE allocated 
was Rs. 86,000 crore which is the highest ever allocation to the scheme at the BE 
stage.  For the FY 2025-26, BE continues to stand at Rs 86,000 crore which shows 
Government’s commitment to provide adequate funds to the scheme. 
 It may kindly be noted that the release of funds to States/UTs is an ongoing 
process, and the Central Government remains committed to ensuring timely 
availability of funds in accordance with demand for work generated on the ground. 
As and when additional financial requirements arise, this Ministry continues to 
engage with the Ministry of Finance for the provision of requisite funds to ensure 
uninterrupted implementation of the Scheme. 
PMAY-G:- The BE 2024-25 i.e. Rs 54500.14 crore,  was proposed for construction 
of 40 lakh houses in FY 2024-25 in anticipation of an enhanced unit assistance of 
Rs. 2 lakhs in plain areas and Rs 2.20 lakhs in IAP districts/Hilly/ North Eastern 
States and difficult areas along with the requirement of liability of interest repayment 
for NABARD loan for the year 2024-25 under PMAY-G.  
 However, Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 09.08.2024 has approved the 
continuation of the PMAY-G for 5 more years to construct 2 crore additional houses 
with existing unit assistance of Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in 
North Eastern Region (NER) States and Hill States. Accordingly, excess funds are 
surrendered at RE stage. 
 Out of RE of 32,426.33 crore, expenditure of Rs 32,326.61 crore has been 
reported under the scheme as on 31.03.2025.   
  The Budget Estimate (BE) for 2025-26 has been set at ₹54,832.03 crore, 
based on projections outlined in the cabinet note and the scheme's actual physical 
progress. 
PMGSY:- The allocation/release of funds to the States for implementation of PMGSY 
is made based on the fund release proposals received from the States/UTs and 
depends, inter-alia on works in hand, execution capacity of the States/UTs, and 
unspent funds available with the States/UTs. Quarterly and Monthly Action Plans are 
chalked out in advance after proper consultation with States/UTs and in pursuance 
of the guidelines of MoF. In addition, the States are regularly followed up for 
requirement of funds. .Under PMGSY there is an unbroken chain of funds release 
and no work has been affected due to a shortage of funds. 
  The budget estimate of PMGSY for FY 2025-26 is Rs. 19,000 crore. This 
amount along with the corresponding State share would be enough to meet the 
expenditure on PMGSY works to be carried out by States/UTs during the FY 2025-
26. 
 

 
 
34 
 
NRLM:- As far as DAY-NRLM is concerned, out of the BE/RE provision of 
Rs.15047.00 Crore (including DDU-GKY and RSETI) for the year 2024-25, an 
amount of Rs.14706.18 Crore (ie.98%) has been utilised. This has been achieved 
even after the programme activities were affected due to the General election during 
initial period of 3 months.  
 BE provision of DAY-NRLM for the year 2025-26 is Rs.19005.00 Crore which 
is sufficient to meet the current level of anticipated expenditure for the year 2025-26. 
The matter will be further taken up at the RE stage, if any additional funds are 
required. 
DDU-GKY:- Recommendation is noted for compliance. 
NSAP:- Under NSAP schemes, funds are provided to States/UTs, based on digitized 
number of beneficiaries or States cap of beneficiaries whichever is lower. Fund 
release is subject to receiving proposal from States/UTs complete in all respects, in 
terms of scheme guidelines/ in procedures laid down by D/o Expenditure. BE 2025-
26 for NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore which is same as the BE/RE for FY 2024-25 of Rs. 
9652.00 crore. During 2024-25, based on the proposals received from States/UTs, 
entire BE/RE was released to States/UTs. In view of the State/UT wise ceiling in 
number of beneficiaries under NSAP schemes to be covered and considering that 
the ceiling is almost fully utilized, allocated BE 2025-26 appears to be sufficient to 
meet the requirement. 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
2.3 The Committee observe from the data on physical and financial progress 
provided by the Ministry that no central funds have been released to the State of 
West Bengal under MGNREGA and various other schemes for FY 2022-23, 2023- 
24, and the current financial year. The continued suspension of funds has resulted in 
severe consequences, including a sharp increase in distress migration and 
disruptions in rural development initiatives. This has had a significant adverse impact 
on the livelihoods of rural populations, exacerbating economic hardships in the state. 
The Committee strongly recommend that West Bengal receive its rightful dues 
for all eligible years, except for the year currently under dispute in court. Additionally, 
the pending payments must be released without delay to ensure that ongoing rural 
development projects are not stalled and that intended beneficiaries do not suffer 
due to financial constraints. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.4 MGNREGA:- Release of funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS to the State 
of West Bengal has been stopped since 9th March, 2022 as per provisions of 
Section 27 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 
due to non- compliance with the directives of the Central Government.  
  Further, no Labour budget revision has been done for the State of West 
Bengal in FY 2021-22 after stoppage of funds in view of the non-compliance by the 
State as stated above 
  The State Government of West Bengal has yet to fully comply with the 
directives issued by the Central Government. Despite multiple communications 
between this Department and the State Government, the State Government has not 
been able to submit a satisfactory Action Taken Report yet. 
  The Central Government is committed towards ensuring transparency and 
accountability for the effective implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
However, in light of the various irregularities found in the implementation of the 
Scheme, the restoration of the scheme in the State can be considered only upon 
receipt of satisfactory compliance with the Central Government’s directives, as 
communicated from time to time. 
PMAY-G:- Under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G), overall the 
State of West Bengal has been allocated a target of 45,69,423 houses out of which 
the State has sanctioned all houses, released 1st instalment of assistance to 
34,65,969beneficiaries and 34,19,254 houses have been completed and 11,50,169 
houses are yet to be completed, as of 23.04.2025. During Financial Year (FY) 2021-
22, the Ministry of Rural Development had received complaints from the Members of 
Parliament, Members of State Legislative Assembly (West Bengal) and other 
stakeholders with serious allegations of re naming of the scheme name as Bangla 
Awaas Yojana in the State and also grant of assistance to ineligible households. 
These complaints were verified through inspection by the National Level Monitoring 
(NLM) teams. The complaints were found to be true in most of the cases. Thereafter, 
the State Government submitted compliances on the observations of the NLM teams 
and complaints of the Members of Parliament and Members of Legislative Assembly. 
 Further, it is informed that the Action Taken Report (ATR) submitted by the 
State Government during August, 2022 was accepted. The State Government had 
also agreed that since the ‘Name’ and ‘Logo’ are part of the core features of the 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs), the official ‘Name’ and ‘Logo’ of PMAY-G will 
be used and displayed in the Citizen and Public Information Board regularly. The 
State Government also issued instructions to the District Magistrates for proper 
implementation of the PMAY-G with official name and 'logo' of the scheme. The 
compliances submitted by the State Government were accepted and target of 
11,36,488 houses from finalised Awaas+ 2018 survey list was allocated to the State 
during the FY 2022-23 vide D.O. letter dated 24.11.2022. The Ministry has already 
released Rs 25,798 crore as Central share to the State since 2016-17 till 2021-22 for 
implementation of the PMAY-G. 

 
 
36 
 
 
 It is also pertinent to inform that post allocation of target to the State in 
November, 2022, complaints regarding irregularities in implementation of PMAY-G 
were received. These complaints were verified through Senior Officers Team and 
National Level Monitoring (NLM) Teams. No Central share of funds have been 
released to the State of West Bengal under the PMAY-G with the approval of the 
competent authority in the Ministry during FY 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 for 
targets of FY 2022-23 from the finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey lists due to non-
submission of satisfactory Action Taken Reports (ATR) on the observations of the 
NLM teams and Senior Officers’ Teams of the Ministry of Rural Development. The 
ATRs have been received from the state and are under examination. It is worthwhile 
to mention that the balance liability of Central share under PMAY-G for the State of 
West Bengal till 31.03.2024 to be released during FY 2024-25 was Rs. 7,888.67 
crore. As per Union Cabinet’s approval for implementation of PMAY-G during FY 
2024-29, the Central share of funds for liability of targets allocated till 31.03.2024 
were to be released during FY 2024-25, however these funds cannot be released 
during the current Financial Year.  
PMGSY:- Under PMGSY, funds are released to States as an advance against the 
Value of Projects (VoP) sanctioned. Funds to the states are released on the subject 
to compliance of the Department of Expenditure and scheme guidelines. As and 
when fund proposals received from state of West Bengal are found in order, the 
funds has been released to the state. 
 The details of fund released (year-wise) to the state of the West Bengal since 
2022-23 is as below:- 
Financial Year Central Share Released (Rs in Crore) 
2022-23 381.03 
2023-24 99.275 
2024-25 225.00 
 
DAY-NRLM:- As far as NRLM is concerned, there has been no stoppage in the 
release of funds to West Bengal. On the contrary, this Ministry released additional 
instalments in recognition of the State's better performance during FY 2023-2024 
and 2024-2025. 
DDU-GKY:- Funds in DDUGKY are released to the States/UTs on receipt of fund 
request. Accordingly central share of admin funds were released to the state of West 
Bengal in FY 2023-24. 
NSAP:- Under NSAP Schemes, there is no outstanding funds due to West Bengal. 
The State Govt. has availed the entire funds earmarked for 2024-25 in time. The 
funds released under NSAP schemes during last three years to the State of West 
Bengal is given below: 

 
 
37 
 
Financial Year Funds released 
(Rs. in Crore) 
2022-23 622.56 
2023-24 1003.18 
2024-25 796.40 
   
             (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
2.5 During the deliberations of the Committee, one of the pertinent issue that kept 
on coming up was the demand of suitable review and widening the ambit of 
‘permissible works’ under MGNREGA so as to include few contemporary required 
areas such as disaster relief and climate-resilient activities. 
Hence, the Committee strongly urge DoRD to look into the matter of inclusion 
of disaster relief and climate-resilient activities under the permissible ambit of 
MGNREGA so that the rural populace too is prepared to meet the challenges posed 
due to climate change. Furthermore, activities such as the construction of protection 
walls in hilly areas and embankments to mitigate coastal and riverbank erosion 
should be incorporated into the scope of MGNREGA to enhance disaster resilience 
and environmental protection in vulnerable regions. 
  The Committee recommend that the amount allocated for construction of 
embankment under MGNREGA in flood-prone areas should be raised from Rs. 10 
lakh to 25 Lakh. Additionally, the Local Representative of Parliament should be 
empowered to propose and approve works under MGNREGA that they deem 
necessary for their respective constituencies, ensuring that local priorities and 
developmental needs are effectively addressed. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.6 Under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), there are 266 permissible works of which 156 
works directly contributes as disaster relief and climate-resilient activities. 
  
SN Works category Number of 
works (Refer 
Annexure for 
list of works ) 
Role in as disaster relief and climate-
resilient activities. 
1 Plantation works 53 Disaster relief: Flood, drought and 

 
 
38 
 
temperature mitigation 
Climate resilience: Carbon 
sequestration (offset)  
2 Soil and water 
conservation works 
50 Disaster relief: Flood and drought 
through improving the vegetation cover.  
Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
and GHGs emission reduction 
3 Irrigation infrastructure 
works 
13 Disaster relief: Increasing the network 
of irrigation facilities. 
Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
and GHGs emission reduction 
4 Vermi/NADEP/Berkeley 
composts structure/pits 
16 Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
and GHGs emission reduction 
5 Work on soak pits 2 Climate resilient: GHGs Emission 
reduction 
6 Land Development 9 Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
7 Ground water recharge 9 Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
8 Biogas plant 2 Climate resilient: Energy conservation 
and GHGs emission reduction 
9 Cyclone shelter and 
embankment 
3 Disaster relief: Cyclone shelter 
provides the safe place for the 
community during the cyclone period 
and embankment prevents expansion of 
flood. 
  Total 156   
   
With regard to raising the ceiling on the construction of embankment under 
MGNREGA in flood-prone areas, a committee has been constituted to rationalization 
of the permissible works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The recommendation of 
the committee has been noted and the same shall be placed before the committee.  
  
The current framework of bottom up planning is as per Sections (13-16) of the 
Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, places decision-making in the hands of Gram Sabhas 
and Panchayati Raj Institutions, which ensures that planning remains closely aligned 
with the needs and priorities of the local population. One of the core objectives of 
MGNREGA is strengthening of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  Upholding this structure 
not only reinforces participatory governance but also fosters greater ownership, 
accountability, and responsiveness at the grassroots level, thereby enhancing the 
overall effectiveness of the programme. 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
2.7 The Committee emphasize the critical role of social audits in ensuring 
transparency, accountability, and public oversight in the implementation of 
government schemes. Given their significance, the Committee strongly recommend 

 
 
39 
 
an increase in financial allocation for conducting comprehensive social audits across 
all welfare programs. 
The scope of social audits must be expanded to cover all major government 
schemes, with greater community participation to strengthen grassroots monitoring 
and evaluation. To achieve this, capacity-building initiatives should be introduced to 
train and educate citizens on the audit process, equipping them with the necessary 
skills to actively oversee and assess the implementation of schemes in their areas. 
Additionally, stringent measures must be enforced to enhance transparency 
and prevent mismanagement. This includes the mandatory use of audio and video 
recordings during social audit processes, ensuring that irregularities are 
systematically documented and addressed. 
The Committee reiterate that social audits are a powerful mechanism for 
public accountability and urges the Department of Rural Development to take 
immediate steps to institutionalize and strengthen this framework across all relevant 
schemes. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 The Ministry of Rural Development has taken several steps to 
institutionalize, strengthen, and expand the scope of social audits, particularly under 
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). 
  
1.         Institutional Mechanism and Funding Support 
  
Under Section 17 of MGNREGA, Gram Sabhas are mandated to conduct 
social audit of all works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. As per the existing 
framework (Annual Master Circular Para 10.6.1), From the States’ entitlement of 6% 
towards administrative expenditure, upto0.5% shall be earmarked for the State’s 
Social Audit. Funds are released to SAUs based on the submission of proposals in 
the prescribed format and subject to fulfillment of requisite conditions. 
  
At present, 27 States and 1 Union Territory have established SAUs. 
Additionally, the Union Territories of Puducherry, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu, and Ladakh have also completed the registration process for setting up SAUs.  
  
2.         Broadening the Scope of Social Audit 
  
Recognizing the need to expand the application of social audits beyond 
MGNREGA, a Joint Task Force on Streamlining Social Audit has been constituted by 
C&AG under the chairpersonship of the Additional Deputy Comptroller and Auditor 
General (Local Governance Audit). Its ToR includes revising audit standards, 

 
 
40 
 
ensuring independence of SAUs, defining fund norms, training standards, and 
establishing mechanisms for inter-departmental coordination and reporting. 
  
3.         Use of Technology to Enhance Transparency 
  
To strengthen transparency and documentation, the Ministry has initiated the 
integration of NREGASoft (Social Audit MIS) with the Panchayat Nirnay App. This 
will enable the real-time capture of geo-tagged and time-stamped photographs of 
Social Audit Gram Sabhas, ensuring better record keeping, documentation of 
processes and transparency. The scaling up is currently underway and will 
significantly enhance the credibility and impact of social audits. 
  
4.         Extension of Social Audit to Other Schemes- Noted 
  
The recommendations of the Committee regarding increased financial 
allocation, greater community participation, capacity building, and the mandatory use 
of audio-visual documentation have been noted and will be given due consideration 
in future planning, policy guidelines, and budgetary proposals.   
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
2.9 The Committee note that a persistent challenge in the implementation of 
PMAY-G has been the identification of genuine beneficiaries, particularly homeless 
individuals and those residing in kutcha houses. The eligibility criteria for PMAY-G 
were determined based on housing deprivation parameters from the Socio-Economic 
Caste Census (SECC), 2011. 
However, considerable time has passed since the base year, and it has been 
widely observed that many eligible beneficiaries have become ineligible while a 
whole lot of eligible beneficiaries have surfaced and waiting to avail the benefits. This 
gap in beneficiary identification is a serious deficiency in the scheme’s 
implementation and requires urgent rectification. 
The Committee recommend that the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD) undertake a comprehensive review of the existing list of eligible beneficiaries 
at the earliest. Additionally, the policy framework must be revised to ensure that 
newly emerging needy households—who were not covered under the SECC 2011 
Census—are duly included in the PMAY-G scheme. This will ensure that no eligible 
and deserving beneficiary is left out. 

 
 
41 
 
 
Furthermore, the Committee also recommend that the eligibility criteria be 
expanded to include households with semi-permanent structures, such as those with 
pucca walls or tin roofs, to better reflect the current housing realities and ensure 
comprehensive coverage under PMAY-G.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.10 The Awaas+ 2024 household survey has started w.e.f 27.12.2024 for 
identification of eligible potential beneficiary households as per the revised exclusion 
criteria under the PMAY-G, as approved by the Union Cabinet. The previous 13 point 
exclusion criteria of SECC 2011 have been simplified into 10 exclusion criteria for 
identification of eligible potential beneficiaries in this new phase of PMAY-G. The 
modified exclusion process is reproduced as under:- 
Step 1: Exclusion of pucca houses- All households living in houses with pucca 
roof and/or pucca wall and households living in houses with more than 2 rooms are 
filtered out.  
Step 2: Automatic Exclusion– From the remaining set of households, all 
households fulfilling any one of the 10 parameters listed below are automatically 
excluded: - 
1. Motorised three/four-wheeler  
2. Mechanised three/ four-wheeler agricultural equipment  
3. Kisan Credit Card with credit limit of ₹50,000 or above  
4. Household with any member as a Government employee  
5. Households with non-agricultural enterprises registered with the 
Government  
6. Any member of the family earning more than ₹15,000 per month  
7. Paying income tax  
8. Paying professional tax  
9. Own 2.5 acres or more of irrigated land 
10. Own 5 acres of more of unirrigated land 
 As of 23.04.2025, a total of 3.32 crore households are surveyed during the 
Awaas+ 2024 household survey for inclusion as potential eligible beneficiaries under 
this phase of the PMAY-G (FY 2024-29). 
 

 
 
42 
 
It is also worthwhile to mention here that with the approval of the competent 
authority, an Expert Committee was constituted for revisiting the definition of kutcha 
house under the PMAY-G. The recommendations of this Expert Committee were 
accepted and the definition of kutcha house for the States of Assam and Tripura was 
modified to include house with kutcha wall and CGI sheet roof as kutcha house in 
these 2 States only. This Committee had also considered requests received from 
Govt. of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab but did not recommend for any revision in 
definition in respect of these 2 States.  
  
         (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
2.11 Rural roads is a State subject, and the responsibility for the execution of road 
works and their maintenance under PMGSY lies with the State Governments, who 
are the implementing authorities of the scheme. The roads constructed under this 
Yojana are based on the prescribed norms and standards under the provisions of 
PMGSY. The Committee were enlightened during their study visit about the non-
availability of land/space for road construction as per the prescribed norms under 
PMGSY. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the DoRD relax the road 
construction norms by amending the provisions and guidelines of PMGSY to give 
flexibility to State Governments to adjust road width and design norms based on their 
local geographical conditions and transportation needs. The Committee also 
recommend that the construction of an additional 100 km of roads be allocated 
based on the recommendation of the local representative of Parliament, and that the 
funds for the same be allocated from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The primary objective of the PMGSY is to provide connectivity, by way of an 
all-weather road with necessary culverts and cross-drainage structures, which is 
operable throughout the year, to eligible unconnected habitations in rural areas. 
Habitations with a population of 500+ in plain areas and 250+ in North-Eastern and 
Himalayan states, Desert areas, Tribal (Schedule V) areas and selected tribal and 
backward districts as identified by the Ministry of Home Affairs/ Planning 
Commission as per Census, 2001 were to be covered under the scheme, so that 
these habitations can have access to basic health services, education and markets 
for their produce. In the critical Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected blocks (as 
identified by MHA), additional relaxation has been given to connect habitations with 
population of 100+ (Census 2001). 

 
 
43 
 
 
 Further, the primary objective of PMGSY-IV is to provide all-weather road 
connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of population size 500+ in 
plains, 250+ in Hill States/ UTs and North-Eastern Region (NER), Special Category 
Areas (Tribal Schedule-V Areas, Desert Areas, Aspirational Blocks/ Districts) and 
100+ in LWE affected Districts (areas notified by MHA) in 9 States as per Census 
2011.  
 The Rural Roads constructed under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
must meet the technical specifications and geometric design standards given in the 
Rural Roads Manual of the IRC (IRC:SP20:2002) and also, where required, the Hill 
Road Manual (IRC:SP:48-1998); 
 The choice of design and surface for the road would be determined, inter alia, 
by factors like traffic, soil type and rainfall, following the technical specifications laid 
down in the Rural Roads Manual (IRC: SP20:2002). Normally, rural roads would 
need to be designed to carry up to 45 commercial vehicles per day (CVPD) only. All 
cases of design for new construction where higher traffic is projected need detailed 
justification. In the case of new construction for eligible Habitations of population 
below 1000 where traffic expected is likely to remain very low (below 15 CVPD), in 
the interest of economy, the road would generally be designed for a gravel or other 
unsealed surface as provided in the Rural Roads Manual, subject to considerations 
of rainfall. In case of new construction to connect Habitations with population below 
500, where the projected traffic growth is likely to be very low, the carriageway may 
further be restricted to 3.0 m. 
 Further, the PMGSY Guidelines provide a key role to the public 
representatives and Hon’ble Members of Parliament in the implementation of the 
programme, including selection and construction of roads.  Consultation with 
Members of Parliament is provided at both the DRRP finalisation and Annual 
Proposals stages.  In addition, at the stage of preparing DPRS, the DPIU conducts a 
transect walk along the road alignment, involving the local panchayat. State 
Governments are required to arrange joint inspection of ongoing as well as 
completed works under PMGSY by Hon’ble MPs, Hon’ble MLAs and representatives 
of Panchayati Raj Institutions.  
     Some important provisions of PMGSY-III guidelines, which provide detailed 
procedures for consultation with the Members of Parliament during the process of 
planning and selection of roads, are detailed below: 
Para 3.6.  The suggestions given by the Members of Parliament are to be given full 
consideration while finalizing the District Rural Roads Plan (DRRP). 
Para 5.5. The Annual proposals will be based on the CUCPL following the Order of 
Priority (subject to PCI). However, it is possible that there are inadvertent errors or 
omissions, particularly in the selection of Through Routes. Accordingly, it is desirable 

 
 
44 
 
to also associate public representatives while finalizing the selection of road works in 
the annual proposals. The proposals of the Members of Parliament are required to 
be given full consideration, for this purpose:  
  
(i)       The CUCPL should be sent to concerned MPs with the request that their 
proposals on the selection of works out of the CUCPL should be sent to the District 
Panchayat. It is suggested that at least 15 clear days may be given for the purpose. 
  
(ii)      In order to ensure that the prioritization has some reference to the funding 
available, the size of proposals expected may also be indicated to the Members of 
Parliament while forwarding the CUCPL list to them. District wise allocation may be 
indicated to enable choice with the requisite geographical spread.  It is expected that 
such proposals of Members of Parliament which adhere to the Order of Priority 
would be invariably accepted subject to consideration of equitable allocation of funds 
and need for upgradation. 
  
 (iii)     The proposals received from the Members of Parliament by the stipulated 
date would be given full consideration in the District Panchayat which would record 
the reason in each case of non-inclusion. Such proposals that cannot be included 
would be communicated in writing to the Members of Parliament with reasons for 
non-inclusion of such proposals in each case.  It would be preferable if the 
communication is issued from the Nodal Department at a senior level. 
  
Para 7.1: After approval by the District Panchayat, the proposals would be forwarded 
by the PIU to the SRRDA. The PIU will at that time prepare the details of proposals 
forwarded by the Members of Parliament, and action taken thereon, in Proforma MP-
I and MP–II and send it along with the proposals. In all cases where the proposal of 
an MP has not been included, cogent reasons shall be given based on the reasons 
given by the District Panchayat.  
Para 7.3      The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) would scrutinize the 
proposals to see that they are in accordance with the Guidelines and that the 
proposals of the Members of Parliament have been given full consideration.  
In order to ensure that the State Government give due attention towards this 
aspect of the guidelines while submitting the proposals to the Ministry of Rural 
Development for sanction, the Ministry has issued a fresh advisory to the States on 
23rd June, 2023. The State Governments have been advised, inter-alia, to 
communicate the final list of proposals in the order of priority to the Member of 
Parliament with the reasons for non-inclusion of certain roads in the proposals and 
incorporate their recommendations with the proposals sent to NRIDA/Ministry for 
approval. 
 

 
 
45 
 
 As per the PMGSY-IV norms, the District Rural Roads Block and District level 
has to be prepared, based on the conducted surveys to identify habitations through 
the Gram Sadak Survey App, and placed before the District Panchayats. In all these 
stages the suggestions and proposals from Hon’ble Members of Parliament are to be 
given due importance.  
 Ministry of Rural Development vide letter dated 29.01.2025 (English) and 
10.02.2025 (Hindi) (Copy Attached) has directed States/ UTs that  during the survey 
process itself, the Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) should apprise the Hon’ble 
Members of Parliament (both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha as per PMGSY norms) 
regarding the ongoing survey and give due consideration to their suggestions for 
inclusion of habitations in DRRP and CNCPL as per the eligibility norms of the 
programme, para 5.5 of the programme guidelines mention the following:- 
 5.5 After the CNCPL is prepared and verified it shall be placed before the 
district Panchayat. The Member of Parliament/ MLA shall be given a copy of the 
CNPL and their suggestions and the suggestions of lower level Panchayati Raj 
Institutions shall be given fullest consideration by the district panchayat while 
according its approval. 
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding the eligible 
habitations should be duly recorded in MP-I format before submission of proposals to 
district Panchayat for the approval. This will ensure that the eventual selection of the 
habitations is comprehensive and it strengthens the planning and implementation 
under the programme.  
 Further, this Ministry vide letter dated 15.03.2025 (Copy Attached) has 
directed the States/ UTs to circulate the letter dated 29.01.2025 and 10.02.2025 
along with a copy of PMGSY guidelines (English and Hindi) to all Hon’ble Members 
of Parliament for kind information. 
             (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.13 The program should prioritize roads in poor condition that have been 
neglected by State Governments, ensuring equitable infrastructure development. 
These roads should either be rehabilitated under a dedicated initiative or included in 
the new PMGSY allotment to improve rural connectivity and accessibility. 
A flagship program like PMGSY is affected by the malaise of poor 
maintenance post-construction and after being handed over to the States. The entire 
effort of constructing quality roads to provide rural connectivity gets marred by 
inadequate maintenance. The Committee note the concerns raised from various 

 
 
46 
 
quarters and through their own experiences during study visits that roads 
constructed under PMGSY at various locations suffer from poor maintenance and 
begin to deteriorate at an early stage. It has been noted that while provisions for 
maintenance exist in the guidelines, there is a lack of adherence to them, and there 
is no accountability. The wherewithal for honesty and transparency seems to be 
lacking in the implementation of such an important scheme. Even though a 
monitoring mechanism is elaborately laid down, the maintenance of roads 
constructed under PMGSY remains a serious concern. 
It has also been noticed that contractors, after the stipulated period under 
their supervision, hand over the roads by merely carrying out cosmetic patchwork on 
damaged roads. Therefore, the Committee are of the firm opinion that the evaluation 
of roads should be conducted on a periodic basis even after the completion of 
construction, both through physical inspections and by utilizing virtual techniques 
such as geo-tagging and mobile applications, to ensure roads are not neglected and 
are maintained properly. 
Thus, the DoRD is recommended to earmark specific teams for periodic and 
mandatory physical inspections of roads under PMGSY. For those roads that are 
already neglected and in disrepair, the Committee recommend that these roads be 
identified and either rehabilitated under a dedicated initiative or included in the new 
PMGSY allotment to improve rural connectivity and accessibility. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The estimated sanctioned cost of any road project encompasses the 
construction cost, a five-year defect liability cost (for routine maintenance based on a 
Performance-Based Maintenance Contract as per NRIDA's Standard Bidding 
Document, executed through the e-MARG module), and additional costs for routine 
maintenance and renewal after the five-year defect liability period. These are 
monitored through the e-MARG module, in accordance with the Standard Operating 
Procedures (SoP) issued by NRIDA for both pre- and post-five-year DLP. Under the 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the DoRD and the State 
Government/UT, the Central Government funds the construction cost, while 
maintenance costs for up to 10 years are borne by the State/UT Government. To 
qualify for Central Government funding, the State/UT's share, which includes both 
the construction cost and the 10-year maintenance cost as approved in each 
Detailed Project Report (DPR), must be credited to the PMGSY fund. To ensure 
timely credit by the State/UT Government, DoRD requires that maintenance funds be 
deposited into the works account, with 50% by May 31 and the remaining 50% by 
November 30 of each financial year, prior to releasing the central share. 

 
 
47 
 
  
 The SRRDAs were advised to develop road maintenance cells to ensure 
effective monitoring of maintenance aspects of rural roads. All SRRDAs shall ensure 
that this maintenance cell is operating efficiently in the State. Bridges constructed 
under PMGSY are also required to be maintained efficiently, therefore, the SRRDAs 
shall ensure effective monitoring of these bridges. To ensure this, the road 
maintenance cell of the SRRDA shall include a bridge expert with appropriate 
qualifications and experience. The State shall also develop a manual for inspection 
and maintenance of bridges. The maintenance of roads and bridges under this 
programme shall be governed by the provisions of the latest IRC/NRIDA guidelines 
in this regard.  The state shall include 5 years bridge Defect Liability Period (DLP) 
including routine maintenance, as is being done for road components, in the Bidding 
Document.  
  State Governments shall endeavour to develop sustainable sources of 
funding for the maintenance of rural roads after the defect liability period and shall 
ensure that the SRRDA:  
i. Prepares and submits to the State Nodal Department and NRIDA an annual 
estimate of funds for proper maintenance of the Rural Core Network and 
roads taken up under PMGSY. 
ii. Enforces a prioritization criterion for allocation of budgeted maintenance 
funds. The criteria may be developed in consultation with NRIDA, based on 
the Pavement Condition Index (PCI), giving weightage to conditions like 
traffic/population. 
iii. Liaises with the executing agencies receiving maintenance funding for rural 
roads to ensure coordinated application of the prioritization criteria; and 
iv. Publishes an annual PIU-wise Road Asset Valuation and Network Asset 
Valuation based on road maintenance investments. 
  
The e-MARG module shall be used for monitoring of maintenance contracts 
for roads under PMGSY. 
 
 Utilization of mobile application ad geo-tagging under PMGSY to ensure 
roads are maintained properly are as below:- 
 
Meri Sadak APP:- With the view to achieve the objectives of e-Governance and 
Digital India, a new Mobile App for PMGSY roads, “Meri Sadak” was launched on 
20th July, 2015 and integrated into OMMAS for user friendly and transparent Citizen 
Feedback and complaint redressal system. The citizens, with the use of this 
application, can express their concerns related to slow pace, abandoned work or bad 
quality of PMGSY works. 
  

 
 
48 
 
eMARG :  PMGSY’s IT platform for maintenance of rural roads, also uses GIS to 
readily display the geo-tagged inspection photos which are used to ratify routine 
maintenance payments to contractors. Every road in eMARG is registered on GIS 
and each inspection is tied to a geo-tagged section of the road along with 
photographs. 
  PMGSY envisages a three tier Quality Assurance Mechanism to ensure 
quality of road works during construction. The first two tiers of the structure are the 
responsibility of the respective State Governments and under the third tier, NRIDA 
engages independent National Quality Monitors (NQMs) for inspections at random, 
of the road works under the programme. Under the 1st tier of quality control 
mechanism, the quality standards are enforced through in-house mechanism by 
establishing field laboratories and carrying out mandatory tests. In addition, to 
augment the field laboratories for non-frequent tests, state and district laboratories 
have been promoted in all States.  As per the Programme Guidelines, a site quality 
control laboratory has to be set up by the contractor for each package. Payments are 
not made to the contractors unless quality control laboratory has been set up. Under 
the second tier, independent monitoring of quality at the State level has been 
prescribed under the control of SRRDA.  The SRRDA is required to monitor the 
quality of works by deploying State Quality Monitors (SQMs), independent of the 
implementing units and upload the abstract of quality grading along with photographs 
in OMMAS.  These quality monitors check the establishment of field laboratories 
also. As per guidelines, each road work is inspected by the State Quality Monitors at 
three different stages. The first two inspections of every work should be carried out 
during the execution of work spaced at least three months apart and the last 
inspection should be carried out on the completion of every work, as soon as 
possible but preferably within 4 months of completion of the work.  
  
 The third tier of the quality mechanism is an independent monitoring system 
at the central level. Under this tier, retired senior engineers termed as National 
Quality Monitors (NQMs) are engaged for inspections of road works. Works for 
inspection are selected at random. The basic objective of this tier is to identify 
generic issues in quality assurance mechanism of the State. Also these provide on-
site guidance to field staff for better understanding of specifications and good 
construction practices. The NQM grades the work inspected in three categories viz. 
Satisfactory(S), Satisfactory Requiring Improvement (SRI) and Unsatisfactory (U). 
The States are required to send Action Taken Reports (ATRs) in respect of works 
graded as ‘Satisfactory Requiring Improvement’ and ‘Unsatisfactory’ by the NQMs 
during their field inspections. These ATRs are further processed at NRIDA and a 
decision about grade improvement is taken based on documentary proof including 
photographs of road work and recommendation of the SRRDA. The entire exercise 
of submission of ATRs by the States and taking of action on these ATRs has now 
been facilitated in the form of an “online process” on OMMAS. 
 

 
 
49 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
2.15 The Committee observe that under the Rationalization of Autonomous Bodies, 
it has been proposed to merge the National Rural Infrastructure Development 
Agency (NRIDA) and the National Rural Livelihood Promotion Society (NRLPS) with 
the Department of Rural Development and to set up a dedicated Project Monitoring 
Unit (PMU) named National Rural Infrastructure Development Unit (NRIDU) within 
the Department. 
The Committee are of the view that the merger of NRIDA and NRLPS with the 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) should not compromise their autonomy. 
These institutions play a crucial role in implementing and monitoring rural 
development programs, and their independent functioning ensures efficiency, 
innovation, and specialized expertise. Efforts should be made to restore their 
autonomy while ensuring seamless coordination with the Ministry. Instead of full 
integration, these institutions should be strengthened with better financial, 
administrative, and functional independence, allowing them to operate effectively. 
Measures should be taken to enhance their role in policymaking, program 
implementation, and monitoring, ensuring that their expertise is utilized optimally for 
capacity building, rural infrastructure, and livelihood promotion. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 NRIDA:- The matter is being examined and inter-ministerial consultations are 
being held. 
 
NRLPS:- The revised cabinet note for merger of NRLPS with DoRD has been 
prepared and has been approved by Hon'ble Minister RD. However, as per 
recommendation on the merger of NRLPS by the Standing Committee, it will be put-
up separately. 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
2.17 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) under the DAY-NRLM scheme are a boon to rural 
women, enabling them to work together for their livelihoods. However, the 
Committee note that SHG women can be better supported in generating revenue if 

 
 
50 
 
the products they produce, such as dairy, agricultural goods, handicrafts, etc., have 
a proper platform for marketing and sales. 
 Although SHGs have access to village mandis, the limited operational days of 
these mandis restrict their ability to sell their products effectively. Therefore, 
continuous promotion and marketing of SHG products is essential to provide them 
with the much-needed opportunity to thrive. This includes free connectivity for SHG 
products to online marketplaces like Amazon, Flipkart, etc. 
  Additionally, SHG members should be provided with specialized computer 
training to help them launch their local products online through websites and social 
media platforms, enabling them to generate revenue through their hard work and 
skills. 
 The Committee therefore recommend that the DoRD develop a robust 
marketing structure that allows SHG products to gain better visibility, leading to wider 
local and international customer reach, ultimately enhancing revenue generation and 
ensuring sustainable incomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken various steps for enabling 
branding and e-marketing access for SHG products. These efforts include the 
following: 
  
1.  Branding: The Ministry of Rural Development has registered brands as 
“Saras”, Saras Aajeevika” and “Aajeevika” for promotion of SHG products. 
Nineteen states have created state level brands and are facilitating the 
sales of the SHG products under these brands, e.g. Palash and Adiva of 
Jharkhand, Himira of Himachal Pradesh, Mathi of Tamil Nadu etc. 
 
2.  Saras Melas are organised at National, Regional, State and District levels 
to popularise the Saras brand and also to promote the sale of SHG 
products in urban markets. 
 
3. A retail store - Saras Aajeevika Gallery is being operated in Central Delhi 
for sale of curated products of SHG members. Similarly States are also 
operating retail outlets under the state’s brands. 
 
4. A dedicated eCommerce platform eSARAS for selling of curated SHG 
products has been set up and is being operated by MoRD. 
 
5. eSARAS is also live as a Seller Network Participant on ONDC. Curated 
products of women SHGs are now available on 11 Apps of ONDC network 
i.e. Paytm, Mystore, Craftsvilla, Jagran, Snapdeal, Novopay, Easypay, 

 
 
51 
 
Gonuclei, Rubaru, Mappls, Himira. As on date 75 orders have been 
received through ONDC platform. 
 
6. Tie-ups/ partnership have been done with other eCommerce players i.e. 
GeM, ONDC, Amazon, Flipkart, Meesho and JioMart. 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
2.19 During its recent study visit, the Committee came to know that Lakshadweep 
is not fully utilizing the central assistance available under the National Social 
Assistance Programme (NSAP). 
 The Committee is of the view that to maximize benefits for eligible 
beneficiaries, it is essential to ensure effective utilization of both Central and Union 
Territory (UT) contributions. Integrating NSAP with existing UT welfare schemes 
would help enhance social security coverage, optimize resource allocation, and 
provide greater financial assistance to the elderly, widows, and persons with 
disabilities. 
 The Committee therefore recommends that a structured implementation plan 
be adopted to ensure seamless coordination between central and UT funds, 
preventing underutilization and ensuring that all eligible individuals receive their 
rightful entitlements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 NSAP is a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS). As per the guidelines 
of NSAP, the State/UTs are encouraged to provide top up amounts at least of an 
equivalent amount to the assistance provided by the Central Govt. to NSAP 
beneficiaries so that the beneficiaries could get a decent level of assistance. Further, 
if there are more deserving beneficiaries in a State, the State has the option to give 
them pension from its own resources. As per latest information collected from UT of 
Lakshadweep, the UT administration is providing top up amount in the range of 
Rs.300 to Rs.800/- for various categories of NSAP beneficiaries and also covering 
1895 additional beneficiaries through its own scheme over and above NSAP 
beneficiaries.  
  

 
 
52 
 
Although funds are earmarked to UT of Lakshadweep, despite constant follow 
up no proposal for fund release has been received from the UT administration since 
2012-13. UT of Lakshwadeep was release the central assistance of Rs. 21 lakh 
during FY 2012-13.  
                    (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
  

 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
  

 
 
54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.1 The Committee note with concern the significant unspent balances in multiple 
schemes under the Department of Rural Development (DoRD), which remains a 
matter of serious concern. As of the latest financial review, the accumulated unspent 
funds under various schemes are PMAY-G: ₹15,825.35 crore, PMGSY: ₹3,545.77 
crore, NSAP: ₹1,813.34 crore, NRLM: ₹2,583.16 crore, MGNREGA: ₹1,627.65 crore 
and DDU-GKY: ₹1,313.43 crore. 
This substantial accumulation of unutilized funds reflects not only weaknesses 
in fiscal planning within DoRD but also gaps in the implementation mechanisms of 
rural development schemes. The Committee acknowledge and appreciate the 
gradual reduction in unspent balances over time. However, the continued non-
utilization of funds, along with pending wage and material liabilities and delays in 
installment releases, adversely affects the efficiency of scheme implementation and 
hinders the achievement of desired outcomes. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the DoRD develop innovative strategies and adopt a more effective 
approach to enhance fiscal prudence. It is essential that funds are optimally utilized 
within the planned timeframes, ensuring that rural development programs function 
smoothly and effectively contribute to their intended objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 “ MGNREGA:- It is reiterated that the release of funds to States/UTs is an 
ongoing process, and the Central Government remains committed to ensuring timely 
availability of funds in accordance with demand for work generated on the ground. 
Continuous efforts have been made in order to ensure complete utilization of the 
available funds by all the States/UTs. An unspent balance of ₹159.49 crore only 
(0.19%) remained for FY 2024-25, against a Budget Estimate of ₹86,000 crore. 
However, the Ministry ensures the release of the next instalment only after the 
utilization of funds against the previous central release. 
  To ensure optimal fund utilization, the Ministry of Finance has introduced 
SNA-SPARSH module in FY 2024–25 for “Just-in-Time” release of Material and 
Administrative funds under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. This reform enhances 
fund flow efficiency, transparency, and financial prudence by enabling real-time, 

 
 
55 
 
demand-based fund disbursement through seamless integration with Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS), State Integrated Financial Management 
System (IFMS), and RBI’s e-Kuber system. By minimizing idle fund parking and 
improving cash management, SNA-SPARSH ensures accountability, the timely 
availability of funds and enhances prudent financial management. 
PMAY-G:- Liquidation of Unspent balance have an indirect impact in progress of the 
scheme. To minimize the Unspent Balances & ensuring better implementation of the 
scheme, the following steps are being taken by this Ministry:- 
i. Micro monitoring of house sanction and completion using latest IT tools and 
technologies. 
ii. Continuous review at the levels of Secretary/ Deputy Director General level. 
iii. Focus on completion of those houses where 3rd or 2nd installment of funds has 
been released  
iv. Separate review of States with high target, poor performing States and delayed 
houses. 
v. Timely release of funds as per requirements of States/UTs. 
vi. The Aadhar Based Payment System (ABPS) has been integrated with PFMS 
by linking the beneficiaries’ Aadhar numbers with their bank accounts and other 
financial details in the PFMS database. This allows for a seamless flow of funds 
from the government to the beneficiaries through ABPS. 
 
PMGSY:-  PMGSY is not a DBT module scheme. Under PMGSY, funds are released 
to States as an advance against the Value of Projects (VoP) sanctioned. As such 
some amount of funds will always remain with the States. However, to avoid parking 
of funds, further funds are released to states only when they spend 75% of the 
previously released funds. The same is tracked through PFMS and fully ensured.  
Further, the Ministry of Finance has issued fresh guidelines for releasing the funds 
against expenditure to be called "Just in Time" release through SNA-SPARSH.  
Once this is fully implemented, the funds will be released against the expenditure 
and no amount will be available in the bank account of the State/UT. At the 
beginning of the year, a Mother Sanction will be issued indicating the drawing limit of 
each State/UT which can be revised upward and downward depending upon the 
funds flow. The actual release will take place against the bills pushed on PFMS by 
the State Finance MIS portal called “Integrated Financial Management and 
Information System(IFMIS)”.  In this scenario, no unspent balance will be available 
with states. Upon onboarding on SNA-SPARSH, the unspent balance available in 
the account of the state nodal account will have to be returned in the Consolidated 
Funds of India/State/UTs in the proportion of existing funding pattern based on the 
pre-defined Standard Operating Procedure. Some States like Assam, Rajasthan, 
Meghalaya and Chhattisgarh have already on-boarded and others will also follow 
suit very soon. 
DAY-NRLM:- With the implementation of guidelines on "Procedure for Release of 
funds under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and monitoring utilization of 
the funds released" by Ministry of Finance, Government of India (Gol), each 

 
 
56 
 
instalment is now limited to 25% of the allocation and proposal for next instalment 
can be raised only on spending of 75% of the available funds including State Share. 
In case State share is not released, proposal for next instalment cannot be 
processed. All the sub-schemes of DAY-NRLM has been on boarded at PFMS 
platform in all states and all the expenditures is being done through PFMS. This 
enhances transparency in transfer of fund and unspent balances at all levels. 
 In addition to the above, this Division rolled out a new electronic fund 
management system namely e-FMAS (e-Financial Management and Accounting 
System) through which expenditure position of the State can be monitored daily-
wise. It will help this Division to monitor State-wise expenditure and unspent balance 
position more vigilantly and guide lagging States for timely utilization of funds. 
 Further, to control the unspent balance, Finance Review Meetings are held 
with States to review the progress of the expenditure and resolve any impediments 
in smooth flow of funds and pace of expenditure. Performance Review Meetings with 
the States are also held regularly at highest level under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (RD) which are attended by the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries of all States. 
 It is also pertinent to mention that this Division is also in process to implement 
SNA-SPARSH model in the States to comply the principle of ‘just-in-time’ release. 
Once, the implementation of SNA-SPARSH completed with all the States, there not 
be any unspent balances with the States. 
DDU-GKY:- Implementation of SNA-SPARSH under DDUGKY has been initiated 
which will minimise the accumulation of unutilised funds to a great extent. However 
recommendations given by the committee have been noted for compliance. 
NSAP:- To foster transparency and swiftness in transactions, NSAP pension 
schemes were included under Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) schemes in December 
2014. At present, almost all States/ UTs are DBT compliant except Andhra Pradesh 
and Nagaland. NSAP-PPS, a web portal linked with Pubic Financial Management 
System (PFMS) as well as UIDAI for Aadhaar authentication/ de-duplication, has 
been operationalized and all States/UTs have been requested to on-board the portal 
to serve as a single beneficiary management system. State/UTs can generate the 
pension payment order monthly by using NSAP-PPS and disburse the pension in the 
respective account of the beneficiary through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). Fund 
requirement of the States/UTs is arrived at based on the digitized number of 
beneficiaries of State cap of beneficiaries, whichever is lower.  Further, funds are 
released to the State/UT in 4 equal tranches and before release of each tranche 
State/UT concerned has to submit relevant documents/ information in compliance 
with scheme guidelines/ procedures laid down by DoE. These measures help in 
optimum utilization of the allocated budget.  
  As regards financial achievement in FY 2024-25, the entire allocation of 
Rs.9652 crore was released to States/UTs under NSAP schemes. BE 2025-26 for 
NSAP is Rs. 9652.00 crore. As there is no change in State/UT wise ceiling of 

 
 
57 
 
beneficiaries under NSAP schemes, allocated BE 2025-26 appears to be sufficient to 
meet the requirement.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.3 The Committee are concerned to note that the Budget Estimates under 
MGNREGA for the Financial Year 2025-26 have remained unchanged at ₹86,000 
crore since the Revised Estimates for 2023-24. 
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) provides a legal right to work for the most economically disadvantaged 
sections of the rural population who are willing to work. It is a last resort of succour 
for the jobless section of the society who have no other means of livelihood to feed 
their family members. The scheme serves as a critical safety net, particularly for 
those facing extreme poverty and unemployment. 
  The role and importance of MGNREGA was clearly visible during the corona 
pandemic times when it acted as a ray of hope for the needy in times of distress. The 
Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale for not increasing the allocation 
of fund under MGNREGA since 2023-24. Since the scheme ensured employment to 
masses of rural poor and deprived section of the society, it is very much essential 
that adequate Budgetary Allocation ought to be made for the effective 
implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee urge that the requirement for fund allocation should be looked 
afresh as it is an established procedure that MGNREGA being a demand driven 
scheme, the funds can be raised at RE stage accordingly. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Rural Development apprise themselves of the 
still existing high demand for job under MGNREGA at the ground level more 
realistically and press upon the Ministry of Finance for increased allocation to 
MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  “The Budget allocation under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA has steadily risen. In 
the budget allocation for the FY 2024-25, the BE allocated was Rs. 86,000 crore 
which is the highest ever allocation to the scheme at the BE stage.  For the FY 2025-

 
 
58 
 
26, BE continues to stand at Rs 86,000 crore, which shows the Government’s 
commitment to provide adequate funds to the scheme. 
 
The release of funds to States/UTs is a continuous and demand-driven process. The 
Central Government remains committed to ensuring the timely availability of funds 
based on the actual requirement for work on the ground. As and when additional 
financial requirements arise, this Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of 
Finance for the provision of requisite funds to ensure uninterrupted implementation 
of the Scheme.” 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.5 A long-standing concern of the Committee regarding MGNREGA have been 
the revision of wage rates and the disparity in wages across different States and 
Union Territories. Despite multiple recommendations on this matter, the Department 
of Rural Development has not implemented any significant changes. 
The Committee emphasize the need for the Department to address this issue 
with a balanced and pragmatic approach. It is essential to ensure that wage rates 
are revised appropriately, keeping in mind the rising cost of living and the economic 
conditions of rural workers. 
Furthermore, the current linkage of MGNREGA wages to the Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Laborers (CPI-AL) may not accurately reflect inflation trends. 
The Committee believe that this index does not fully capture the real impact of 
inflation, and therefore, the method of wage calculation must be reviewed and 
updated on a priority basis to reflect actual economic conditions at the ground level. 
Since MGNREGA is primarily funded by the Central Government, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development consider the 
implementation of a uniform wage rate across all States and Union Territories. This 
would help ensure fairness and consistency in wage payments under the scheme. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development take immediate steps to revise MGNREGA wage rates by linking them 
to a more appropriate pricing index and explore the feasibility of establishing a 
standardized wage rate under MGNREGS at the national level. 

 
 
59 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 “As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005, Central Government may, by notification, specify a separate 
wage rate for the beneficiary of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The rate is revised on 
the basis of Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL).  
 Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA vide Gazette Notification S.O. 82(E) dated 14th January, 2011 in exercise of 
the power conferred by Section 6(1) of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, using CPI-AL 
as index and kept the wage rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs.100 
whichever is more as the base for indexation for the States.  
 For protecting the wage against inflation, it has been decided to index the 
wage rate notified under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA to the Consumer Price Index 
for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) while maintaining the distinction between the notified 
wage rate under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and the minimum wage Act.   
 However, State Governments can provide wage over and above the wage 
rate notified by the Central Government. Using the present methodology of wage 
rate calculation, the central government has notified the wage rate and it has 
increased by around 5% (average) over the last year and around 29% (average) in 
the previous 5 years.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
4.7 The Committee are concerned about the persistent delays in the 
disbursement of the Centre’s share of funds under the wage and material 
components of MGNREGA across multiple States and Union Territories. As per the 
information provided by the Department of Rural Development, as of 15.02.2025, the 
pending liabilities stand at ₹12,219.18 crore in wages, ₹11,227.09 crore in material 
components and total pending liabilities are ₹23,446.27 crore. This accounts for 
27.26% of the current budget, meaning that more than one- fourth of the allocated 
funds will be used to clear previous years' dues. Consequently, the actual working 
budget for the current financial year is reduced to ₹62,553.73 crore, significantly 
limiting the scheme’s capacity to function effectively and meet its primary objective of 
preventing rural distress and ensuring livelihood security. 
 

 
 
60 
 
The Committee find accrual of such liabilities as severe impediments 
hampering the beneficiaries’ plight. While the Committee acknowledge the reasons 
cited by the Department of Rural Development, such as non-receipt of required 
documents, these delays in wage payments and fund disbursement create 
significant hardships for rural workers. Given the scale of MGNREGA, which serves 
millions of job cardholders across the country, such financial bottlenecks not only 
impact rural livelihoods but also discourage the most vulnerable sections of society 
from seeking employment under the scheme. 
  This, in turn, increases distress migration to urban areas in search of 
alternative employment opportunities. Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Department of Rural Development to take immediate steps to ensure the timely 
release of the Centre’s share of funds under wages and materials. The Department 
must strengthen coordination with State Governments and adopt effective measures 
to prevent further delays in disbursement. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 “The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA), 2005 is a demand driven wage employment programme. Fund 
release to the States/UTs is a continuous and dynamic process.  Funds are released 
to the States/UTs on the basis of "agreed to" Labour Budget (LB) and performance 
of the States/UTs during the financial year. Funds are released to the States/UTs 
normally in two tranches with more than one instalment in one tranche based on 
agreed Labour Budget (LB), opening balance, pending liabilities of the previous 
financial year, if any, and overall performance. The first instalment of first tranche is 
released to the States/UTs in 1st half of April month of the financial year. The 2nd 
Tranche is released on submission of proposal in the prescribed format by the State 
and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions. The proposal can be 
submitted after a State / UTs has utilized 75 percent of the total available funds. If 
the proposal for 2nd Tranche is submitted after 30th September, then the Audit 
Report and Audited UC of the previous financial year are also required. Quantum of 
funds to be released as part of second tranche depends upon the performance of the 
State/UTs.  
 The Central Government has cleared all pending wage liabilities (₹17,251.21 
crore) of FY 2024–25 across all States and Union Territories and fund is also being 
released to all States/UTs for meeting wage payment requirements for the ongoing 
financial year 2025–26 in a phased manner. It may be noted that the release of 
funds to States/UTs is a continuous and demand-driven process. The Central 
Government remains fully committed to ensuring the timely availability of funds in 
accordance with the demand for work generated on the ground under MGNREGA.” 
 

 
 
61 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
4.9 The Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS) facilitates the direct transfer of 
wages to the bank accounts of unskilled workers under MGNREGA, even in cases 
where beneficiaries frequently change bank accounts or fail to update their new 
account details with the concerned Programme Officer. This system has been 
effective in eliminating fraudulent claims and ensuring that only genuine beneficiaries 
receive wage payments. 
The Committee acknowledge and appreciates the role of ABPS in enhancing 
transparency and efficiency. However, the Committee firmly believe that this 
technological intervention should not be made mandatory due to operational 
challenges that have led to exclusions of genuine beneficiaries. In several instances, 
workers have been wrongfully removed from the system due to discrepancies 
between their Aadhaar details and job card records. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development ensure that the Aadhaar-Based Payment System remains optional and 
that alternative payment mechanisms are made available. This would ensure that 
workers without Aadhaar or those facing biometric authentication issues continue to 
receive their rightful wages without compromising the integrity of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 “ABPS is a route for a payment instruction to follow and finally payment gets 
credited into the bank account of the beneficiary linked to Aadhaar at last time by the 
beneficiary. Earlier, ABPS (Aadhaar Based Payment System) conversion was done 
by MoRD through NPCI Mapper uploads. Now, this functionality is available at the 
block and GP levels in NREGASoft, enabling Aadhaar authentication and ABPS 
conversion directly by POs. This streamlined process has removed conversion 
bottlenecks, with Program Officers now performing daily updates at the block level. 
 As of now, 11.78 crore Aadhaar (99.58%) have been seeded in NREGASoft, 
and 11.52 crore workers (97.77%) are ABPS-enabled. Nearly 99.9% of wage 
payments are made via DBT, with support 95% through ABPS as of March 2025. It 
is also informed that if any transaction returns from NPCI/Bank with any valid reason 
for rejection under ABPS then that transaction can be regenerated from NACH 
(National Automated Clearing House) payment mode. Therefore, there already 

 
 
62 
 
exists an alternative solution at NREGASoft in the form of NACH Payment mode (i.e. 
Account Based) for the regeneration of failed transactions under ABPS. The 
effectiveness of ABPS is evident from the fact that from 1st january,2024 till 25th 
Feburary,2025 mere 0.41% of transactions have been rejected with reasons such as 
no such account or account closed in case of ABPS system, whereas the rate of 
rejection was as high as 8.50% in case of NACH payment mode. This figure clearly 
demarcates that ABPS system ensures greater transparency and ensures on time 
payment to the workers.  
 Further, the Ministry has also strengthened the verification procedures to 
ensure that all job cards issued are genuine and meet the required criteria. For this, 
a detailed SOP has been issued to all States/UTs for deletion and restoration of 
jobcards. The SoP outlines standardized procedures to ensure compliance with the 
MGNREG Act, promoting transparency, accountability and fairness in the deletion or 
restoration of job cards and workers. 
 The Ministry continues monitoring and addressing delays and exclusions due 
to unseeded Aadhaar, tech issues, or lack of awareness. It is intensifying training, 
awareness efforts, and KYC compliance, while also upgrading tech and grievance 
redressal systems. The Committee’s recommendation to mandate ABPS supports 
transparency and efficiency, and the Ministry remains committed to inclusivity, 
ensuring timely and secure wage disbursement under MGNREGS.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
4.11 While examining the subject of MGNREGA and during their deliberations, the 
Committee were apprised about demands from various quarters of the country 
regarding the increase in the number of days from 100. The Committee also take 
cognizance of the provision of the scheme through which State Governments can 
request an additional 50 days of work under MGNREGA to meet the need for work in 
cases of exigencies arising out of natural calamities. 
The Committee take note of this existing provision and is of the view that 
MGNREGA is a last ‘fall-back’ option for numerous rural people, and the amount of 
expenditure under it also elicits a keen interest in the scheme by the poor and 
marginalized. The scheme needs to be revamped, keeping in view the changing 
times and emerging challenges. 
 

 
 
63 
 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the ‘need of the hour’ is to further 
diversify the nature of works under MGNREGA in such a manner and through such 
mechanisms that could also propel the number of guaranteed working days under 
MGNREGA to at least 150 days from the current 100 days. In light of this, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Department of Rural Development to review the 
scheme of MGNREGA in such a way that could ensure an increase in the number of 
guaranteed days of work from 100 to 150 days. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA), 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood 
security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one 
hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every 
household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
            The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage 
employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household 
in a forest area, provided that these households have no other private property 
except for the land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
       In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days 
of wage employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified 
rural areas. Further, as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may 
make provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the period 
guaranteed under the Act from their own funds. States like Odisha, Chhattisgarh, 
Maharashtra, Kerala etc. have a provision to provide over and above 100 days of 
wage employment from their own resources.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
4.13 The Committee note that the Ministry of Rural Development has been 
implementing the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) since April 1, 
2016, as one of the Government's flagship schemes aimed at achieving the vision of 
‘Housing for All by 2024’. The overall target of the scheme was to construct 2.95 
crore houses by 2024, which included 2.04 crore houses from the Socio-Economic 

 
 
64 
 
Caste Census (SECC) 2011-based Permanent Wait List (PWL) and 0.91 crore 
houses from the finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey list. 
  The Union Cabinet, in its meeting on August 9, 2024, approved the 
continuation of PMAY-G for five more years to construct 2 crore additional houses, 
which would cover the remaining eligible households from the SECC 2011 PWL and 
saturation of the updated Awaas+ (2018) list. Additionally, the houses targeted for 
completion by March 31, 2024, under the previous phase, must now be completed 
by March 2025, as per the Cabinet's approval. 
While the Committee appreciate the extension of PMAY-G, it expresses 
serious concern over the allocation of houses under the extended phase. As of 
October 22, 2024, a total of 2.66 crore houses have been completed, while 29 lakh 
houses remain pending. A backlog of 1,46,54,267 houses still exists, including 
62,54,267 from the SECC-2011 list and approximately 84 lakh from the Awaas+ list. 
The 2 crore houses approved under the extended phase already account for this 
backlog of 1.46 crore houses, meaning that, in reality, only 53.45 lakh new houses 
have been allocated under this phase. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the total number of houses planned 
under the extended phase of PMAY-G be increased to at least 3.46 crore, 
accounting for both the backlog of 1.46 crore houses and an additional 2 crore 
houses to ensure fresh allocations beyond the existing backlog. Additionally, given 
the rise in construction costs and inflationary pressures, the Committee recommend 
that the per-unit cost of houses under PMAY-G be increased to ₹4 lakh to ensure 
that beneficiaries receive quality housing that meets minimum standards of safety 
and durability. 
During the course of its examination, the Committee was informed that all 
houses under the scheme will only be completed by 2029, a timeline the Committee 
consider highly concerning, as it will cause unnecessary hardship to intended 
beneficiaries. The Committee also note that in the meantime, the Awaas+ 2024 
survey, conducted through the Awaas+ 2024 Mobile App, is being used to identify 
additional eligible rural households under modified exclusion criteria. As of February 
14, 2025, 80,32,731 households have been surveyed by States and Union 
Territories, raising expectations that many more rural families will be able to secure 
pucca houses under the scheme. 
  

 
 
65 
 
Given the scale of delays and the existing backlog, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to take urgent and proactive measures to identify and address the causes of delays. 
It is imperative to ensure continuous coordination with States and Union Territories 
to facilitate the timely completion of incomplete and pending houses within the 
revised deadline. The successful implementation of PMAY-G is crucial for achieving 
universal housing coverage, and the Committee strongly emphasize that all 
necessary actions must be taken without further delays to prevent hardship to rural 
beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 “The PMAY-G had an initial target of construction of 2.95 crore houses during 
FY 2016-24. The initial target was arrived at on the basis of the eligible households 
as per the Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011database, after verification 
by the Gram Sabhas, as of 31.03.2016.However, the States and Union Territories 
(UTs) have remanded the ineligible households and as of 31.03.2024, a total of 2.11 
crore households remained as eligible in the SECC 2011 based Permanent Wait List 
(PWL) of the PMAY-G. The Ministry had allocated target of 2.04 crore houses from 
the Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011 based Permanent Wait List (PWL) 
and 0.91 crore houses from the finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey list till 31.03.2024.  
With the approval of the Union Cabinet for implementing the next phase of the 
PMAY-G during FY 2024-25 to 2028-29, the existing SECC 2011 PWL of all States 
have been saturated with overall target allocation of 2.11 crore houses. In addition, 
the Ministry has allocated overall target of 3.84 crore houses till 23.04.2025, 
including target of 0.89 crore houses allocated during FY 2024-25 from the new 
allocation of 2 crore houses approved by the Union Cabinet. The finalized Awaas+ 
2018 survey list of 22 States and Union Territories is already saturated. In addition, a 
proposal is under consideration for saturating the remaining States by allocation of 
balance houses/ beneficiaries in Awaas+ 2018 survey list as target during FY 2025-
26. A total of 0.62 crore houses is to be allocated to the 10 remaining unsaturated 
States to saturate their existing Awaas+ 2018 survey list. 
The Awaas+ 2024 survey window is open till 30.04.2025. After saturation of 
existing SECC 2011 PWL and finalized Awaas+ 2018 survey list, approximately a 
target of 54 lakh houses would remain to be allocated from the Awaas+ 2024 survey 
lists during this phase of the PMAY-G (till FY 2028-29). 
The recommendations of the Standing Committee for increasing target of this 
phase of the PMAY-G from 2 crore houses to 3.46 crore houses, have been noted. 
However, there is no proposal under consideration of the Ministry to increase the 
target for this phase of the PMAY-G (FY 2024-29). 
In addition, the unit assistance under the PMAY-G is Rs. 1.20 lakh in plain 
areas and Rs. 1.30 lakh in Hill States (Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Union 

 
 
66 
 
Territories of J&K and Ladakh) and North Eastern States. At present, there is no 
proposal for revision in the existing unit assistance provided under the PMAY-G. 
The major shortcomings faced till date by the PMAY-G are delay in 
construction of houses due to COVID-19 induced restrictions, delay on part of 
States/ UTs in releasing of Central & State Share from State Treasury to State Nodal 
Account of PMAY-G, delay in allotment of land to landless beneficiaries by the 
States/UTs, cases of unwillingness of beneficiaries, permanent migration, disputed 
succession, unavailability of building materials and at times General/ Assembly/ 
Panchayat elections. 
The Ministry is taking the following steps to ensure timely completion of 
houses under PMAY-G:  
i. Regular review of progress at the level of Ministry. 
ii. Launch of dedicated PMAY-G analytic Dashboard for monitoring and 
supervision of the scheme. 
iii. Timely allocation of targets to the States/UTs and release of adequate 
funds. 
iv. Regular follow ups with the State to ensure release of central and state 
share of funds and provision of land to landless beneficiaries in rural 
areas. 
v. Awards to the best performing States/UTs, Districts based on 
performance index dashboard, thereby creating healthy competition and 
motivation among the States/UTs for achieving the set targets.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.15 The Committee note that the progress and development of the entire country 
is heavily dependent on robust rural connectivity. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) was launched with the objective of providing all- weather road 
connectivity to unconnected habitations, thereby boosting rural infrastructure and 
economic development. However, it has been observed that a significant number of 
projects under PMGSY remain incomplete within their designated timeframe, leading 
to delays in infrastructure development and the benefits reaching the intended 
beneficiaries. 
 

 
 
67 
 
Such delays even cause an escalation in the project cost due to the 
inflationary aspect affecting the expenditure on raw materials. Rural roads is a State 
subject, and the responsibility for the execution and maintenance of PMGSY projects 
lies with the State Governments, who serve as the implementing authorities. While 
the Committee acknowledge this, they emphasize the need for stronger coordination 
mechanisms to ensure the timely release of funds by State Governments, enabling 
smoother project execution. 
Additionally, the Committee note that delays in obtaining clearances from 
various Ministries, such as the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
have further prolonged the implementation of many PMGSY projects. This 
bureaucratic bottleneck has been a significant hurdle in the timely execution of road 
construction projects, affecting the rural populace who rely on improved connectivity 
for economic and social mobility. 
In light of the above facts, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Rural Development (DoRD) take proactive measures to expedite the completion of 
pending PMGSY projects by ensuring effective coordination with State 
Governments, streamlining approval processes, and facilitating better convergence 
with other Ministries. The Committee stress that it is imperative for the DoRD to 
address these issues on a priority basis to ensure that PMGSY projects are 
completed within stipulated timelines and deliver their intended benefits to rural 
communities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 “The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) aims to provide all-
weather road connectivity to unconnected habitations in rural areas. Over the years, 
significant progress has been made under PMGSY-I, PMGSY-II, and PMGSY-III. 
However, certain projects remain pending due to various challenges such as land 
acquisition issues, difficult terrain, contractor delays, and legal hurdles.  The Ministry 
remains committed to completing all pending projects under PMGSY within the 
stipulated timelines. With continuous monitoring, policy flexibility, and strategic 
interventions, efforts are being made to overcome the existing challenges and 
ensure seamless rural road connectivity across the country. 
 The progress of implementation of rural roads under PMGSY is regularly 
reviewed by way of Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), the Performance Review 
Committee (PRC)Meetings, Pre-Empowered /Empowered Committee Meetings with 
the States. At District level, the District Development Coordination and Monitoring 

 
 
68 
 
Committee (DISHA) headed by a Member of Parliament (LS) monitors the 
implementation of various schemes of Government of India including PMGSY. In 
addition to this, special review meetings/monthly review meetings are also held by 
Secretary/Additional Secretary/Joint Secretaries, Ministry of Rural Development with 
Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries of the States. In these meetings, hand 
holding of the State is done and efforts are made to remove the obstacles. 
Further, the Ministry of Rural Development has taken the following initiatives 
to ensure completion of the sanctioned PMGSY Projects within the timeline 
prescribed in the programme guidelines: 
  
i. The Operational Manual of the PMGSY has been amended to ensure that 
all works sanctioned under the scheme commence on the ground within 72 
days from the date of sanction. 
ii. States have been requested to augment their executing capacity and 
contracting capacity, and their compliance in this regard is regularly 
reviewed. 
iii. Bidding document provisions have been rationalised. 
iv. Training is being imparted to field engineers and contractors, as well as 
their staff, for capacity building. 
v.     Information Technology is being utilised for monitoring the progress of      
work.” 
 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
4.17 The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana-IV 
(PMGSY-IV) has been launched for the financial years 2024-25 to 2028-29, with a 
total outlay of Rs. 70,125 crore (Central Share: Rs. 49,087.50 crore, State Share: 
Rs. 21,037.50 crore). Under this scheme, 25,000 unconnected habitations with a 
population size of 500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill States/UTs, special category 
areas (Tribal Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/Blocks, Desert areas), and 100+ in 
LWE-affected districts will be covered as per the 2011 Census. It is proposed that 
62,500 km of all-weather roads will be provided to these unconnected habitations. 
Additionally, the construction of required bridges along the alignment of these roads 
will also be undertaken. 

 
 
69 
 
The Committee, however, express concern that the PMGSY-IV road survey is 
currently based on the outdated 2011 Census, which does not reflect the present 
population, settlement expansions, and evolving infrastructure needs. Since the new 
Census has not yet been conducted, the survey lacks an accurate picture of ground 
realities, leading to ineligible habitations receiving priority while genuine beneficiaries 
are overlooked. 
The Committee therefore recommend that, to ensure equitable rural 
connectivity, the road survey under PMGSY-IV should be revised based on the latest 
available population data or an interim assessment. This will help identify true 
beneficiaries, address infrastructural gaps, and ensure that roads are allocated fairly 
to areas most in need. 
Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommend that the local Member of 
Parliament (MP) must be consulted before the survey, and each survey must be 
vetted and approved by the local parliamentary representative. If the authorities fail 
to do so, it would raise serious concerns about the transparency and inclusivity of the 
survey process. The Committee emphasize that parliamentary oversight is crucial in 
ensuring that the road network benefits those who need it the most and that no 
eligible habitation is left out due to bureaucratic lapses or outdated data. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 The CCEA has approved PMGSY-IV with the following stipulations/ norms:- 
  
 "Construction of 62,500 Km of all-weather roads (single lane) to provide 
connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of population size 500+ in 
plains, 250+ in NE & Hill States/ UTs, special category areas (Tribal Schedule V, 
Aspirational Districts/ Blocks, Desert areas), and 100+ in LWE affected districts, as 
per Census 2011". 
 Further, Programme guidelines of PMGSY provide that the population of all 
habitations within a radius of 500 meters (1.5 km of path distance in case of Hills) 
may be clubbed together to determine the population size. In the block bordering the 
international boundary in the hill States (as identified by Department of Home 
Affairs), however, all habitations within a path distance of 10 km may be treated as a 
cluster for this purpose. This cluster approach would enable the provision of 
connectivity to a larger number of Habitations, particularly in the Hill/ Mountains 
areas. 
  As per the PMGSY-IV norms, the District Rural Roads Block and District level 
has to be prepared, based on the conducted surveys to identify habitations through 
the Gram Sadak Survey App, and placed before the District Panchayats. In all these 

 
 
70 
 
stages the suggestions and proposals from Hon’ble Members of Parliament are to be 
given due importance.  
 Ministry of Rural Development vide letter dated 29.01.2025 (English) and 
10.02.2025 (Hindi) (Copy Attached at reply to recommendation Serial No. 14) has 
directed States/ UTs that  during the survey process itself, the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIUs) should apprise the Hon’ble Members of Parliament (both 
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha as per PMGSY norms) regarding the ongoing survey 
and give due consideration to their suggestions for inclusion of habitations in DRRP 
and CNCPL as per the eligibility norms of the programme, para 5.5 of the 
programme guidelines mention the following:- 
 5.5 After the CNCPL is prepared and verified it shall be placed before the 
district Panchayat. The Member of Parliament/ MLA shall be given a copy of the 
CNPL and their suggestions and the suggestions of lower level Panchayati Raj 
Institutions shall be given fullest consideration by the District Panchayat while 
according its approval. 
 The suggestion of the Hon’ble Members of Parliament regarding the eligible 
habitations should be duly recorded in MP-I format before submission of proposals to 
district Panchayat for the approval. This will ensure that the eventual selection of the 
habitations is comprehensive and it strengthens the planning and implementation 
under the programme.  
 Further, this ministry vide letter dated 15.03.2025 has directed the States/UTs 
to circulate the letter dated 29.01.2025 and 10.02.2025 along with a copy of PMGSY 
guidelines (English and Hindi) to all Hon’ble Member of Parliament for kind 
information.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
4.19 NIRD, established in 1958 as an autonomous organization of the Ministry of 
Rural Development, Government of India, acts as a ‘think-tank’ for the Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) and the Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) by providing 
critical inputs for policymaking through research, creation of a knowledge base, and 
capacity building of rural development officials and development practitioners. NIRD 
has played a facilitating role in rural development flagship programs of MoRD since 
the inception of the current Ministry. NIRD was registered as a society funded by the 
Ministry of Rural Development. In 2014, the subject of Panchayati Raj was added to 
NIRD, making it the National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj 
(NIRDPR). 

 
 
71 
 
 The Committee note that for the year 2024-25, the Budget Estimate (BE) was 
Rs. 108 crore, which was later reduced to Rs. 73.68 crore at the Revised Estimate 
(RE) stage, and the actual expenditure remained the same. However, the Committee 
are perplexed at the Budget Estimate for 2025-26 being only Rs. 1 lakh. From this, it 
can only be inferred that a major development regarding the future of the institute is 
being planned. 
The Committee are concerned about the fate of the 200-odd employees of 
this historical institute. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that the 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, has recommended the 
disengagement of this autonomous organization from the MoRD, with a proposal that 
the institute be converted into a Centre of Excellence or a deemed university-type 
setup, generating its own funds. This proposal is still at the discussion stage with 
NIRDPR. 
The Committee desire that, until a concrete decision is taken, the budget 
allocation be reviewed to ensure the continued functioning of this institute and to 
allay the fears and anxiety of its employees. 
Reply of the Government 
4.20 “The Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Government of India 
undertook an exercise to rationalize various Central Autonomous Bodies established 
by the Government of India in line with Rule 229 of General Financial Rules, 2017. A 
review of the recommendations, carried out by Department of Expenditure, noted in 
its report AB-4 as below:- 
 “The Institute has expanded itself over time in terms of it’s mandate. Its 
performance in fulfilling it’s primary role of capacity building of rural development 
functionaries, elected representatives of PRIs, bankers, NGOs and other 
stakeholders has been satisfactory. The plethora of activities undertaken needs to be 
continued as NIRD&PR acts as a think-tank providing consultancy services for rural 
schemes & programmes. Moreover, it has emerged as an internationally recognized 
center of excellence. It has also taken steps towards long term financial stability by 
establishing a corpus fund.  
It is recommended that NIRD&PR may be disengaged from 
MoRD/Government of India gradually in terms of financial support and administrative 
control. It may be converted into a Center of Excellence/Deemed University engaged 
in training and research. However, Central government may access it’s services as a 
client. Government may give grants based on the functions of the body till it is 
converted into a deemed, autonomous Institute. Disengagement by the government 
is recommended with a three year timeline and a gradual budget reduction of 25 % 
each year.” 

 
 
72 
 
    In compliance of recommendation of Ministry of Finance, a draft cabinet note 
was circulated among stake holders Ministries/ Department for inter-ministerial 
consultation on 28.08.2023 and after receiving comments from various Ministries, 
revised draft cabinet note has been sent to DoE for comments on 03.04.2025. Reply 
from DoE is awaited.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.35 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
4.21 The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a 100% Centrally 
Funded Centrally Sponsored Scheme, providing social security assistance to senior 
citizens, widows, disabled persons, and bereaved families upon the death of the 
primary breadwinner. The scheme has been continued under the 15th Finance 
Commission Cycle (2021-26). 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimates for NSAP have remained 
static at Rs. 9,652 crore for the last three financial years, including the current year. 
The Committee are unable to comprehend the rationale behind not increasing the 
allocation of funds for NSAP since 2022-23. Given the importance of ensuring 
adequate financial support for the beneficiaries, the Committee feel that the 
budgetary allocation must be reviewed. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of Rural 
Development submit a new proposal for Cabinet consideration, seeking an upward 
revision of fund allocation for NSAP. This would ensure that all eligible beneficiaries 
receive the intended assistance, and the needs of vulnerable sections are effectively 
addressed. 
Reply of the Government 
 4.22 “The Govt. has approved continuation of NSAP in its present form upto 2025-
26. An evaluation study of NSAP schemes for assessing its overall impact and to 
suggest road map/ recommendations for continuation of the scheme has been 
initiated, for contemplating the proposal for continuing NSAP beyond March, 2026.” 
 
 (DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
 
73 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
4.23 The Committee are aware that District and State-level DISHA meetings are to 
be conducted once every three months and six months, respectively, to ensure strict 
oversight of government schemes and to provide a detailed review of their progress 
through interactions between public representatives and government officials. The 
primary objective of these meetings is to monitor the effective utilization of 
government funds for the welfare of the common masses. Given their critical role in 
governance, these meetings hold paramount importance as a valuable accountability 
mechanism. 
 However, the Committee have repeatedly noted glaring irregularities by 
District and State authorities in holding these meetings as mandated. Despite 
numerous requests by Members of Parliament, the follow-up on conducting DISHA 
meetings effectively has been ignored. As of February 15, 2025, only 462 district-
level meetings have been conducted for the 2024-25 financial year, which is far 
below the expected frequency. 
  Since it is imperative for Members of Parliament to regularly review the 
implementation status of government schemes in their constituencies, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department of Rural Development establish 
a robust mechanism to ensure regular convening of DISHA meetings. At a minimum, 
at least two meetings per year should be mandatorily conducted, with the 
compulsory attendance of all concerned officers to ensure effective monitoring and 
accountability. 
Reply of the Government 
4.24 “Timely convening of the DISHA meeting is crucial for ensuring effective 
governance and promoting the holistic development of the districts. Recognizing the 
critical importance of DISHA, Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) is persistently 
working to ensure that these meetings are convened on a regular basis. All 
States/UTs have been urged to take necessary actions and instruct the relevant 
Member Secretaries (District Collectors, Magistrates, Deputy Commissioners) to 
ensure that District Level DISHA meetings are held as per DISHA guidelines. The 
Hon'ble Members of Parliament have also been requested from time to time to hold 
mandated DISHA meetings in their respective districts.” 
(DoRD O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.41 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
 
74 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Rural Development O.M.No. G-20011/17/2024-B&A Dated 10.06.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 8th August, 2025 
 17 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
75 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 8th AUGUST, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
    
12. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
a. Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 5th Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). 
b. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
3. Above mentioned draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee 
then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same 
to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 

 
 
76 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              22
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, 3, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21 
          Total:10
                Percentage: - 45%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0%      
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17, 20, 22    
   
Total: 12 
        Percentage: - 55% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0%      
 
 
 