 
 
 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT   
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An insight into 
wage rates and other matters relating thereto” (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development)] 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
4 


 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 
 (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
  (DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An insight into wage rates and 
other matters relating thereto (2023-24) of the Ministry of Rural Development 
(Department of Rural Development)'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CRD No. 195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by __________________. 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-2025) ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
   
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 
23 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
37 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
38 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
53 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 13.12.2024 
 
54 
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj. 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka   -  Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
Rajya Sabha Members 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
28. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
29. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sudhanshu Shekhar  - Executive Officer 
 
  

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development & 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on their behalf, present the 4th Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj (17thLok Sabha) on 
‘Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (MGNREGA) – An insight into wage rates and other matters relating thereto’ 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development). 
2.  The Thirty-Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 08.02.2024 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2024. Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
12.06.2024. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 13.12.2024. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
13 December, 2024 
22 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)    
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2024-25) deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An insight into 
wage rates and other matters relating thereto’ of the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) for the term 2023-2024. 
1.2  The Thirty-Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 
08.02.2024 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2024. The 
Report contained 18 Observations/Recommendations.  
1.3  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 18 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Government. These have been examined and categorised as follows: -  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Serial Nos. 1, , 7, 8, 9, , , 12, 15, 16, 17, 18     
         Total: 9 
         Chapter-II 
           
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
      Serial No. NIL 
Total: NIL  
Chapter-III  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
      Serial No. 2, 3, 4, 5,6,10,11 13, 14       
 Total: 09 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
      Serial No. NIL        
 Total: NIL 
              Chapter-V 
 

 
 
2 
 
1.4  The Committee desire that Final Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration/merit 
comments.  
I. Delay in the Release of Funds 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
1.6 With regard to the Delay in the Release of Funds, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee find that availability of funds is one major 
aspect affecting the financial health of the scheme while the other area 
of equal importance is the often complained matter associated with the 
delay in the release of funds to the States. Proper implementation of 
the scheme totally hinges on the timely and adequate release of funds 
to all the States/UTs. Now the permissible works under MGNREGA 
have been widened further to include Natural Resource Management 
(NRM) works and hence the ambit of works under MGNREGA is 
further increasing day by day. However, on perusal of the information 
provided, Committee find that there are wage and material liabilities in 
respect of many of the States and UTs. In this regard, the Committee 
note the submission of DoRD that fund release is a continuous process 
and timely compliance of conditions by States for fund release is the 
important requirement. If any State could not comply the conditions in a 
timeline, it leads to delay in release of funds. Further, it is noted that 
there are delays in material payment and DoRD is trying to devise 
systems whereby these delays are removed or minimized. In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that whatever may be the 
reasons for non-release of funds, the sufferers remain the poor and 
down-trodden beneficiaries of MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, 
call upon the DoRD to address the grey areas surrounding the timely 
release of funds under MGNREGA and spruce up their financial 
mechanisms for ensuring that obstacles in the path of seamless 
release of funds under MGNREGA are removed so that MGNREGA 
works/beneficiaries do not have to suffer. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that DoRD should take up the matter of delays in 
compliance of conditions with every State and UT and ensure that the 
funds for both wage and material components are released to all 
States/UTs without any delays. ”  
1.7 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme is a demand driven wage employment Scheme. Under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, States/UTs furnish funds release proposals 
to the Government of India. The Ministry releases funds periodically in 

 
 
3 
 
two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more instalments, 
keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, 
opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall 
performance and subject to submission of relevant documents by the 
States/UTs. 
 
First instalment of the first tranche is released in the first half of 
April after adjusting unspent balance available with the States and 
considering the pending liabilities, if any. The second tranche is 
released on submission of proposal in the prescribed format by the 
State and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions. The 
proposal for release of 2nd tranche can be submitted by the State/UT 
after utilization of 75% of the total available funds. If the proposal for 
second tranche is submitted after 1st October, then the Audit Report 
and Audited Utilization Certificate (UC) of the previous financial year 
are also required. Quantum of funds to be released as part of second 
tranche depends upon the performance of the States/UTs and 
compliance with other conditions for fund release. 
   
Fund release to States/UTs is a continuous process and Central 
Government is committed in making funds available to States/UTs for 
the implementation of the Scheme as per the demand for work on the 
ground. 
 
A total of 6 crore households were provided employment 
resulting in generation of 312.55 crore person days during FY 2023-24 
and release of an amount of Rs.89,351.65 crore.  
  
This Ministry regularly interacts and follows up with States/UTs 
Government regarding timely submission of prescribed documents in 
order to avoid delay in release of funds for implementation of scheme.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee note that the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) 
is highlighting only the States’ loopholes for the delay in release of funds both 
for wage and material components of scheme.  The Committee is of the view 
that in as much as the delay is attributable to the States, the larger 
responsibility is of the Central Government in this regard. From the reply, it 
may be seen that the DoRD released funds under MGNREGA is based on the 
provision of the Act and rules framed under guidelines of the scheme and 

 
 
4 
 
have again elaborated on the existing mechanisms of funds release to States 
in two instalments i.e. 1st tranche in the 1st half of April and the 2nd tranche 
after 1st October and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions.  The 
Committee find that the DoRD have also merely furnished their stereotypical 
reply delineating only the provisions of the scheme without addressing the 
core issue with the seriousness it warrants.  Delving deep into the reply of the 
Ministry, the Committee are of the opinion that, had these provisions and 
mechanisms been functioning optimally, the issue of delay in fund release 
would not have arisen in the first instance.  Thus there is a clear indication of 
lack of coherence between the enacted provisions and its  applicability on 
ground level.  The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an immediate need 
for a much more concerted and synchronised action between the Central and 
States’ nodal agencies as the delay of funds release will add more misery and 
sufferings to the masses of poor people living in the rural areas..  In view of 
this, the Committee reiterate their recommendation for ensuring timely release 
of funds under MGNREGA with suitable measures so that the scheme’s 
progress and payment of wages to the rural poor are unhindered. 
II. Increase in wages under MGNREGA 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
1.9 With regard to increase in wages under MGNREGA, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee note that Section 6 of the Act defines the wage 
rate and also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Central Government, may by 
notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of the Act which 
may be different for different areas. The provision further implies that 
the wages so notified shall not be less than the wages guaranteed 
under Minimum Wages Act for agricultural labourers. The Committee 
feel that the need for having a wage guaranteeing rural employment 

 
 
5 
 
scheme of such a grand scale was emanated from the need of 
providing a sense of security in terms of employment and wage to the 
poor people in rural areas who does not have any other job avenue to 
look forward to. The Ministry notifies the wage rates under MGNREGA 
for each State/UT at the beginning of each financial year. After going 
through the notified wage rates under MGNREGA over the period of 
years and during the ongoing financial year, the Committee find the 
range of wages to vary from as little as Rs.221/- in Madhya Pradesh 
and Chhattisgarh, Rs. 224/- in Arunachal Pradesh, Rs. 228/- in Bihar 
and Jharkhand to Rs. 354/- in the 3 Gram Panchayats of Sikkim 
(namely Gnathang, Lachung and Lachen), Rs. 328/- in Nicobar and Rs. 
311/- in Andaman. Observing the quantum of wages since 2008, the 
Committee find the wages inadequate and not in consonance with the 
rising cost of living. At this juncture, the agricultural labourers and other 
labourers involved in masonry/miscellaneous works command a daily 
wage more than the wage guaranteed under MGNREGA. Perhaps, 
one of the reasons for the dearth of MGNREGA workers to be engaged 
in the works under MGNREGA, may be the insufficiency of the wage 
rates under MGNREGA. Workers would definitely engage themselves 
in such projects/works which could earn them a better remuneration. 
This is indeed an area of concern vis-à-vis the implementation of 
MGNREGA along with the fulfilment of noble objectives and the spirit 
behind the inception of such a social scheme. It has been also brought 
to the notice of the Committee that a Central Government Committee 
on minimum wages, AnoopSatpathy Committee had recommended 
that the wages under MGNREGA should be Rs.375/- per day. The 
need for suitable increase in the wages under MGNREGA has been 
felt and echoed from various quarters and also highlighted by this 
Committee in its earlier Reports. Therefore, the Committee once again 
recommend that DoRD should take a considered view on the pertinent 
issue of suitable increase in the wage rates under MGNREGA and 
increase the wage rates at the earliest for benefitting MGNREGA 
beneficiaries in a befitting manner." 
  
1.10 The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 "Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme is a demand driven wage employment Scheme. It provides fall 
back options for livelihood security for the rural households, when no 
better employment opportunity is available.  
  
As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the 
Central Government may by notification specify the wage rate for its 
beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provide that until such 
time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of 
any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government 
under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for 
Agricultural Labours shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to 
that area. Accordingly  as per provision of Section 6(2) of the Act, from 

 
 
6 
 
the inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage 
rate in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the State Government. However, from the 
financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started determining 
the wage rates using the Consumer Price Index for agricultural labour 
(CPI-AL).  
  
To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against 
inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every 
financial year based on change in Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for different 
States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated 
wage rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of 
previous year, it is being protected by maintaining the previous year 
wage rate. The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each 
financial year.  
 
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 
2023-24 is about 7 %. 
 
However, each State/UT can provide wage over and above 
the wage rate notified by the Central Government. 
State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha were 
providing more than notified wage rates under the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS from their own resources in last financial year 2023-24." 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11  Observing the rate of wages paid under MGNREGA since 2008, the 
Committee find the amount inadequate and not in consonance with the rising 
cost of living.  Taking up works under MGNREGA is a sort of last resort for 
many of the poor rural masses who do not have any other option of livelihood 
or job option to utilise but wages of such nominal nature sometime with 
delayed payment only discourage them and propel them to migrate and seek 
work in areas giving better remuneration.  The Committee do understand that 
MGNREGA is a demand driven scheme where the workers move out in search 
of better opportunities.  However, the figures are abysmally low and it 
definitely points towards low wage rates as one of the major reasons for the 
workers to opt out of MGNREGA, thereby hampering the percentage of work 

 
 
7 
 
completed under MGNREGA.  The Committee have time and again urged DoRD 
to increase the wage rates under MGNREGA by linking it with an index 
commensurate with national inflation.  But the wage rates under MGNREGA 
continue to remain stagnant on account of no change in indexation.  Thus, the 
Committee once again make a strong appeal to the DoRD to review its stand 
and bring onboard all the stakeholders so as to increase the wage rates at the 
earliest for benefitting MGNREGA beneficiaries across all the States/UTs. 
III. Revision of Base Rate for fixation of Wages 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
1.12  In the context of Revision of Base Rate for fixation of Wages, the Committee 
had recommended as below:- 
“The Committee note that the Government of India notifies the 
wage rate under MNGREGA using Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) and by keeping the wage rates thus 
obtained on 1st April 2009 or Rs.100 whichever is more as the base for 
indexation for the States. Every year, wage rates are revised and 
notified by addition of incremental value  to the base rate on the basis 
of CPI-AL. According to DoRD, this inflation is being accounted for 
based on the base rate of 2009. The Committee find this method of 
calculation using the base year of 2009-2010 obsolete and saturated to 
yield any desired figure commensurate with the present inflation and 
increased cost of living. It is felt that one of the probable mechanism to 
sort out the issue of lower wage rates can be achieved through the 
revision of base year and the base rates to a more closer time line 
alongwith increase in the base rate. The similar rationale was also 
proposed by the recommendation of the Mahendra Dev Committee 
while suggesting that the baseline for MGNREGA Wage indexation 
from 2014 may be current minimum wage rate for unskilled agricultural 
labourers fixed by the States under the Minimum Wage Act or the 
current MGNREGA wage rate, whichever is higher. Thus, in light of the 
above rationale, the Committee recommend DoRD to explore the 
feasibility of revising the base year and base rate in such a manner to 
bring in an appreciable hike in the wage rates under MGNREGA.” 
 
1.13 The following Action Taken Reply has been given by DoRD:- 
“As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, the Central Government may, by 
notification specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA.  

 
 
8 
 
 
Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provide that until such time as a 
wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of any area in 
a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under 
section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural Labours 
shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. 
 
Accordingly, as per provision of Section 6(2) of the Act, from the 
inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage rate in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the 
minimum wage set by the State Government. However, from the 
financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started determining 
the wage rates using the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour 
(CPI-AL).  
 
Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA vide Gazette Notification. S.O. 82(E) dated 
14th January, 2011 in exercise of the power conferred by Section 6(1) 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREG act, using CPI-AL as index and kept the 
wage rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs. 100 whichever 
is more as the base for indexation for the States/UTs 
 
To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against 
inflation, the Ministry of Rural Development revises the wage rate every 
financial year based on change in Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for different 
States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla.  If the calculated 
wage rate of a state is lower than the wage rate of the previous 
financial year then it is protected by continuing the wage rate of the 
previous financial year. The wage rate is made applicable from 
1st April of each financial year. 
  
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 
2023-24 is about 7 %.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 Since the inception of MGNREGA, one aspect surrounding the scheme 
which has always intrigued the Committee is that of unrevised base rate for 
fixation of wages. The Government of India notifies the wage rate under 
MGNREGA using Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) and 
by keeping the wage rates thus obtained on 1st April, 2019 or Rs. 100 
whichever is more as the base for indexation for the States.  Every year wage 
rates are revised and notified by addition of incremental value to the base rate 

 
 
9 
 
on the basis of CPI-AL.  The Committee find this method of calculation using 
the base year of 2009-2010 obsolete and saturated.  The reply of DoRD in this 
regard has talked about the mechanism of revision of wage rates for each 
financial year without giving any befitting response to the novel idea 
recommended by the Mahendra Dev Committee.  Remaining silent on such 
significant recommendation and bypassing it without giving specific reply 
undermines the sustained efforts being undertaken for the betterment of 
MGNREGA scheme.  Thus, in light of the above rationale, the Committee 
reiterate their recommendation and urge the Ministry to explore the feasibility 
of revising the base year and base rate in such a manner to bring relief to the 
poor rural masses of the country who rely upon MGNREGA for their 
livelihoods. 
IV. Utilisation of a better inflation linked index 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
1.15 In the connection of Utilisation of a better inflation linked index, the Committee 
had made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that the Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) is used by DoRD for calculating the 
revision of wage rates under MGNREGA at the start of each Financial 
Year. After scrutinizing the pattern of increase in the wage rates under 
MGNREGA using the CPI-AL, the Committee feel that the current 
index was perhaps not sufficient to take into account the inflation 
during the time-period under study. The usage of such index has not 
reflected requisite quantum of hike in the MGNREGA wages. Both 
Mahendra Dev Committee and Dr. Nagesh Singh Committee have 
suggested that Consumer Price Index for Rural (CPI-Rural) may be 
considered as the appropriate index for protecting the wages against 
inflation as the consumption basket of CPI-R is of more recent vintage 
than CPI-AL. However, after going through the comparative data 
obtained from the DoRD regarding the wage rates under MGNREGA 
on the basis of CPI-AL and CPI-Rural for the ongoing financial year, 
the Committee find both the indexation resulting in almost similar wage 
rates for different States/UTs barring few fluctuations. In this regard, 
the Committee are of the view that DoRD should perhaps find a better 
approach to the problem of selecting a more suitable index for 
neutralising the inflationary effect at the time of revision of wage rates 

 
 
10 
 
under MGNREGA. Hence, the Committee recommend that DoRD 
should adopt a much more economically viable method in identifying 
ways and means for the selection of an appropriate index which cater 
to the need of the hour for the positive revision of wage rates under 
MGNREGA according to the prevailing inflationary trend.” 
1.16 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
  “It is submitted that, as per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, Central Govt. may, 
by notification, specify the separate wage rate for the beneficiary of the 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The rate is revised on the basis of 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). 
 
Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA vide Gazette Notification S.O. 82(E) dated 
14th January, 2011 in exercise of the power conferred by Section 6(1) 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, using CPI-AL as index and kept the 
wage rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs.100 whichever is 
more as the base for indexation for the States. 
 
For protecting the wage against the inflation, it has been 
decided to index the wage rate notified under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA to the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) 
while maintaining the distinction between the notified wage rate under 
the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and the minimum wage Act.   
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-
24 is about 7 %.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17  The Committee opine that a long standing demand from various 
quarters of the country has been that of utilisation of a better inflation linked 
index for payment of wages to MGNREGA workers.  The Consumer Price Index 
for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) is used by DoRD for calculating the revision 
of wage rates under MGNREGA at the start of each Financial Year.  The 
Committee feel that the current index was perhaps not sufficient to take into 
account the level of inflation during the time-period under study.  The usage of 
such index has not reflected requisite quantum of hike in the MGNREGA 
wages.  The Committee in the wake of the non-yielding situation are seriously 

 
 
11 
 
concerned about the plight of the beneficiaries of MGNREGA who belong to 
extreme periphery of the society and for whom any increase in wage through 
suitable linkage with inflationary index, providing buffer against rising costs, 
would indeed be a blessing.  In this context, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation for adoption of a much more economically viable method in 
identifying ways and means for the selection of an appropriate index 
commensurate with the inflationary trend. 
V.  Mitigation of delay in Payment of Wages 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 6) 
 
1.18 In the connection of mitigation of delay in payment of wages, the Committee 
had made the following recommendation:- 
 
“The Committee note that the MGNREGA Act provides that the 
payment of wages should be done within fifteen days of the closure of 
muster rolls. However, the ground reality paints a stark picture contrary 
to the theoretical provision. The Committee have been enlightened 
time and again with this omnipresent issue of delay in payment of 
wages to the MGNREGA workers. Delving deep into the issue, the 
Committee, through their on-ground experiences and deliberations find 
that there are many reasons for delay in the payment of wages viz., 
delay/improper filling of Muster rolls, delayed release of Fund Transfer 
Orders, procedural hindrances at the ground level, non-adherence to 
provisions of MGNREGA for payment, etc. Instead of pointing to a 
single cause of concern, the Committee find that the reasons may vary 
place to place. Since the Committee feel that a holistic exercise need 
to be undertaken by the nodal agency, DoRD, to identify each issue 
separately and bring forward a stronger solution to deal with such 
issues, it is recommended that DoRD should get onboard all the 
stakeholders involved in the process of payment of wages to 
streamline the mechanism and ensure that MGNREGA beneficiaries 
do not suffer on account of delay in payment of wages any more.” 
 
1.19 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
                 
“The Ministry has taken various steps to ensure timely payment 
of wages to workers under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. These 
include: 

 
 
12 
 
  
Up scaling of National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) 
in 28 States and 3 Union Territories.  
 
Intensive consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders 
to strategize timely payment of wages, verification of pending 
compensation claims etc.  
 
Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure for monitoring of timely 
payment and payment of compensation.  
 
Meetings with States/ UTs for reviewing the status of timely payment 
and payment of delay compensation.  
 
States/UT’s have been requested to ensure timely regeneration of 
rejected transaction and every fund release is tagged with priority 
release of rejected transaction. 
 
Review meetings with Banks, NPCI and PFMS are conducted on a 
regular basis at central level to review the delays, if any and the 
stakeholders are directed to resolve the issues. 
 
States/UTs have been requested to ensure correction of invalid 
accounts as per information provided by Public Financial Management 
System (PFMS). 
  
 Further, Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) uses 
Aadhaar numbers to link a beneficiary's bank account with job cards, 
aiming to ensure faster, safer wage disbursement and reduce fraud 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
  
Central Government is making wage payment directly into the 
Bank/ Post office account of the beneficiary as per the DBT protocol 
through a National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) for 
the States under Ne-FMS. Currently, 98.67% Fund Transfer Orders 
(FTOs) are getting generated within statutory period of 15 days. 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble committee has been noted 
and appropriate follow up action will be taken to ensure 100% timely 
payment of wages.” 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.20 The Committee note that the Ministry is taking various steps to ensure 
timely payment of wages to workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS through 
intensive consultation with state Governments and other stake holders. The 
Committee appreciate the Ministry’s approach however the Aadhar Based 

 
 
13 
 
Payment Bridge System (APBS) in its current form has led to many job 
deletions and therefore instances of wage delays are found/being reported 
from across the States all over the country. The Committee thus reiterate this 
recommendation that the process of payment of wages be streamlined and a 
robust mechanism be put in place to ensure that the MGNREGA beneficiaries 
do not suffer on account of delay in payment of wages.  
VI.  Aadhar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10) 
1.21 In the connection of Aadhar Based Payment Bridge System, the Committee 
had made the following recommendation:- 
 
“The Committee appreciate the efforts being undertaken by the 
DoRD in switching to completely Aadhar Based Payment System for 
the beneficiaries under MGNREGA. The aim to bring in greater 
transparency and reduce misappropriation of funds through the usage 
of technology is a welcome step and perhaps the need of the hour. 
There have been reported cases of non-seeding of Aadhar numbers of 
all the active job card holders, primarily due to pending cases of NPCI 
mapping. As on 21.11.2023, 14.12% of total job card holders are not 
Aadhar enabled under MGNREGA. Moving over the technical aspect, 
there are practical constraints being faced by MGNREGA beneficiaries 
such as non-working of their Aadhar numbers, KYC compliance, 
ignorance about the linkage of Aadhar with their bank account etc. One 
should always remember that the target community of MGNREGA are 
mainly less educated, technologically challenged and having less fiscal 
management know-how. Therefore, the Committee feel that any 
mechanism to be activated needs to take care of all the mushrooming 
challenges and till the time all the major bottlenecks associated with 
Aadhar Based Payment Bridge System are not tackled sufficiently, 
including creation of awareness among the MGNREGA beneficiaries, 
the system should not be made mandatory. Alternative mechanism 
should always operate side by side to ensure that the primary goal of 
MGNREGA to provide wages does not get defeated due to lack of 
proper implementation of technology. Hence, the Committee 
recommend to DoRD to strike a fine balance between the usage of 
technology for payment and ironing out the flaws associated with it, 
while ensuring that wages are paid timely to MGNREGA workers and 
they are not mandated with Aadhar compliance till the mechanism is 
made foolproof. 
1.22 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 

 
 
14 
 
 
“Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) is a method of 
disbursing payment to Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers using their 
unique 12 digit Aadhaar number as their finincial address. It uses 
Aadhaar numbers to link a beneficiary's bank account with job cards, 
aiming to ensure faster, safer wage disbursement and reduce fraud. All 
worker under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Emplolyment Gurantee 
Act (MGNREGA) scheme are to receive their wages through  an 
Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS). 
  
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, beneficiaries are getting wage 
payment for unskilled manual work, directly into the Bank/Post office 
account as provided by the beneficiary. The wage payment is routed 
through Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS). After 
detailed consultation with all States/UTs ABPS has been made 
mandatory since 1st January, 2024. As on date out of  total of 13.02 
crore active workers, 98.85% active workers Aadhaar has been 
seeded. 
  
As per NREGASoft, in April 2024  more than 96% Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS beneficiaries received their wages securely through 
Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS). It may be noted that 
 ABPS helps in timely payment of beneficiaries even in cases of 
frequent change of Bank account change in beneficiaries. 
   
In case States/UTs face any kind of issues or problems in 
respect of Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge Systems the same are 
resolved on a priority basis. Ministry also organizes training programme 
frequently for functionaries of States/ UTs involved in implementation of 
ABPS. 
 
Further, it is to mention that the Ministry arranges trainings as 
and when required by the States/UTs to keep updated with the process 
of Aadhaar seeding.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
 
1.23 The Committee note that after detailed consultation with all the 
States/UTs Aadhar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) has been made 
mandatory since 1.1.2024 and as on 12.06.2024 out of total of 13.02 crore 
active workers, 98.85% Aadhar of active workers have been seeded. According 
to the Ministry any issues or problems in the APBS are resolved on a priority 
basis. While accepting the gains of APBS, the Committee is of the view that it 

 
 
15 
 
is too early to make it mandatory as the problems relating to Aadhar seeding 
still have not been resolved leading to exclusion of Lakhs of workers. The 
Committee therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that APBS should 
not be made mandatory and alternative mechanism should always operate 
side by side to ensure that the primary goal of MGNREGA to provide wages 
does not get defeated due to lack of proper implementation of technology. 
 
VII.  National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 11) 
1.24 With regard to the National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS), the 
Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
 
“One of the other major initiative undertaken by DoRD to usher 
in greater transparency and accountability with the aid of technology is 
the usage of National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) app for 
capturing of attendance at work site. The Committee note that from 
1st January, 2023 onwards, the workers under MGNREGA are 
supposed to capture their Geotagged two time stamped photographs in 
a day for marking their attendance. On the basis of the uploading of 
photographs, the attendance is counted and Muster rolls are 
accordingly generated. Although much water has flown under the 
bridge by now since the initiation of this mechanism, still there are few 
teething issues which remain to be addressed due to which workers on 
ground are facing obstacles in marking their attendance resulting in 
non-payment for the work actually done by them. The Committee have 
been enlightened on different occasions through credible sources and 
also through the insight gained from the study visits to different parts of 
the country that NMMS app, though a right step in eradicating 
malpractices to certain extent, still has a long way to go in terms of its 
execution. The reliability of MGNREGA beneficiaries on other persons 
with smart phones once again brings in the involvement and 
dependence upon a third party. Beneficiaries from various corners of 
the country have still expressed their inability to mark attendance on 
account of non-availability of smart phones, internet connectivity 
issues, boundation to remain at the site even after the work is 
completed for marking attendance to name a few. The Committee, 
once again are of the view that technology should always smoothen 
the passage and not turn out to be a dampener when its use is made 
mandatory. The larger intent of MGNREGA should always be achieved 
in terms of rural-employment and till the time all the stakeholders, in 
this case, the MGNREGA beneficiaries, are not brought on board and 
acquainted with the usage, some other alternative should also remain 

 
 
16 
 
in position for marking the attendance. So, the Committee recommend 
that DoRD should create awareness and provide facilities to the 
MGNREGA beneficiaries to get them acclimatized with the usage of 
the NMMS App while keeping in vogue a robust alternative mechanism 
also till that time.” 
 
1.25 In regard to the above recommendation, the DoRD in their action taken reply 
have stated as below:- 
“To ensure more transparency in the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in 
the States/UTs, capturing of attendance with geo-tagged, two time-
stamped photographs of the workers in a day through National Mobile 
Monitoring System (NMMS) App for all the works (except individual 
beneficiary works) has been made mandatory from 1st January, 2023.  
  
This increases citizen oversight of the Scheme besides enabling 
faster processing of payments. Worksite supervisors are responsible 
for capturing attendance along with geo-tagged photographs of the 
workers through the NMMS App. 
  
                Ministry has arranged various workshop at a regular interval 
to pursue hand holding support to the States/UTs. The technical issues 
being faced in NMMS App are taken up with National Informatics 
Centre (NIC), Rural Development on a real-time basis. The new 
provisions/ suggestions requested by the States/UTs are being 
incorporated. All the issues concerning the NMMS app are reviewed 
and resolved from time to time. Training have been scheduled by the 
Ministry whenever required by the States/UTs to keep updated with the 
usage of NMMS app. 
  
NMMS app has been modified to capture the second 
photograph just after 4 hours of uploading the attendance and first 
photograph. The morning attendance along with the first photograph 
and second photograph can be captured in offline mode and to be 
uploaded once the device comes into a network. In case of exceptional 
circumstances due to which attendance could not be uploaded, the 
District Programme Coordinator (DPC) has been authorized to upload 
the manual attendance. 
 
Regarding availability of the Smart phone, it may be mentioned 
that there is a widespread availability of smartphones in the rural areas. 
As per Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) 2021 of ASER 
Centre, which reported that 67.7% surveyed rural households have at 
least one smartphone. Similar data has been reported by other 
agencies. Further, these smart phones required by only one person of 
the GP, preferably by the GraminRozgarSevak (GRS) and is not 
needed by every worker. 
  

 
 
17 
 
Further, it is to mention that the Government is actively engaged 
with the State Government in establishing systems that ensure 
provision of work as per demand. To generate awareness about the 
provisions of the Scheme and to provide adequate employment 
opportunities to rural households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, all 
States/UTs have been requested to (i) initiate appropriate Information 
Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns including wall 
paintings for wide dissemination of the provisions of the Act, (ii) expand 
scope and coverage of demand registration system to ensure that 
demand for work under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS does not go 
unregistered, (iii) prepare plans in a participatory mode and get them 
approved in the Gram Sabha. 
 
It is also submitted that no decline in generation of PD has been 
observed due to introduction of  NMMS. Against generation of 
293.7crore PD in FY 2022-23,  309.07 crore PD has been generated in 
FY 2023-24 which shows that there is no adverese on PD generation 
due to NMMS. It is also sumbmitted that a new system has since 
stabilized. 
 
          The recommendation given by Hon’ble Committee regarding 
creation of awareness among Mahatma Gandhi NREGS beneficiaries 
on use of NMMS has been noted.“ 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.26  National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) app is a mobile and internet 
based platform. Due to non-availability of smart phones, irregular power 
supply and lack of proper internet connectivity in various areas, the 
attendance of many MGNREGA workers is not getting recorded by the App. 
This is leading to a delay in the payment of the wages. The Committee, 
therefore, opine that NMMS app, though a right step in eradicating 
irregularities to certain extent, still has a long way to go in terms of its 
execution. The Committee, are of the view that technology has to be smooth 
and appropriate and the burden on the worker should be less or minimal. So, 
the Committee reiterate their recommendation that DoRD should create 
awareness and provide adequate facilities to the MGNREGA beneficiaries to 
get them acquainted with the usage of the NMMS along with some other 
alternative should also remain in place for marking the attendance. 
 
VIII. Increase in number of days  of  work 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
1.27 With regard to increase in number of days of work, the Committee had 
recommended  as under:- 

 
 
18 
 
“The Committee find that the number of permissible works under 
MGNREGA has increased to 266. Also, the RE sought by DoRD for the 
ongoing Financial Year 2023-24 is Rs.1,10,000 crore. These aspects 
only strengthen the opinion that demand for work under MGNREGA 
has not diminished. Hence, the Committee find the demand from 
various quarters for raising the guaranteed number of days of work 
under MGNREGA from 100 to possibly 150 merits due weightage. The 
rationale behind such demand stems from the fact that the population 
of the country has been rising since the inception of MGNREGA in 
2006 and so has the ambit of works under MGNREGA. By tweaking 
the nature of works and carrying out suitable convergence of 
MGNREGA with other schemes of Central/State, the expenditure on 
labour force required for various projects can be better channelized 
and utilised. Dovetailing of labour oriented projects such as PMGSY, 
PMAY-G with MGNREGA can only be a win-win situation. On this 
premise, the Committee opine that the scale of MGNREGA can be fine 
tuned by utilizing its labour force through proper mechanism. 
Increasing the guaranteed number of days shall act as an incentive to 
work under MGNREGA. Thus, the Committee recommend to DoRD to 
look into the issue with practical approach and undertake a study for 
reviewing the need and justifications for increasing the number of 
guaranteed days of work under MGNREGA from present 100 days to 
150 days and necessary action may be taken according to the outcome 
of the study.” 
1.28  The DoRD in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
 “The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act, 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood 
security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing 
at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every 
financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do 
unskilled manual work. 
  
The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of 
wage employment (beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every 
Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided that these 
households have no other private property except for the land rights 
provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for up to additional 50 
days of wage employment in a financial year in drought/natural 
calamity affected notified rural areas.  
  
As per Section 3 (4) of the Act, the State Governments may 
make provision for providing additional days of employment beyond the 
period guaranteed under the Act from their own funds 
  
Details of National average days of employment provided per 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial 
years  2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 2023-24 are given below.  

 
 
19 
 
        
Financial Year 2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
52.09 47.83 50.07 51.52 48.4 
 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of 
employment per household in each financial year in the last five 
financial years has remained around 50 days. Therefore, the Ministry is 
emphasizing generating awareness about the provisions of the 
Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural 
households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.” 
 
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The Committee note the demand from various quarters regarding the 
hike in the number of days of work sought under MGNREGA from 100 to 150 
days.  The rationale behind such demand stems from the rising population of 
the country since the inception of MGNREGA and so has the ambit of 
permissible works under MGNREGA.  MGNREGA emerged as a last ray of 
hope for the poor rural masses in the unprecedented challenging times 
witnessed by all of us especially during the COVID pandemic.  DoRD in their 
reply have stated about the provision of 100 days of guaranteed wage 
employment under MGNREGA and that under Section 3(A) of the Act, State 
Governments are allowed to make provision for additional days of employment 
beyond the guaranteed period from their own funds.  The Committee find the 
reply routine and generic in nature, merely highlighting the formulated 
provisions of the Act.  Although the State  Governments may make provisions 
for additional days, still the Committee are of the firm opinion that the 
mandatory increase in number of guaranteed days should be brought about by 
the DoRD by moving an amendment in the Act in order to make it applicable 
for the entire country, so that the demand of needy beneficiaries may not 

 
 
20 
 
hinge upon the arbitrariness of the State Governments.  Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their recommendation for increase in number of days of 
work sought under MGNREGA from 100 to 150 days and implore upon DoRD 
to take up the matter in right earnest. 
 
IX. Separate Job Card for Differently Abled person in the family 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
1.30 Regarding the issue of Separate Job Card for Differently Abled person in the 
family, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“A very important suggestion which came before the Committee 
was that of issuance of a separate job card for a differently abled 
person in a household. The Committee were briefed about the need 
and importance of a separate job card to cater to the livelihood of a 
differently abled person. Normally, one job card is issued to a willing 
worker from a household. However, there are cases, wherein a family 
also comprises of a differently abled person, who can also undertake 
work under MGNREGA. Keeping in view that the range of MGNREGA 
works has diversified in much larger way and there is a hope of 
providing employment to differently abled persons according to their 
abilities. The plight and prayers of a differently abled person to live an 
esteemed life is oblivious to no one. The welfare nature of MGNREGA 
Scheme will perhaps not require much breaking away from the mould 
to open up its domain to also include the differently abled persons of 
the rural areas as a separate entity. This provisioning shall go a long 
way in empowering our disabled section of the population who have all 
the rights and wherewithal to compete and live life on equal terms with 
others. Therefore, the Committee implore upon the DoRD to take up 
this recommendation on humane grounds and make the scheme under 
MGNREGA ‘Disabled Friendly’ by providing them a separate Right to 
work and live with their heads high.”  
1.31  The DoRD in their action taken reply furnished to the Committee have stated 
as follows:- 
“Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme is very inclusive and ensures equal opportunities for all rural 
workers, including differently-abled persons. 
  
As per Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, 2005 the 
adult member of every household residing in any rural area and willing 
to do unskilled manual work may submit the names, age and the 
address of the household to the Gram Panchayat at the village level, in 
whose jurisdiction they reside, for registration of their household for 

 
 
21 
 
issuance of a job card. If the job seeker is a single woman or 
disabled person or aged person or released bonded labour or 
belonging to Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group, they must be 
given a special job card of a distinct colour which will ensure them 
a special protection in providing work, work evaluation and work as site 
facilitates, as the case may be. 
  
The provisions for differently abled persons under Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act Operational 
Guidelines are given as under:-  
  
Para 9.3.1: The disabled or differently abled persons defined 
under the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of 
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996) as persons with 
disabilities, the severity of which is 40% and above would be 
considered as special category of vulnerable persons for the purposes 
of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The disabled persons as defined in the 
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999) are 
also to be considered as disabled for the purpose of inclusion in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
  
Para 9.3.2: Since this category of people are differently abled, 
special conditions have to be created to facilitate their inclusion in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
  
Para 9.3.3: Each State Government will identify specific works, 
which can be done by the disabled and vulnerable persons. In a 
village, different categories of persons with disabilities will be organized 
to come together as a fixed group to accomplish the works proposed 
for them under the Scheme, in a way that makes it possible for them to 
exercise their choice. On no grounds, should the disabled and 
vulnerable persons be paid lower wages as compared to other persons 
employed in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA works.  
  
Here it is also submitted that Ministry has already formulated 
and notified the Accessibility guidelines for the persons with disability 
for all the schemes being administered by this Ministry. State/UTs have 
been advised to implement these guidelines in the works under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.”   
Further Observations/Comments of the Committee 
1.32 The Committee were briefed about the need and importance of a 
separate job card to cater to the livelihood of a differently abled person.  
Considering their vulnerability, physical and mental condition, there is a need 
to provide a conducive work environment by discounting of work norms to 

 
 
22 
 
attract them into MGNREGA.  Such an action will help the disabled persons to 
realise their potential and encourage them to join the workforce and contribute 
their bit in the nation building.  It has been also found that their treatment at 
worksites was not totally free from all sorts of prejudices towards differently 
abled person. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the DoRD to strictly 
monitor and strengthen all its monitoring mechanism for proper 
implementation of guidelines in States/UTs for disabled persons under 
MGNREGA. And that not only those who implement the scheme but the co-
workers and society at large need to be sensitised to overcome the problem 
faced by the disabled persons. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
23 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
2.1 The Committee note that MGNREG Scheme is a marquee scheme of the 
Government of India which is administered and supervised under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) by the Department of Rural Development 
(DoRD). Since the inception of MGNREG Scheme through the MGNREG Act in 
2005 and its complete coverage of the country’s rural landscape by 2008, the 
scheme has been a flag bearer of the Right based rural employment framework. The 
testimony to its worth has been vindicated by the submissions of the DoRD wherein 
its role in providing succour to the rural populace in times of distress and reverse 
migration during Covid mayhem has been duly acknowledged. In this context, 
budgetary allocation to MGNREGA for the financial year 2023-24 seems to be 
inadequate to cover all the expenditure bases of a scheme of such magnitude. 
Rs.60,000/- Crore has been allocated to MGNREGA Scheme at BE stage against 
the proposed demand of Rs.98,000/- Crore made by the Department of Rural 
Development (DoRD) for the Financial Year 2023-24. While BE for the Financial 
Year 2022-23 was Rs. 73,000/- Crore for MGNREGA Scheme, which got increased 
to Rs. 89,400/- Crore at the RE stage. The reduction in budgetary allocation under 
the scheme for the current financial year is puzzling and needs to be looked into. In 
this regard, the Committee agree with the contention of DoRD that MGNREG 
Scheme is a demand driven scheme and the budgetary resources for it can be 
replenished on need-basis. However, the pruning of funds at BE stage itself does 
have a cascading effect on various important aspects such as timely release of 
wages, release of material share etc. which have a telling impact on the progress of 
the Scheme. The Committee feel that for smooth implementation of MGNREGA at 
ground level, shortage of fund is a big obstacle which does not augur well for the 
performance of the scheme. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend 
that DoRD should look into the issue of shortage of funds under MGNREGA 
pragmatically and seek requisite increase in the funds through proper demands from 
the Ministry of Finance for the effective implementation of the scheme. Moreover, the 

 
 
24 
 
MoRD should also try to convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate budgetary grant 
to MGNREGA based on its expenditure pattern of previous years. 
 
     Reply of the Government  
2.2 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is a 
demand-driven wage employment scheme. Funds release to States/UTs is a 
continuous process and Central Government is committed to making funds available 
to States/UTs for the implementation of the Scheme as per the demand for work on 
the ground. 
The financial allocation under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS for financial year 2023-24 
was Rs. 60,000 crore at Budget Estimate (BE) stage, which was enhanced to 89,400 
crore at Final Estimate (FE) stage. 
 For financial year 2024-25, budget allocation of Rs. 86,000 crores for Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS has been provided, which is the highest ever allocation under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS at BE stage. 
The Ministry seeks additional funds for the scheme from the Ministry of Finance as 
and when required for meeting the demand for work on the ground.  
               (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
2.3 The Committee came across a suggestion during examination of the subject 
that the issue of physical slips to the MGNREGA beneficiaries may be very practical 
and user friendly. It is an agreeable fact that much of the information can be 
accessed through Janmanrega app, but still the Committee feel that the end line 
consumers of this scheme are the labourers from rural background, not yet efficient 
in handling even smart phones and apps. Issuance of a physical pay slip denoting 
their details like number of days worked, amount to be paid, amount due till date will 
perhaps prove to be a greater sense of security for the psyche of MGNREGA 
labourers. Thus, the Committee recommend that DoRD should explore the feasibility 
of issuance of a physical pay slip enumerating the requisite details to the MGNREGA 
beneficiaries on completion of their work and the closure of Muster roll. 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.4 In addition to provision for issuance of wage slips through NREGAsoft to the 
beneficiary at block level/Gram Panchayat level there is provision for issuance of 

 
 
25 
 
physical Job card to each rural household willing to do unskilled work under the 
scheme. In the Job card there is specific provisions for entering information on date 
wise amount of wages paid. Further, as a part of transparency and accountability 
measures ministry has developed JANMANREGA app. This app plays a crucial role 
in facilitating the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS by promoting 
transparency, accountability, and empowerment among beneficiaries. It serves as a 
valuable tool for both beneficiaries and authorities involved in the implementation of 
the scheme. 
 
The Janmanrega App is a citizen-centric mobile application; its key features are as 
follows: 
 
Give Feedback: Citizens can provide feedback on assets within the radius of 20 
meters of the geotagged location of the asset. Additionally, workers can raise 
concerns related to work allocation, work demand, payment, etc. The app 
automatically forwards user-raised issues to the concerned officials at the block, 
district, and state levels for prompt resolution. 
 
Know Worker’s Attendance/Payments: Workers can check information about their 
payment status, work attendance, ABPS status, and job-card details by entering the 
job-card number. 
 
Nearby Assets: Users can locate details of assets based on their live Global 
Positioning System (GPS) location and specific attributes. 
 
The app is available in Hindi, English, as well as 10 regional languages (Bengali, 
Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, and Urdu). 
 
For accessing the information available in Janmanrega App, the Gram 
RojgarSahayak (GRS) under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS will ensure awareness of 
various features of the Janmanrega App to all the stakeholders at the Gram 
Panchayat. Therefore, the beneficiaries/stakeholder who are unable to access the 
information from Janmanrega App may take help of GRS. 
  
Also, the banks send a SMS alert regarding the payments credited to the account of 
the beneficiary. 
 (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
2.5 The Committee note that Section 7(1) of the MGNREGA Act, 2005 
unambiguously outlines the terms and conditions for payment of unemployment 
allowance to the applicants who are not provided employment within fifteen days of 
the receipt of their applications seeking employment. The daily unemployment 
allowance will be at a rate not less than one fourth of the wage rate for the first thirty 
days during the financial year and not less than one half of the wage rate for the 
remaining period of the financial year. The State Governments are liable to provide 

 
 
26 
 
unemployment allowance subject to terms and conditions prescribed by them and as 
per their economic capacity. State Governments also need to make necessary 
budgetary provision for the payment of unemployment allowance. Perusal of 
State/UT-wise details of beneficiaries eligible for unemployment allowance and the 
beneficiaries who were paid unemployment allowance shows that some States/UTs 
have not provided unemployment allowance during the period from 2018 to 2023. 
Since it is necessary to provide unemployment allowance to those beneficiaries who 
were not provided employment, the Committee recommend that DoRD should 
ensure all possible measures including taking up the matter at the highest level with 
the concerned States/UTs so that the State Governments do not fail in their statutory 
duties to provide the unemployment allowance to the MGNREGA beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.6 Section 7(1), Mahatma Gandhi NREGA: “If an applicant for employment under 
the Scheme is not provided such employment within fifteen days of receipt of his 
application seeking employment or from the date on which the employment has been 
sought in the case of an advance application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled 
to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance with this section.” 
  
The daily unemployment allowance will be at a rate not less than one fourth of the 
wage rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one half 
of the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year. 
  
The responsibility of implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is vested with the 
Government of States/UTs. The Ministry has a comprehensive system of monitoring 
and review mechanism for Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The Ministry regularly reviews 
the performance of the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs 
through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget meetings, Labour 
Budget Revision meetings, Programme Review meetings. Central Employment 
Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils periodically monitor 
implementation of the programme. 
  
So far, Unemployment Allowance rule have been notified by 25 States/UTs under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
  
The recommendation given by Hon’ble committee has been noted and it will be 
strictly followed up with all the States/UTs. 
         (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
2.7 The Committee note that the timely payment of delay compensation is 
another grey area in the implementation of the MGNREG scheme under the Act. 

 
 
27 
 
Beneficiaries under MGNREGA are entitled to receive payment of compensation for 
the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid wages per day of delay beyond the 
sixteenth day of the closure of Muster roll. During the course of examination of the 
subject, the Committee found that during the Financial Year 2022-23, Rs.93,82,436/- 
was approved amount but Rs.59,39,191/- was the paid amount under delay 
compensation. During the ongoing Financial Year 2023-24, as on 21.11.2023, Rs. 
24,31,869/- is the approved amount, but only Rs.2,50,343/- has been paid so far 
under delay compensation. These figures themselves indicate the concerns raised 
by the MGNREGA beneficiaries who not only suffer from the delay in the payment of 
wages but are also bereft of their statutory solace in terms of payment of delay 
compensation. MGNREGA scheme is the brainchild of the Central Government and 
has been a pioneer social welfare scheme aimed at the upliftment of rural population 
who have no other work for livelihood. The scheme derives its authority from the 
statutory wordings of the Act notified in 2005. Being an Act of Parliament, the DoRD 
is its custodian and compliance of all the provisions by the executing agencies needs 
to be strictly monitored and reviewed upon on regular basis. In wake of such existing 
gap between the provisions in the Act and its actual implementation on the ground 
level, the Committee recommend DoRD to engage in active communication with all 
the departments/governing bodies of the States/UTs for ensuring timely and stricter 
compliance with the payment of delay compensation to the suffering beneficiaries 
under MGNREGA. 
Reply of the Government  
2.8 As per the provisions mentioned in Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, wage seekers shall be entitled to receive 
payment of compensation for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid wages per 
day of delay beyond the sixteenth day of closure of muster roll. 
  
Any delay in payment of compensation beyond a period of fifteen days from the date 
it becomes payable shall be considered in the same manner as the delay in payment 
of wages. 
  
The State Government shall pay the compensation upfront after due verification 
within the time limits specified above and recover the compensation amount from the 
functionaries or agencies responsible for the delay in payment. 
  
The government of India has taken various steps to ensure timely payment of 
delayed compensation to the suffering beneficiaries under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS. The important elements of the above framework are listed below: 

 
 
28 
 
 
The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, Labour 
Budget determination and Labour Budget revision meetings, and Programme 
Review meetings. Central Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment 
Guarantee Councils also periodically monitor the implementation of the Scheme. 
  
Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability which include 
geo-tagging of assets, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), National electronic Fund 
Management System (NeFMS), Aadhar Based Payment System (ABPS), Software 
for Estimate Calculation using rural rates for Employment (SECURE) and 
appointment of Ombudsperson in every district of States/UTs. 
  
In order to ensure a higher level of monitoring and oversight, National Mobile 
Monitoring System (NMMS) App and Area Officer App have been introduced. In the 
former, attendance of workers on all work sites (except individual beneficiary works) 
is taken daily along with a geo-tagged & time-stamped photograph of theirs. The 
latter has been designed to ensure that field officials conduct inspections in the 
requisite numbers and look into all the relevant aspects of the scheme. 
  
So far, Delay Compensation rule have been notified by 26 States/UTs under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
  
The recommendation given by Hon’ble committee has been noted and it will be 
strictly followed up with all the States/UTs. 
 (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
2.9 The Committee have been witnessing since the inception of the scheme 
under MGNREGA, one major calamitous factor, that despite good efforts of the 
DoRD, remains as a thorn in the implementations of the scheme being that of the 
prevalence of fake job cards. This is a major reason for irregularity in the 
implementation of scheme, which deprives the genuine beneficiaries from their dues, 
and acts as a tool for diverting funds. Experts and people in the know-how of things 
associated with MGNREGA along with the experience of Members have brought this 
issue before the Committee on numerous occasions. The Committee also note that 
Section 25 of the Act states that contravention of the provision of the Act shall on 
conviction attract a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. In-arguably, 
several provisions for proper implementation have been provided in the Act. 
However inspite of the presence of such provisions, the open secret of fake job 
cards afflicting the schemes’ intent is a major cause for concern. DoRD have been 
consistently endeavouring to streamline and bring greater transparency in the 

 
 
29 
 
execution of MGNREGA at ground level which has not gone unnoticed. However, 
still rogue actors at ground level devise means to bypass the system and through 
their shrewd connivance with similar mindset characters flourish in their wrongful 
acts. The Committee after their deliberations recommend DoRD that a holistic review 
of the mechanism surrounding the issue of job cards be undertaken to weed out the 
glaring loopholes with the correct usage of technology. This may be done through 
use of smart cards or biometric cards, anything which the DoRD may find practical 
and robust enough not to be forged or duplicated. Moreover, penal provisions in the 
Act may also be augmented by seeking proper amendments and stricter monitoring 
may be ensured.    
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) acknowledges the Hon’ble 
Committee’s continued attention to the critical issue of fraudulent job cards within the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS).  
  
It is submitted that implementation of the Scheme is the responsibility of State 
Governments and several provisions for proper implementation have been provided 
in the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA), 2005. 
 
Verification of Job Cards is a regular exercise conducted by the States/UTs. It is the 
responsibility of the District Programme Coordinator in the State and the UT 
Government to ensure that these verification campaigns are conducted in a time 
bound manner. In all cases, the Programme Officer, after independent verification of 
the facts, may direct the Gram Panchayat to cancel the Job Card.   
  
The Job Cards can be cancelled/deleted, after due verification, only if, it is a fake job 
card (incorrect job card)/ duplicate job card/ household not willing to work/ family 
shifted from Gram Panchayat permanently/ single person in job card and that person 
is expired. 
  
All additions / deletions / cancellations must be made public, presented to the Gram 
Sabha / Ward Sabha, reported to the Programme Officer and updated in the 
NREGASoft. 
  
As per NREGASoft, during the FY 2023-24, total number of Job cards deleted 
including fake Job cards by the States/UTs was 1.03 crore. 
This Ministry is actively pursuing a multi-pronged approach to address this 
challenge: 
 
Technological Solutions: MoRD intend to implement face authentication version in 
NMMS App at the field level. This will help in preventing cases of   forgery and 

 
 
30 
 
duplication of job cards as only genuine beneficiaries will be able to mark their 
attendance through NMMS App. 
  
Robust Monitoring Mechanisms: MoRD remains committed to implementing 
stricter monitoring procedures at all levels of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
implementation. This enhanced vigilance and will ensure greater transparency, 
enable the timely detection of irregularities, and ultimately safeguard the scheme's 
resources for genuine beneficiaries.  
  
Aadhaar seeding of beneficiary: Aadhaar seeding of beneficiary is a continuous 
process and is done as a de-duplication exercise to authenticate the genuine 
beneficiaries, to make the benefits of the social welfare schemes available only to 
the genuine beneficiaries. As on date, 12.87 Crores active workers Aadhaar have 
been seeded in MIS out of 13.02 Crores active workers.  
  
The recommendation given by Hon’ble committee has been noted and it will be 
strictly followed up with all the States/UTs. 
 (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
2.11 The Committee find Section 17 of the MGNREGA Act, 2005 as a unique tool 
of check and balance in the implementation of the scheme at ground level. One of 
the best mechanism that is already ingrained in the statute itself perhaps reveal the 
intent to keep the scheme under a tight leash of monitoring. Section 17(2) of the Act 
mandates that the Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all the projects 
under the scheme taken up within the Gram Panchayat. The Committee further find 
that during the current financial year, as on 20.11.2023, only 32.19% of the 2,56,254 
Gram Panchayats planned for audit at least once in a financial year had been 
audited. During 2022-23, 69.48% of the planned 2,39,265 GPs, 51.78% of 2,04,608 
of the planned GPs in 2021-22 and only 14.02% of the 79,312 planned GPs in 2020-
21 were audited at least once in the Financial Year. The figures themselves reveal 
the sorry state of affairs in this regard. Needless to say that Section 17 of the Act is 
not being complied with in letter and spirit for various reasons. It has been revealed 
that the State of Goa, UTs of Ladakh, Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep, 
Puducherry, the Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu are yet to establish a 
Social Audit Unit in the State/UT to facilitate conducting of social audits by the Gram 
Sabha. Thus, setting up of a Social Audit Unit is a pre-requisite which needs to be 
mandatorily done. The Committee feel that such an important aspect of the scheme 
should not remain neglected/non-complied with at the grass root level. Conducting of 

 
 
31 
 
timely social audits not only ensures the transparency in expenditure of funds at the 
Gram Panchayat level but is also a tool to recover the misappropriated funds 
reported after audit. The reports of social audits in public domain would only work to 
augment the confidence of the MGNREGA beneficiaries in the scheme. Moreover, it 
is also utmost necessary to bring within the ambit the other agencies also who are 
entrusted with carrying out MGNREGA works other than through GPs. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the DoRD to ensure the independent establishment and 
functioning of Social Audit Units in each State/UT to carry out the mandatory social 
audits under MGNREGA as per the Act while publishing their audit reports in public 
domain. Efforts should also be taken to bring the other agencies also under the 
ambit of social audit. If necessary, necessary amendments to MGNREG Act may be 
considered for incorporating penal provisions in case non-auditing of MGNREGA 
accounts. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The independent Social Audit Units have been established in 27 States and in 
1 UT. The State of Goa, UT of Ladakh, Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep, 
Puducherry and The Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu are yet to 
establish a Social Audit Unit (SAU) to facilitate the conduct of Social Audit by Gram 
Sabha. These States/UTs are directed in various review meetings to establish the 
Social Audit Unit for the smooth conduct of Social Audits in Gram Panchayat.  
 
As on 31.03.2024, out of total 2.69 lakhs Gram Panchayats, Social audit has been 
completed for more than 2 lakhs Gram Panchayats. States/UTs-wise details of 
Social Audit Conducted under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme are given at Annexure. 
 
Also, a Joint Task Force on Streamlining Social Audit has been formed under the 
chairpersonship Additional Deputy Controller and Auditor General (Local 
Governance Audit) on the following ToR: 
 
a. Modifying the current Auditing Standards of Social Audit so that it can be 
applicable to programmes of multiple Departments and Ministries mandating 
social audits. The task force may examine whether social audit can now be 
broad-based to cover the entire gamut of activities for the delivery of services 
and benefits at the grassroots level, not necessarily linked to individual 
schemes/funding sources.  
b. Developing norms for ensuring the financial, administrative and functional 
independence and autonomy of the Social Audit Units across the 
implementing Department/ Ministry.  
c. Defining norms of fund allocation and fund releases to Social Audit Units.  
d. Building minimum standards of training and capacity building of Social Audit 
Unit Resource Persons.  

 
 
32 
 
e. Defining an inter-departmental administrative mechanism for reviewing social 
audits and action taken on social audit findings on a period basis, and its 
reporting to the Legislature and the C&AG.  
   
As per information uploaded by the States/UTs in NREGASoft an amount of Rs. 
197.60 crore have been recovered since inception based on misappropriation 
reported by Social Audit team under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
  
Act mandates that Social Audit is to be conducted at least once in every six months. 
The performance of the Social Audit Unit of States/UTs is regularly monitored in 
various review meetings like Mid-term Review (MTR), Performance Review 
Committee (PRC), Common Review Mission (CRM) and Labour budget revision 
meetings and before Empowered Committee.  In addition to this, the performance of 
social audit is also one of the agenda during the Central team visits to States/UTs 
and National Level Monitors (NLM) and necessary instructions are issued from time 
to time. 
  (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
2.13 The Committee further note that as per the provision under the MGNREGA 
Act, 2005, out of the States’ entitlement of 6% towards administrative expenditure, 
up to 0.5% shall be earmarked for the State’s social audit. However, it has been 
widely reported and also brought to the notice of the Committee that one of the 
reasons being cited for non-timely conduct of social audits in the States/UTs is that 
of non-release of earmarked funds. Due to paucity of funds, the Social Audit Units 
are not able to manage their operational costs leading to non-implementation of a 
mandatory provision in the Act, that of Conduct of Social Audit. From the details of 
the current financial year, the Committee observe that 1st Tranche of fund release 
(1st instalment) has been released for 15 States while fund release 1st tranche (1st& 
2nd instalment) has been released to 3 States only. From few States, proposals are 
yet to be received while some have sent incomplete proposals. The situation aptly 
reflects that their exists some administrative/bureaucratic impediment due to which 
either procedural formalities are not being taken care of seriously at the State/UT 
level or there exists unexplained glitches in overseeing the set up and conduct of 
smooth social audit units. The Committee therefore feel that DoRD should look into 
this glaring aspect with alacrity and rectify the anomalies that might have crept in the 
implementation of such an important component of the scheme for want of timely 
release of funds. Hence, the Committee recommend the DoRD to ensure that the 

 
 
33 
 
provision of social audit is implemented in totality and does not suffer due to lack of 
funds. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 Funds release to SAUs is a continuous process and Central Government is 
committed to making funds available to SAUs in time for the smooth conduct of 
social audits. Fund is released to SAUs on submission of proposal in the prescribed 
format by the SAU and subject to fulfilment of the prescribed conditions. The 
proposal can be submitted after a SAU has utilized 75 per cent of the total available 
funds as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance.  
Social Audit Units have been established in total of 27 States/1 UT. Owing to 
consistent perusals with the State/UT government funds have been released to 23 
States/UT in FY 2023-24 from whom complete proposals were received.  
 The recommendation given by Hon’ble committee has been noted and all efforts will 
be made to ensure timely release of funds to the Social Audit Units (SAUs) 
            (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
2.15 The Committee are of the opinion that MGNREG Scheme is such a large 
scheme in terms of its geographical coverage and paraphernalia involved in its 
implementation that there cannot be any escape from the reporting of grievances by 
the beneficiaries at some or the other level. Thus, it becomes imperative that the 
Section 19 of the MGNREGA Act, 2005, which entails that the State Government 
shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal mechanisms at the Block 
and the District level for dealing with any complaint by any person in respect of 
implementation of the scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such 
complaints, is followed scrupulously without any laxity. In this regard, the Committee 
note that a complaint register is needed to be maintained at Gram Panchayat level. 
Moreover, Para 30 of the Schedule I of the MGNREGA Act also mandates the 
appointment of Ombudsman for each district to look into the grievances, enquire and 
post awards. There are still districts having no Ombudsman. The Committee 
appreciate the provision of Online Central Portal Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
System (CPGRAMS) of the Ministry. However, looking at the target population of 
MGNREGA beneficiaries, the Committee are still of the view that physical setups for 
hearing one to one grievances of the MGNREGA beneficiaries will serve much better 
for the technologically challenged MGNREGA beneficiaries. Thus, the Committee 
recommend to DoRD to create awareness for the usage of CPGRAMS in a better 

 
 
34 
 
way while ensuring that there is stricter compliance of Section 19 of the Act and 
appropriate mechanism is set up at Gram Panchayat/Block/District levels along with 
mandatory presence of an Ombudsperson in each district. Moreover, DoRD should 
take steps for creating awareness among the rural population about the availability of 
complaint register at Gram Panchayat level and the existence of ombudsman in 
each district who can be approached in case of non-resolving of their complaints.  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) is 
an online platform set up by Department of Administrative Reforms and Public 
Grievances (DARPG) to enable the citizens to lodge their grievances to the public 
authorities. Complaint can be lodged through CPGRAMS portal on any subject 
including the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.  
  
State/UT –wise Pendency Status of complaints are reviewed by this Ministry from 
time to time in various forums such as Mid-term Review meetings, Performance 
Review Committee meetings and Annual Action Plan Meetings and during physical 
visits of Officers from Departments to States/UTs etc. Apart from CPGRAMS, under 
good governance initiatives, Complaint Register is also maintained at Gram 
Panchayat level to capture the complaints/grievances of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
beneficiaries. 
  
Additionally, complainants can also lodge their grievances/complaints at Block, 
District, State and Central level directly through written letters, mails etc. 
  
It is also mentioned that each State/UTs also has their own Grievance Redressal 
mechanism.  
  
Status of appointment of ombudsperson is regularly reviewed with states/UTs. A 
total of 567 ombudsperson have been appointed out of total of 740 districts, across 
the States/UTs. 
  
However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further follow-up 
action.  
          (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
2.17 Strong monitoring mechanism is an essential requirement for the success of 
any scheme of the Government and to achieve the desired target. The Committee 
having deliberated upon the subject feel that MGNREGA is a welfare oriented 
scheme which has its intention at right places aimed at providing last recourse to the 
downtrodden masses of rural populace who look at it with the sense of hope and 
credence. No other scheme of rural poverty alleviation derives its strength from the 

 
 
35 
 
statutory provisions. Thus, it becomes all the more important that the scheme does 
not fare poorly for reasons of weak monitoring system. DoRD have elaborated upon 
the various steps being taken by them to ensure compliance, accountability and 
ushering in of greater transparency in the implementation of the scheme. However, 
the Committee also note that the implementing body of the Scheme are States/UTs 
and the GPs to be precise at the grass root level. In this context, the Committee 
expect DoRD to maintain and strengthen all its monitoring modules for sustained 
progress of the scheme in terms of achievement of its physical and financial targets. 
Whether it be the wrong usage of machinery instead of MGNREGA workers or the 
issue of fake job cards etc., there can be widespread instances associated with 
MGNREGA which require stricter surveillance and redressal. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that DoRD should keep on reviewing and upgrading their 
monitoring mechanism of MGNREGA in such a way so that the scheme benefits its 
targeted beneficiaries with the right outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Ministry has a comprehensive system of monitoring and review 
mechanism for Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Some of the important elements of the 
above framework are listed below: 
  
i. The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., Mid-Term 
Review, Empowered Committee Meeting for Annual Action Plan Preparation, 
Labour Budget Revision meetings, and Programme Review meetings. Central 
Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils 
also periodically monitor the implementation of the Scheme. 
ii. National Level Monitors, Common Review Missions and Officers of the 
Ministry visit States/UTs at regular intervals to review the implementation of 
the scheme. After the field visits, the findings/shortcomings and 
recommendations are shared with the States/UTs for appropriate action at 
their end. 
iii. Auditing Standards for Social Audit have been issued and States/UTs have 
been advised to establish independent Social Audit Units, conduct Social 
Audit as per Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011 and training of village resource 
persons for conducting Social Audit etc. As per the Audit of the Scheme 
Rules, the audit of the works in a Gram Panchayat has been made 
mandatory.  Internal Audit Teams of the Department also conduct regular 
audits. 
iv. Steps have been taken to strengthen transparency and accountability which 
include geo-tagging of assets, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), National 
electronic Fund Management System (NeFMS), Aadhar Based Payment 
System (ABPS), Software for Estimate Calculation using rural rates for 

 
 
36 
 
Employment (SECURE) and appointment of Ombudsperson in every districts 
of States/UTs. 
v. Steps have been taken for establishment of State Technical Cell at various 
levels for qualitative monitoring and supervision of works under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS. 
vi. In order to ensure a higher level of monitoring and oversight, National Mobile 
Monitoring System (NMMS) App and Area Officer App have been introduced. 
In the former, attendance of workers on all work sites (except individual 
beneficiary works) is taken daily along with a geo-tagged & time-stamped 
photograph of theirs. The latter has been designed to ensure that field officials 
conduct inspections in the requisite numbers and look into all the relevant 
aspects of the scheme. 
vii. Transparency and accountability measures like an Ombudsperson for each 
district, an independent Director for the Social Audit Unit, and timely 
compliance of Internal Audit Paras are some of the conditions for the funds 
release. 
 
          (O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
37 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
  

 
 
38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
4.1 The Committee find that availability of funds is one major aspect affecting the 
financial health of the scheme while the other area of equal importance is the often 
complained matter associated with the delay in the release of funds to the States. 
Proper implementation of the scheme totally hinges on the timely and adequate 
release of funds to all the States/UTs. Now the permissible works under MGNREGA 
have been widened further to include Natural Resource Management (NRM) works 
and hence the ambit of works under MGNREGA is further increasing day by day. 
However, on perusal of the information provided, Committee find that there are wage 
and material liabilities in respect of many of the States and UTs. In this regard, the 
Committee note the submission of DoRD that fund release is a continuous process 
and timely compliance of conditions by States for fund release is the important 
requirement. If any State could not comply the conditions in a timeline, it leads to 
delay in release of funds. Further, it is noted that there are delays in material 
payment and DoRD is trying to devise systems whereby these delays are removed 
or minimized. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that whatever may be the 
reasons for non-release of funds, the sufferers remain the poor and down-trodden 
beneficiaries of MGNREGA. The Committee, therefore, call upon the DoRD to 
address the grey areas surrounding the timely release of funds under MGNREGA 
and spruce up their financial mechanisms for ensuring that obstacles in the path of 
seamless release of funds under MGNREGA are removed so that MGNREGA 
works/beneficiaries do not have to suffer. In this regard, the Committee recommend 
that DoRD should take up the matter of delays in compliance of conditions with every 
State and UT and ensure that the funds for both wage and material components are 
released to all States/UTs without any delays.  
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is a 
demand driven wage employment Scheme. Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, 
States/UTs furnish funds release proposals to the Government of India. The Ministry 
releases funds periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or 

 
 
39 
 
more instalments, keeping in view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, 
opening balance, pace of utilization of funds, pending liabilities, overall performance 
and subject to submission of relevant documents by the States/UTs. 
 
First instalment of the first tranche is released in the first half of April after adjusting 
unspent balance available with the States and considering the pending liabilities, if 
any. The second tranche is released on submission of proposal in the prescribed 
format by the State and subject to fulfilment of all the prescribed conditions. The 
proposal for release of 2nd tranche can be submitted by the State/UT after utilization 
of 75% of the total available funds. If the proposal for second tranche is submitted 
after 1st October, then the Audit Report and Audited Utilization Certificate (UC) of 
the previous financial year are also required. Quantum of funds to be released as 
part of second tranche depends upon the performance of the States/UTs and 
compliance with other conditions for fund release. 
 
Fund release to States/UTs is a continuous process and Central Government is 
committed in making funds available to States/UTs for the implementation of the 
Scheme as per the demand for work on the ground. 
 
A total of 6 crore households were provided employment resulting in generation of 
312.55 crore person days during FY 2023-24 and release of an amount of 
Rs.89,351.65 crore.  
  
This Ministry regularly interacts and follows up with States/UTs Government 
regarding timely submission of prescribed documents in order to avoid delay in 
release of funds for implementation of scheme. 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
4.3 The Committee note that Section 6 of the Act defines the wage rate and also 
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, 
the Central Government, may by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes 
of the Act which may be different for different areas. The provision further implies 
that the wages so notified shall not be less than the wages guaranteed under 
Minimum Wages Act for agricultural labourers. The Committee feel that the need for 
having a wage guaranteeing rural employment scheme of such a grand scale was 
emanated from the need of providing a sense of security in terms of employment and 
wage to the poor people in rural areas who does not have any other job avenue to 
look forward to. The Ministry notifies the wage rates under MGNREGA for each 
State/UT at the beginning of each financial year. After going through the notified 

 
 
40 
 
wage rates under MGNREGA over the period of years and during the ongoing 
financial year, the Committee find the range of wages to vary from as little as 
Rs.221/- in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, Rs. 224/- in Arunachal Pradesh, Rs. 
228/- in Bihar and Jharkhand to Rs. 354/- in the 3 Gram Panchayats of Sikkim 
(namely Gnathang, Lachung and Lachen), Rs. 328/- in Nicobar and Rs. 311/- in 
Andaman. Observing the quantum of wages since 2008, the Committee find the 
wages inadequate and not in consonance with the rising cost of living. At this 
juncture, the agricultural labourers and other labourers involved in 
masonry/miscellaneous works command a daily wage more than the wage 
guaranteed under MGNREGA. Perhaps, one of the reasons for the dearth of 
MGNREGA workers to be engaged in the works under MGNREGA, may be the 
insufficiency of the wage rates under MGNREGA. Workers would definitely engage 
themselves in such projects/works which could earn them a better remuneration. 
This is indeed an area of concern vis-à-vis the implementation of MGNREGA along 
with the fulfilment of noble objectives and the spirit behind the inception of such a 
social scheme. It has been also brought to the notice of the Committee that a Central 
Government Committee on minimum wages, AnoopSatpathy Committee had 
recommended that the wages under MGNREGA should be Rs.375/- per day. The 
need for suitable increase in the wages under MGNREGA has been felt and echoed 
from various quarters and also highlighted by this Committee in its earlier Reports. 
Therefore, the Committee once again recommend that DoRD should take a 
considered view on the pertinent issue of suitable increase in the wage rates under 
MGNREGA and increase the wage rates at the earliest for benefitting MGNREGA 
beneficiaries in a befitting manner. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is a 
demand driven wage employment Scheme. It provides fall back options for 
livelihood security for the rural households, when no better employment 
opportunity is available.  
  
As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by notification 
specify the wage rate for its beneficiaries. Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provide 
that until such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of 
any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under section 
3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for Agricultural Labours shall be considered as 
the wage rate applicable to that area. Accordingly  as per provision of Section 6(2) of 

 
 
41 
 
the Act, from the inception of the scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage 
rate in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA was determined on the basis of the minimum wage 
set by the State Government. However, from the financial year 2011-12, the 
Government of India started determining the wage rates using the Consumer Price 
Index for agricultural labour (CPI-AL).  
  
To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the wage rate every financial year based on change in 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla. If the calculated wage 
rate of any State/UT is coming lower than the wage rate of previous year, it is being 
protected by maintaining the previous year wage rate. The wage rate is made 
applicable from 1st April of each financial year.  
 
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-24 is about 7%. 
 
However, each State/UT can provide wage over and above the wage rate 
notified by the Central Government. 
 
State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha were providing 
more than notified wage rates under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from their own 
resources in last financial year 2023-24. 
 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
4.5 The Committee note that the Government of India notifies the wage rate 
under MNGREGA using Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) and 
by keeping the wage rates thus obtained on 1st April 2009 or Rs.100 whichever is 
more as the base for indexation for the States. Every year, wage rates are revised 
and notified by addition of incremental value  to the base rate on the basis of CPI-AL. 
According to DoRD, this inflation is being accounted for based on the base rate of 
2009. The Committee find this method of calculation using the base year of 2009-
2010 obsolete and saturated to yield any desired figure commensurate with the 
present inflation and increased cost of living. It is felt that one of the probable 
mechanism to sort out the issue of lower wage rates can be achieved through the 
revision of base year and the base rates to a more closer time line alongwith 
increase in the base rate. The similar rationale was also proposed by the 

 
 
42 
 
recommendation of the Mahendra Dev Committee while suggesting that the baseline 
for MGNREGA Wage indexation from 2014 may be current minimum wage rate for 
unskilled agricultural labourers fixed by the States under the Minimum Wage Act or 
the current MGNREGA wage rate, whichever is higher. Thus, in light of the above 
rationale, the Committee recommend DoRD to explore the feasibility of revising the 
base year and base rate in such a manner to bring in an appreciable hike in the 
wage rates under MGNREGA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005, the Central Government may, by notification specify the wage 
rate for its beneficiaries of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.  
 
Further, section 6 (2) of the Act, provide that until such time as a wage rate is fixed 
by the Central Government in respect of any area in a State, the minimum wage 
fixed by the State Government under section 3 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 for 
Agricultural Labours shall be considered as the wage rate applicable to that area. 
 
Accordingly, as per provision of Section 6(2) of the Act, from the inception of the 
scheme till the financial year 2010-11, the wage rate in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA 
was determined on the basis of the minimum wage set by the State Government. 
However, from the financial year 2011-12, the Government of India started 
determining the wage rates using the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour 
(CPI-AL).  
 
Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA vide 
Gazette Notification. S.O. 82(E) dated 14th January, 2011 in exercise of the power 
conferred by Section 6(1) of Mahatma Gandhi NREG act, using CPI-AL as index and 
kept the wage rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs. 100 whichever is 
more as the base for indexation for the States/UTs 
 
To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the wage rate every financial year based on change in 
Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The index is different for 
different States/UTs as notified by Labour Bureau Shimla.  If the calculated 
wage rate of a state is lower than the wage rate of the previous financial year then it 
is protected by continuing the wage rate of the previous financial year. The wage 
rate is made applicable from 1st April of each financial year. 
  
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-24 is about 7%. 
 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 

 
 
43 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
4.7 The Committee note that the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour 
(CPI-AL) is used by DoRD for calculating the revision of wage rates under 
MGNREGA at the start of each Financial Year. After scrutinizing the pattern of 
increase in the wage rates under MGNREGA using the CPI-AL, the Committee feel 
that the current index was perhaps not sufficient to take into account the inflation 
during the time-period under study. The usage of such index has not reflected 
requisite quantum of hike in the MGNREGA wages. Both Mahendra Dev Committee 
and Dr.Nagesh Singh Committee have suggested that Consumer Price Index for 
Rural (CPI-Rural) may be considered as the appropriate index for protecting the 
wages against inflation as the consumption basket of CPI-R is of more recent 
vintage than CPI-AL. However, after going through the comparative data obtained 
from the DoRD regarding the wage rates under MGNREGA on the basis of CPI-AL 
and CPI-Rural for the ongoing financial year, the Committee find both the indexation 
resulting in almost similar wage rates for different States/UTs barring few 
fluctuations. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that DoRD should perhaps 
find a better approach to the problem of selecting a more suitable index for 
neutralising the inflationary effect at the time of revision of wage rates under 
MGNREGA. Hence, the Committee recommend that DoRD should adopt a much 
more economically viable method in identifying ways and means for the selection of 
an appropriate index which cater to the need of the hour for the positive revision of 
wage rates under MGNREGA according to the prevailing inflationary trend. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 4.8 It is submitted that, as per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, Central Govt. may, by notification, specify the 
separate wage rate for the beneficiary of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The rate is 
revised on the basis of Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). 
 
Government of India has notified the wage rate under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA vide 
Gazette Notification S.O. 82(E) dated 14th January, 2011 in exercise of the power 
conferred by Section 6(1) of Mahatma Gandhi NREG Act, using CPI-AL as index and 
kept the wage rates as these obtained on 1st April, 2009 or Rs.100 whichever is 
more as the base for indexation for the States. 

 
 
44 
 
For protecting the wage against the inflation, it has been decided to index the wage 
rate notified under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA to the Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL) while maintaining the distinction between the notified 
wage rate under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and the minimum wage Act. 
 
The overall % increase in wage rate for FY 2024-25 from the FY 2023-24 is about 7%. 
 
 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
4.9 The Committee note that the MGNREGA Act provides that the payment of 
wages should be done within fifteen days of the closure of muster rolls. However, the 
ground reality paints a stark picture contrary to the theoretical provision. The 
Committee have been enlightened time and again with this omnipresent issue of 
delay in payment of wages to the MGNREGA workers. Delving deep into the issue, 
the Committee, through their on-ground experiences and deliberations find that there 
are many reasons for delay in the payment of wages viz., delay/improper filling of 
Muster rolls, delayed release of Fund Transfer Orders, procedural hindrances at the 
ground level, non-adherence to provisions of MGNREGA for payment, etc. Instead of 
pointing to a single cause of concern, the Committee find that the reasons may vary 
place to place. Since the Committee feel that a holistic exercise need to be 
undertaken by the nodal agency, DoRD, to identify each issue separately and bring 
forward a stronger solution to deal with such issues, it is recommended that DoRD 
should get onboard all the stakeholders involved in the process of payment of wages 
to streamline the mechanism and ensure that MGNREGA beneficiaries do not suffer 
on account of delay in payment of wages any more. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 The Ministry has taken various steps to ensure timely payment of wages to 
workers under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. These include: 
 
Up scaling of National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) in 28 States 
and 3 Union Territories.  
 

 
 
45 
 
Intensive consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders to strategize 
timely payment of wages, verification of pending compensation claims etc.  
 
Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure for monitoring of timely payment and 
payment of compensation.  
 
Meetings with States/ UTs for reviewing the status of timely payment and payment of 
delay compensation.  
 
States/UT’s have been requested to ensure timely regeneration of rejected 
transaction and every fund release is tagged with priority release of rejected 
transaction. 
 
Review meetings with Banks, NPCI and PFMS are conducted on a regular basis at 
central level to review the delays, if any and the stakeholders are directed to resolve 
the issues. 
 
States/UTs have been requested to ensure correction of invalid accounts as per 
information provided by Public Financial Management System (PFMS). 
 
Further, Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) uses Aadhaar numbers to 
link a beneficiary's bank account with job cards, aiming to ensure faster, safer wage 
disbursement and reduce fraud under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
  
Central Government is making wage payment directly into the Bank/ Post office 
account of the beneficiary as per the DBT protocol through a National Electronic 
Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) for the States under Ne-FMS. Currently, 
98.67% Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs) are getting generated within statutory period 
of 15 days. 
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble committee has been noted and appropriate 
follow up action will be taken to ensure 100% timely payment of wages. 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
4.11 The Committee appreciate the efforts being undertaken by the DoRD in 
switching to completely Aadhar Based Payment System for the beneficiaries under 
MGNREGA. The aim to bring in greater transparency and reduce misappropriation of 
funds through the usage of technology is a welcome step and perhaps the need of 
the hour. There have been reported cases of non-seeding of Aadhar numbers of all 
the active job card holders, primarily due to pending cases of NPCI mapping. As on 
21.11.2023, 14.12% of total job card holders are not Aadhar enabled under 

 
 
46 
 
MGNREGA. Moving over the technical aspect, there are practical constraints being 
faced by MGNREGA beneficiaries such as non-working of their Aadhar numbers, 
KYC compliance, ignorance about the linkage of Aadhar with their bank account etc. 
One should always remember that the target community of MGNREGA are mainly 
less educated, technologically challenged and having less fiscal management know-
how. Therefore, the Committee feel that any mechanism to be activated needs to 
take care of all the mushrooming challenges and till the time all the major 
bottlenecks associated with Aadhar Based Payment Bridge System are not tackled 
sufficiently, including creation of awareness among the MGNREGA beneficiaries, the 
system should not be made mandatory. Alternative mechanism should always 
operate side by side to ensure that the primary goal of MGNREGA to provide wages 
does not get defeated due to lack of proper implementation of technology. Hence, 
the Committee recommend to DoRD to strike a fine balance between the usage of 
technology for payment and ironing out the flaws associated with it, while ensuring 
that wages are paid timely to MGNREGA workers and they are not mandated with 
Aadhar compliance till the mechanism is made foolproof. 
Reply of the Government 
4.12 Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge System (APBS) is a method of disbursing 
payment to Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers using their unique 12 digit Aadhaar 
number as their financial  address. It uses Aadhaar numbers to link a beneficiary's 
bank account with job cards, aiming to ensure faster, safer wage disbursement and 
reduce fraud. All worker under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Emplolyment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) scheme are to receive their wages through  an 
Aadhaar-Based Payment System (ABPS). 
 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, beneficiaries are getting wage payment for 
unskilled manual work, directly into the Bank/Post office account as provided by the 
beneficiary. The wage payment is routed through Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge 
System (APBS). After detailed consultation with all States/UTs ABPS has been 
made mandatory since 1st January, 2024. As on date out of  total of 13.02 crore 
active workers, 98.85% active workers Aadhaar has been seeded. 
 
As per NREGASoft, in April 2024  more than 96% Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
beneficiaries received their wages securely through Aadhaar Based Payment Bridge 
System (APBS). It may be noted that  ABPS helps in timely payment of beneficiaries 
even in cases of frequent change of Bank account change in beneficiaries. 
 

 
 
47 
 
In case States/UTs face any kind of issues or problems in respect of Aadhaar Based 
Payment Bridge Systems the same are resolved on a priority basis. Ministry also 
organizes training programme frequently for functionaries of States/ UTs involved in 
implementation of ABPS. 
 
Further, it is to mention that the Ministry arranges trainings as and when required by 
the States/UTs to keep updated with the process of Aadhaar seeding. 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
4.13 One of the other major initiative undertaken by DoRD to usher in greater 
transparency and accountability with the aid of technology is the usage of National 
Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) app for capturing of attendance at work site. The 
Committee note that from 1st January, 2023 onwards, the workers under MGNREGA 
are supposed to capture their Geotagged two time stamped photographs in a day for 
marking their attendance. On the basis of the uploading of photographs, the 
attendance is counted and Muster rolls are accordingly generated. Although much 
water has flown under the bridge by now since the initiation of this mechanism, still 
there are few teething issues which remain to be addressed due to which workers on 
ground are facing obstacles in marking their attendance resulting in non-payment for 
the work actually done by them. The Committee have been enlightened on different 
occasions through credible sources and also through the insight gained from the 
study visits to different parts of the country that NMMS app, though a right step in 
eradicating malpractices to certain extent, still has a long way to go in terms of its 
execution. The reliability of MGNREGA beneficiaries on other persons with smart 
phones once again brings in the involvement and dependence upon a third party. 
Beneficiaries from various corners of the country have still expressed their inability to 
mark attendance on account of non-availability of smart phones, internet connectivity 
issues, boundation to remain at the site even after the work is completed for marking 
attendance to name a few. The Committee, once again are of the view that 
technology should always smoothen the passage and not turn out to be a dampener 
when its use is made mandatory. The larger intent of MGNREGA should always be 

 
 
48 
 
achieved in terms of rural-employment and till the time all the stakeholders, in this 
case, the MGNREGA beneficiaries, are not brought on board and acquainted with 
the usage, some other alternative should also remain in position for marking the 
attendance. So, the Committee recommend that DoRD should create awareness 
and provide facilities to the MGNREGA beneficiaries to get them acclimatized with 
the usage of the NMMS App while keeping in vogue a robust alternative mechanism 
also till that time. 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 To ensure more transparency in the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme in the States/UTs, capturing of 
attendance with geo-tagged, two time-stamped photographs of the workers in a day 
through National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS) App for all the works (except 
individual beneficiary works) has been made mandatory from 1st January, 2023.  
  
This increases citizen oversight of the Scheme besides enabling faster processing of 
payments. Worksite supervisors are responsible for capturing attendance along with 
geo-tagged photographs of the workers through the NMMS App. 
 
Ministry has arranged various workshop at a regular interval to pursue hand holding 
support to the States/UTs. The technical issues being faced in NMMS App are taken 
up with National Informatics Centre (NIC), Rural Development on a real-time basis. 
The new provisions/ suggestions requested by the States/UTs are being 
incorporated. All the issues concerning the NMMS app are reviewed and resolved 
from time to time. Training have been scheduled by the Ministry whenever required 
by the States/UTs to keep updated with the usage of NMMS app. 
 
NMMS app has been modified to capture the second photograph just after 4 hours of 
uploading the attendance and first photograph. The morning attendance along with 
the first photograph and second photograph can be captured in offline mode and to 
be uploaded once the device comes into a network. In case of exceptional 
circumstances due to which attendance could not be uploaded, the District 
Programme Coordinator (DPC) has been authorized to upload the manual 
attendance. 
 
Regarding availability of the Smart phone, it may be mentioned that there is a 
widespread availability of smartphones in the rural areas. As per Annual Status of 
Education Report (Rural) 2021 of ASER Centre, which reported that 67.7% surveyed 
rural households have at least one smartphone. Similar data has been reported by 
other agencies. Further, these smart phones required by only one person of the GP, 
preferably by the GraminRozgarSevak (GRS) and is not needed by every worker. 
  
Further, it is to mention that the Government is actively engaged with the State 
Government in establishing systems that ensure provision of work as per demand. 
To generate awareness about the provisions of the Scheme and to provide adequate 
employment opportunities to rural households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, all 

 
 
49 
 
States/UTs have been requested to (i) initiate appropriate Information Education and 
Communication (IEC) campaigns including wall paintings for wide dissemination of 
the provisions of the Act, (ii) expand scope and coverage of demand registration 
system to ensure that demand for work under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS does not go 
unregistered, (iii) prepare plans in a participatory mode and get them approved in the 
Gram Sabha. 
 
It is also submitted that no decline in generation of PD has been observed due to 
introduction of  NMMS. Against generation of 293.7crore PD in FY 2022-23,  309.07 
crore PD has been generated in FY 2023-24 which shows that there is no adverse 
on PD generation due to NMMS. It is also submitted that a new system has since 
stabilized. 
 
The recommendation given by Hon’ble Committee regarding creation of awareness 
among Mahatma Gandhi NREGS beneficiaries on use of NMMS has been noted. 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
4.15 The Committee find that the number of permissible works under MGNREGA 
has increased to 266. Also, the RE sought by DoRD for the ongoing Financial Year 
2023-24 is Rs.1,10,000 crore. These aspects only strengthen the opinion that 
demand for work under MGNREGA has not diminished. Hence, the Committee find 
the demand from various quarters for raising the guaranteed number of days of work 
under MGNREGA from 100 to possibly 150 merits due weightage. The rationale 
behind such demand stems from the fact that the population of the country has been 
rising since the inception of MGNREGA in 2006 and so has the ambit of works under 
MGNREGA. By tweaking the nature of works and carrying out suitable convergence 
of MGNREGA with other schemes of Central/State, the expenditure on labour force 
required for various projects can be better channelized and utilised. Dovetailing of 
labour oriented projects such as PMGSY, PMAY-G with MGNREGA can only be a 
win-win situation. On this premise, the Committee opine that the scale of MGNREGA 
can be fine tuned by utilizing its labour force through proper mechanism. Increasing 
the guaranteed number of days shall act as an incentive to work under MGNREGA. 
Thus, the Committee recommend to DoRD to look into the issue with practical 
approach and undertake a study for reviewing the need and justifications for 
increasing the number of guaranteed days of work under MGNREGA from present 

 
 
50 
 
100 days to 150 days and necessary action may be taken according to the outcome 
of the study. 
Reply of the Government 
4.16 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, is an 
Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural 
areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage 
employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members 
volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
  
The Ministry mandates the provision of additional 50 days of wage employment 
(beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest 
area, provided that these households have no other private property except for the 
land rights provided under the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for up to additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity affected notified rural 
areas.  
  
As per Section 3 (4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for 
providing additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the 
Act from their own funds 
  
Details of National average days of employment provided per households under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years  2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 
2022-23 2023-24 are given below. 
 
Financial Year 2023-24  2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 
National average days of 
employment availed per 
households 
52.09 47.83 50.07 51.52 48.4 
 
Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the average days of employment per household in 
each financial year in the last five financial years has remained around 50 days. 
Therefore, the Ministry is emphasizing generating awareness about the provisions of 
the Scheme and to provide adequate employment opportunities to rural households 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.29 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
4.17 A very important suggestion which came before the Committee was that of 
issuance of a separate job card for a differently abled person in a household. The 
Committee were briefed about the need and importance of a separate job card to 

 
 
51 
 
cater to the livelihood of a differently abled person. Normally, one job card is issued 
to a willing worker from a household. However, there are cases, wherein a family 
also comprises of a differently abled person, who can also undertake work under 
MGNREGA. Keeping in view that the range of MGNREGA works has diversified in 
much larger way and there is a hope of providing employment to differently abled 
persons according to their abilities. The plight and prayers of a differently abled 
person to live an esteemed life is oblivious to no one. The welfare nature of 
MGNREGA Scheme will perhaps not require much breaking away from the mould to 
open up its domain to also include the differently abled persons of the rural areas as 
a separate entity. This provisioning shall go a long way in empowering our disabled 
section of the population who have all the rights and wherewithal to compete and live 
life on equal terms with others. Therefore, the Committee implore upon the DoRD to 
take up this recommendation on humane grounds and make the scheme under 
MGNREGA ‘Disabled Friendly’ by providing them a separate Right to work and live 
with their heads high. 
Reply of the Government 
4.18 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is very 
inclusive and ensures equal opportunities for all rural workers, including differently-
abled persons. 
  
As per Schedule-II of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, 2005 the adult member of every 
household residing in any rural area and willing to do unskilled manual work may 
submit the names, age and the address of the household to the Gram Panchayat at 
the village level, in whose jurisdiction they reside, for registration of their household 
for issuance of a job card. If the job seeker is a single woman or disabled person 
or aged person or released bonded labour or belonging to Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Group, they must be given a special job card of a distinct 
colour which will ensure them a special protection in providing work, work evaluation 
and work as site facilitates, as the case may be. 
  
The provisions for differently abled persons under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act Operational Guidelines are given as under:-  
  
          Para 9.3.1: The disabled or differently abled persons defined under the 
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996) as persons with disabilities, the severity of which 
is 40% and above would be considered as special category of vulnerable persons for 
the purposes of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. The disabled persons as defined in the 
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999) are also to be considered 
as disabled for the purpose of inclusion in Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
  

 
 
52 
 
             Para 9.3.2: Since this category of people are differently abled, special 
conditions have to be created to facilitate their inclusion in Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA. 
  
           Para 9.3.3: Each State Government will identify specific works, which can be 
done by the disabled and vulnerable persons. In a village, different categories of 
persons with disabilities will be organized to come together as a fixed group to 
accomplish the works proposed for them under the Scheme, in a way that makes it 
possible for them to exercise their choice. On no grounds, should the disabled and 
vulnerable persons be paid lower wages as compared to other persons employed in 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA works.  
  
Here it is also submitted that Ministry has already formulated and notified the 
Accessibility guidelines for the persons with disability for all the schemes being 
administered by this Ministry. State/UTs have been advised to implement these 
guidelines in the works under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.  
 
 
(O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 1.32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

 
 
53 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DoRD O.M.No.H-11013/01/2024-RE-II dated 12.06.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
13 December, 2024 
22 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)    
Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural  
Development & Panchayati Raj 
 
 

 
 
54 
 
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
FRIDAY, THE 13th DECEMBER, 2024 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
7. Shri Jugal Kishore 
8. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
9. Shri Imran Masood 
10. Shri Janardan Mishra 
11. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
12. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri Samirul Islam 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay P. Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Draft Report on action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 37th Report on 
‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An 
insight into wage rates and other matters relating thereto’ pertaining to the 
Department of Rural Development (Ministry of Rural Development). 
 
3. Draft Report was taken up for consideration and after discussion, the 
Committee adopted the same with minor modification. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Report and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
----------- 

 
 
55 
 
ANNEXURE II 
[Vide para 4 of Introduction of Report] 
  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SEVEN REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations:              18
        
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 Serial Nos. 1, , 7, 8, 9, , , 12, 15, 16, 17, 18  
          Total:9
                Percentage: - 50%
    
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government:  
Serial No. NIL          
          Total: NIL 
                Percentage:- 0% 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 Serial No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14     
  
Total: 9 
        Percentage: - 50% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Serial No. NIL        
Total: NIL 
           Percentage:- 0% 