 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
   
 
       EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
 
 
CLEAN AND GREEN VILLAGE: ROLE OF PANCHAYATS 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
18 


 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
(2024-2025) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
 
 
CLEAN AND GREEN VILLAGE: ROLE OF PANCHAYATS 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
CRD No. 209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs 
 
 
 
© 2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by __________________. 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
Composition of the Committee (2024-2025) ii 
Introduction  iii  
 
REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
 
A. Introduction 1 
B. Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats 2 
C. Interventions of Ministry of Panchayati Raj to create Clean and Green 
Village through State, District, Blocks and Gram Panchayats 
 
3 
 Part - II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
8 
ANNEXURES  
I Minutes of the twenty-third sitting of the Committee held on 5th May, 
2025 
13 
II Extracts of the minutes of the thirty-third sitting of the Committee held on 
8th August, 2025 
15 
  

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-2025) 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson 
Lok Sabha Members 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Raju Bista 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
8. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore 
10. Dr. D. Ravi Kumar 
11. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
12. Shri Imran Masood 
13. Shri Janardan Mishra 
14. Shri Kota Srinivasa Poojary 
15. Shri K. Radhakrishnan 
16. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
17. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
18. Shri Parshottambhai Rupala 
19. Shri Devendra Singh Alias Bhole Singh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh 
21. Shri Vivek Thakur 
 
Rajya Sabha Members 
 
22. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
23. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
24. Shri Samirul Islam 
25. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
26. Shri Nagendra Ray 
27. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.K. Shailon   - Director 
3. Smt Rashmi Roy   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar   - Executive Officer 
 

 
 
iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (2024-2025) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present the Eighteenth Report on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role 
of Panchayats’ of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
2.  The Committee held briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj (MoPR) and the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) 
on 5th May, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
8th August, 2025. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj (MoPR) and the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation) for placing before them the requisite material and their considered views in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
08 August, 2025 
17 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati Raj 
 

 
 
1 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
CLEAN AND GREEN VILLAGE: ROLE OF PANCHAYATS 
PART – I  
NARRATION ANALYSIS  
A. Introduction 
 
1.1 The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, marked a watershed moment in 
India's democratic decentralization by institutionalizing Panchayats as the third tier of 
governance. The Amendment empowered Panchayats to function as institutions of local 
self-government and entrusted them with the preparation and implementation of plans 
for economic development and social justice. Under this amendment, the Eleventh 
Schedule of the Constitution was introduced, listing 29 subjects under the jurisdiction of 
Panchayats. Several of these subjects are directly relevant to the "Clean and Green 
Village" theme, including: 
 
 Social forestry and farm forestry 
 Non-conventional energy sources 
 Sanitation 
 Minor irrigation, water management, and watershed development 
 
1.2 The Panchayats are mandated for delivery of critical public services related to 29 
subjects listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution up to the level of Gram 
Panchayats/ villages. Hence, role of PRIs became more important for achievements of 
SDGs through localization. Therefore, it was felt need to take forward the SDGs up to 
last mile i.e. up to Gram Panchayat level leveraging wide network and strong 
institutional mechanism of third tier of Government including Traditional Bodies of non-
part IX areas. 
 
1.3 Accordingly, MoPR setup an Expert Group on ‘Localization of SDGs through 
Panchayati Raj Institutions’ to provide guidance on localization of SDGs. The 
Committee recommended for adopting thematic approach by aggregating/ converging 
the 17 SDGs into 9 themes of LSDGs to enable easy understanding, acceptance & 
implementation by Panchayats. Accordingly, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has adopted 9 
thematic approaches for localisation of SDGs, which are as under:  
 
S. No. Themes 
1.  Poverty Free and Enhanced Livelihoods Village 
2.  Healthy Village 

 
 
2 
 
3.  Child Friendly Village 
4.  Water Sufficient Village 
5.  Clean and Green Village 
6.  Village with Self Sufficient Infrastructure  
7.  Socially Just and Socially Secured Village 
8.  Village with Good Governance  
9.  Women Friendly Village 
 
1.4 These themes are interlinked and inter-related to each other, which ensure the 
achievement of SDGs at the grassroots. The goals on these themes to be attained by 
2030 in graduated manner by embracing following approach:  
(i) Convergence of developmental and welfare schemes/ programmes at 
Panchayat level through Panchayat Development Plan 
(ii) Saturation of various activities in all villages in phased manner, through 
focused interventions based on Sankalp/ resolution. 
(iii) Usage of digital technology for ensuring transparency and accountability at 
grassroots level.  
 
1.5 Ministry of Panchayati Raj is not having any scheme to directly provide supports 
for the Clean & Green village. However, Ministry provide support under the scheme of 
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) for Capacity Building & Training (CB&T) of 
Elected Representatives (ERs), Functionaries and other Stakeholder of Panchayats. 
The CB&T activities are mainly carried out for preparation and implementation of 
convergent and comprehensive Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP).  
 
B. Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats 
 
1.6 Out of 9 Themes, one of the Theme of Localisation of Sustainable Development 
Goals (LSDGs) is “Clean and Green Village”, which refers to have access to safe & 
adequate drinking water and sanitation services, low-pollution, cleaner air and water to 
enable people to lead healthy and productive lives, land and forests are sustainably 
managed and conserved to improve livelihoods and ensure food security, and most 
importantly protect the environment for future generations. To create “Clean and Green 
Village” following major interventions can be carried out by the Panchayats: 
  
(i) To create ODF+ village  
(ii) Mechanism for waste collection at source and its segregation  
(iii) Ensure to keep village 100% defecation free by ensuring availability of 
toilets in all public institutions (Anganwadi centres, Panchayat Bhawan, sub-
centres, schools, etc. 
(iv) Ensure that all households using clean cooking fuel. 
(v) Providing fumigation and sanitation services 

 
 
3 
 
(vi) Ensure use of dustbins in households, public places and institutions 
(vii) Prohibit effluent discharge in water bodies by firms and factories 
(viii) Ban on single use plastic in and around the Panchayat. 
(ix) Survival and maintenance of saplings planted during the plantation drive 
(x) Prohibition of illegal felling/ deforestation 
(xi) Planting of natural vegetation in high slope areas, barren and other 
common lands along roadsides 
 
C. Interventions of Ministry of Panchayati Raj to create Clean and Green Village 
through State, District, Blocks and Gram Panchayats  
1.7 As mentioned above, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj is not having any scheme to 
directly provide supports for the Clean & Green village. However, Ministry provide 
support under the scheme of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) for Capacity 
Building & Training (CB&T) of Elected Representatives (ERs), Functionaries and other 
Stakeholder of Panchayats. The CB&T activities are mainly carried out for preparation 
and implementation of convergent and comprehensive Gram Panchayat Development 
Plan (GPDP). Further, following interventions carried out to assist Panchayats through 
State Government in creation of “Clean and Green Village”: 
 
(i) Thematic Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP): Preparation of thematic 
GPDP has been institutionalized, where Panchayats prepare development plans 
focusing on specific themes, including "Clean and Green Village" by taking 
‘Sankalp’. This enables need-based, locally-driven planning aligned with 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The activities related to “Clean and 
Green Village”. The activities related to “Clean and Green Village” have been 
incorporated in the portal for preparation of Plan. 
 
(ii) Sankalp based GPDP: Gram Panchayats have been advised to prepare Sankalp / 
resolution based GPDP for focus intervention on at least one theme out of 9 
themes including “Clean and Green Village”.  
 
Total Sankalp Taken in Last 2 years for Clean and Green 
Village 
Sankalp Taken on Theme 5 – Clean and 
Green Village 
2024-25 2025-26 
30445 36690 
Note: Telangana, Andhra, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Odisha are the top 5 leading States for adopting Theme-5 
 
(iii) Capacity Building & Training: One of the major areas of intervention of the 
Ministry is Capacity Building & Training under the scheme of Rashtriya Gram 
Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA). The Elected Representatives, functionaries and other 

 
 
4 
 
Stakeholders of Panchayats are being provided training on various aspects of 
Localisation of Sustainable Development Goals (LSDGs) including preparation of 
thematic GPDP, taking Sankalp, convergence at grassroots level, etc. 
 
Total Capacity Building & Training Done in Last 3 years for Theme-5 
Training Category 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Theme 5 – Clean and Green Village 197232 88199 104567 
 
(iv) Digital for monitoring: An integrated portal called e-GramSwaraj portal based on 
worked based accounting have been introduced to enhance transparency, 
accountability, and real-time monitoring of budgeted development works included 
in Panchayat Development Plan, including activities undertaken in the theme of 
Clean & Green village.  
 
(v) Best practices / work done by Gram Panchayats for creating Clean & Green 
Village 
 
Gram Panchayat: Tagarampudi, Block Panchayat: Anakaapalle, District: 
Visakhapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) was awarded under National Panchayat 
Award of 2024 for the key achievement on:  
a) 100% segregated waste collection from households,  
b) Processing one ton of garbage daily and converting it into 72 tons of 
vermicompost annually 
c) Developed a community sanitary complex and ensured access to safe 
drinking water for all residents 
d) Increased green cover to over 995 acres through extensive roadside tree 
plantations, with organic farming promoted on 257 acres  
e) Implemented Zero Budget Natural Farming on 128 acres, reducing 
dependency on chemicals  
f) Five Clap Mitras (Green Ambassadors) are appointed for daily garbage 
collection and at source segregation of Dry and Wet Waste  
 
Gram Panchayat: Sumoor, Block Panchayat: Panamic, District: Leh, 
Ladakh was also awarded under National Panchayat Award of 2024 for the 
key achievement on:  
a) Established Solid Resource Management Centers to segregate 
and process waste, reducing landfill dependency and promoting recycling 
b) Village-level cleanliness drive has been institutionalized, involving 
households and local schools in regular clean-up activities  
c) Tree plantation drives are organized seasonally 

 
 
5 
 
d) Sought financial assistance from district and state schemes for the 
necessary infrastructure 
e) Involved local NGOs for technical support in waste management  
f) Conduct of community awareness programs for waste segregation 
and eco-friendly practices Local volunteers engaged to lead neighborhood 
clean-up campaigns, inspiring collective action 
g) Leveraged digital platforms to promote its initiatives, reaching a 
wider audience and enhancing community involvement 
 
Gram Panchayat: Modale, Block Panchayat: Igatpuri, District: Nashik, 
Maharashtra was also awarded under National Panchayat Award of 2024 
for the key achievement on:  
 
a) Availability of 325 individual and public toilets for hygienic sanitation  
b) Availability of 1,275 Drainage Lines for efficient waste management  
c) 90,000 Saplings planted to promote biodiversity and restore green spaces  
d) Large-scale construction project undertaken, building individual and public 
toilets, along with sophisticated underground drainage systems to 
manage waste effectively  
e) Implemented renewable energy solutions like solar streetlights and 
pumps, biogas units, and even mini wind turbines. 
 
Gram Panchayat: Kundal, Block Panchayat: Palus, District: Sangli, 
Maharashtra was awarded under National Panchayat Award of 2023 for the 
key achievement on:  
 
a) GP Provided 100% Solid and Waste Management for all the households 
and also for Government and Semi Government buildings. 
b) A grey water management system has been successfully implemented; it 
ensures 100% treatment of grey water. 
c) Roof top rain water harvesting system has been implemented to solve the 
water scarcity of the village by storing rain water. 
d) 100% Use of LED lights in Domestic Lightning. 
e) GP has installed WTP Plant and providing clean water to all the 
households. 
f) Approx 4000 trees are planted for afforestation and preservation of wild 
life and plants in the GP. 
 
Gram Panchayat: Syasan Ambagam, Block Panchayat: Hinjlicut, District: 
Ganjam, Odisha was awarded under National Panchayat Award of 2023 for 

 
 
6 
 
the key achievement on:  
 
a) Door to door garbage collection on daily basis, segregation and re-cycling 
of waste through Management of Community Composting (MCC) 
b) Regular cleanliness drive taken up by village sanitation committee. 
c) Construction of Asset like MCC Community Compost Pit, Institution 
Compost Pit etc. 
d) Massive Plantation activities for afforestation and preservation of wild life 
and plants. 
e) Installation of Energy efficient solar pumps for micro irrigation 
f) Community-based management of natural resources including forests, 
water bodies and sacred groves. 
g) Ensuring conservation of biodiversity and sustainability of ecosystems 
 
Gram Panchayat: Sulthanpur, Block Panchayat: Eligaid, District: 
Peddapalli, Telangana was awarded under National Panchayat Award of 
2023 for the key achievement on:  
 
a) Segregation shed for waste management has been constructed. Wet 
waste is thoroughly used to prepare compost. 
b) Around 50,000 saplings planted in the GP to spread greenery. 
c) GP has imbibed a sense of responsibility among villagers to maintain a 
clean and green environment and has distributed 6 plants to each of its 
households. 
d) Every house has IHHL, Kitchen Garden and well-maintained soak pits. 
This has helped GP achieve 100% ODF status. 
e) To restore all kinds of water, community soak pits are constructed. 
f) Grey water is conserved and purified in preserve pits for Irrigation 
purpose. 
 
(vi) Incentivisation of best practices: Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) has been 
incentivizing the best performing Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) through 
thematic awards on all 9 themes including Clean & Green village as an 
encouragement to enhance their performance in local self-governance. 
Incentivizing the Panchayats in form of thematic awards is an integral part of 
creating a healthy and competitive ecosystem for holistic implementation of 
developmental plans. Further, Ministry has also constituted an award on Climate 
Action Special Panchayat Award.  
 
  

 
 
7 
 
1.8 During the course of evidence, the Committee observed:  
 
“आपने एक बŠत ही अǅ ी योजना कʄ ुिनटी टॉयलेट यूिनट बनाने की लाई थी। जैसा कहा गया िक  
उसकी साफ-सफाई, रख-रखाव क े िलए पंचायत ही कोई Ůावधान नहीं रखती तो Ǜ ादा से Ǜ ादा 
एक हɞ ा तक वह चलता है, िफर उसक े बाद वह बंद हो जाता है। इसक े बाद उस तरफ कोई 
देखता भी नहीं है िक यहां क ु छ है। कोई अगर जाएगा तो शायद शौचालय क े बाहर जो दीवारŐ हœ, 
अगर कहीं जŐट्स होगा तो िफर वहीं लघु शंका वगैरह करते हœ। वह गंदगी का एक अǭा सा बन 
जाता है। मेरी ŮाथŊना है िक  यह बड़ा लɾ ा िसː म है, िजसमŐ क ु छ ऐसा करना चािहए िक जो पैसा 
हम देते हœ, उस पैसे का सदा क े िलए उपयोग हो, अɊ था यह वन टाईम यूिटलाइज करने वाला बन 
जाता है। उसक े बाद वह दोबारा से यूिटलाइज नहीं होता है” 
 
  

 
 
8 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Creation of New Scheme namely “Clean and Green Village” 
The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has encouraged the Gram Panchayats (GPs) 
for preparation of thematic based Gram Panchayat Development Plans (GPDPs). 
Out of 9 Themes one of the Theme is “Clean and Green Village” with the aim to 
provide adequate drinking water and sanitation services, clean air, food security 
etc. for the villagers. During the briefing representatives of MoPR has stated that 
Ministry do not have any scheme for this theme but under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj 
Abhiyan (RGSY) training have been provided to elected representatives, 
stakeholders and panchayat functionaries so that they prepare details plans on 
this theme. Approximately 99000 panchayats have adopted this theme through 
Sankalp and nearly 4 lakhs stakeholders have been trained during the last three 
years. The Committee observe that rural India is an asset to speed-up socio-
economic development and attaining the target of SDG. Despite noble objectives, 
the “Clean and Green Village” initiative faces many challenges in its 
implementation in the country. There is no scheme in MoPR named “Clean and 
Green Village” due to which no separate funds are allocated for this theme. This 
scheme is depended on State assistance, some states giving more assistance 
than others, hence, the progress of this theme is uneven across the country. 
Training is provided to stakeholders but they are facing problem to implement it 
properly on ground level and involvement of local people/villagers are very low, 
which affects the success and sustainability of this theme. Hence, the Committee 

 
 
9 
 
recommend that MoPR should start a separate and Independent Sanitation 
scheme with adequate funds and clear guidelines to provide additional financial 
support to poor States to maintain parity in implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee also recommend that for the purpose specialized training be imparted 
based on feasibility, creating awareness programme/campaigns by strengthening 
usage and behaviour change communication to motivate locals/villagers to take 
active participation for effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
further recommend to establish a dedicated “Clean Village Fund” under MoPR, 
allowing direct disbursement to Panchayats so that massive activities like door-
to-door campaigns, wall art and local folk media on toilet hygienic, usage of 
dustbins in households, public places, institutions, household using clean 
cooking-fuel, can be taken up by including community influencers and SHGs in 
behaviour change programmes. The Panchayats can also take up Local 
Sanitation Governance and Monitoring by maintaining village sanitation resisters 
to monitor usage of constructed toilets. Integrate sanitation dashboard with e-
GramSwaraj to track progress and flag gaps. 
2. Increase in Financial Assistance for Construction of IHHLs 
Financial assistance of Rs.12,000/- and technical support are provided by 
the Government to eligible households for construction of Individual Household 
Latrines (IHHLs) in rural villages under various scheme like Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Grameen) etc. Further financial assistance also provided to Gram 
Panchayats for constructing Community Sanitary Complexes (CSCs) in villages. 
However, the Committee is surprised to observe that the financial assistance 

 
 
10 
 
amount for IHHLs has remained unchanged over the past several years, despite a 
significant increase in the cost of construction materials during above period. 
Hence, Committee feel that the allocated amount is inadequate to meet the actual 
construction costs, thus, the objectives of the scheme has not been achieved up 
to the optimum level. The Committee therefore recommend that the amount of 
financial assistance for toilets construction may be increased to match the 
current cost of construction materials and labour so that people can easily build 
toilets and the purpose of the scheme can be achieved. While disbursing 
assistance prioritize vulnerable households with no access to functional toilets to 
keep villages 100 percent defecation free by ensuring availability of toilets in all 
Public Institutions, Anganwadi Centres, Panchayat Bhawans, State Centres, 
Schools etc. Further Committee desire that Government should empower 
Panchayats to top-up assistance from own funds. The adequate regular and 
timely flow of funds is essential to achieve the aims and objectives of the 
scheme. 
3. Maintenance of Community Toilet Unit  
Community Toilet Unit (CTU) is helpful for people who do not have toilets in 
their homes due to lack of space and money, specially in poor or crowded areas 
and villages. CTU is usually built as toilet blocks that can be used by some group 
of people every day. The Committee appreciate the CTU scheme, which has 
significantly improved sanitation access to the needy people and make 
environment clean. The Committee observe that the scheme faces several 
challenges in its effective implementation, including irregular cleaning, 

 
 
11 
 
insufficient water supply, lack of user awareness, and inadequate waste 
management infrastructure. A major concern is the absence of long-term 
maintenance contracts for CTUs. The Committee note that without proper 
maintenance after its construction, the condition of CTUs deteriorates over the 
time. As a result, thereof, the people stop using them, rendering the facilities 
unsafe or unusable. Therefore, the Committee recommend that MoPR a long-term 
maintenance contracts for all CTUs should be given to local panchayats to 
ensure their effective implementation and upkeep. A well-designed public toilet 
should have all essential qualities such as clean and dry, well ventilated, easy to 
maintain, carefully planned layout and friendly to persons with disabilities and 
special needs etc. Regular cleaning and inspections should be conducted by 
trained staff, and a steady water supply must be guaranteed for proper usage. 
Further, waste disposal systems need to be improved to maintain cleanliness and 
safety in the surrounding area. The construction of CTUs should adhere to 
specific guidelines concerning the number of seats allocated for men and 
women, separately, availability of bathing facilities, and provisions for persons 
with disabilities. The Committee also recommend that the region/communities 
where concept of using toilet is a taboo and people not mentally ready, the 
panchayats should first focus on making them aware about benefits of its usage 
by encouraging them to use CTU. This will help in optimum utilization of funds for 
toilet construction under IHHLs aiming at clean and green village. 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
4. Panchayats as Self-Reliant Unit 
From the foregoing the Committee are of the firm view that in order to 
achieve complete success of this clean and green village Gram Panchayats must 
be given full autonomy to prepare local plan by incorporating best practices like 
processing of litter, organic farming, avoid use of plastic or its management and 
power to levy taxes, generate income source in order to finance the local 
schemes meant for welfare of the village, otherwise basic purpose of the scheme 
would not be achieved. The Committee are firm that following this process all 
Gram Panchayats will be transformed as self-reliant according to the spirit of the 
73rd Constitutional Amendment, Act 1992. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
08 August, 2025 
17 Shraavana, 1947 (Saka) 
SAPTAGIRI SANKAR ULAKA  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Rural Development & Panchayati 
Raj 
 
  

 
 
13 
 
Annexure I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
MONDAY, THE 5th MAY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1717 hrs in Committee Room 'D',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
  Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka  -- Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Raju Bista 
3. Shri Sanjay Jaiswal 
4. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
5. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
6. Shri Jugal Kishore 
7. Shri Naba Charan Majhi 
8. Shri Imran Masood 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha  
11. Shri H. D. Devegowda 
12. Shri Iranna Kadadi 
13. Shri Nagendra Ray 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Des Raj Shekhar - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri L. Singson  - Deputy Secretary  -
 Deputy Secretary  
Representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj    
Sr. No. Name of the Witness Designation 
1. Shri Sushil Kumar Lohani Additional Secretary 
2. Dr Bijaya Kumar Behera Economic Advisor 
3. Miss Mukta Shekhar Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Vipul Ujwal Director 
6. Dr. Sriramappa V. Director 
 
Representatives of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
 (Ministry of Jal Shakti) 
 
1. Shri Ashok Kumar K. Meena Secretary 

 
 
14 
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishore Soan Additional Secretary & Mission Director (JJM) 
3. Shri Karanjit Singh Director (SBM) 
4. Ms. Swapna Devireddy Director (SBM) 
5. Shri Y. K. Singh Director (SBM) 
6. Shri Sanjay Kumar Sinha Director (SBM) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj (MoPR) and Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on 
the subject “Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats”. 
 [Witnesses were then called in] 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and in his opening remarks 
emphasized on the crucial role of Panchayats in creating “Clean and Green Village” 
which is one of the theme adopted by the Ministry of Panchayat Raj to transform rural 
ecosystems with the support of Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP). The 
Chairperson further emphasized on the Swachh Bharat Mission (Grameen) Phase-I 
launched on 02.10.2014 with the aim of making the country Open Defecation Free 
(ODF). He then asked the representatives of the Ministries to introduce themselves to 
the Committee. 
  
4. Thereafter, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj and 
Secretary of Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) gave 
their power point presentations on the subject which focused inter-alia highlighted on 
role of Ministries and Panchayats in clean and green village, best practices awards for 
creating clean and green village gram Panchayats, utilization of tied grand allocated 
under 15th Finance Commission, vision of SBM (G) Phase-II and its budgetary 
allocation/outlay, ODF Plus Model Villages and progress and impact of SBM(G) - 2.0 all 
over the country. They also highlighted the other future plans and the initiatives taken/to 
be taken for achieving the objective/target set for Clean and Green Villages in the 
country. 
 
5.  Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various issues related to creation of 
jobs under SBM (G), increasing the grant from Rs.12,000/- for construction of toilets, 
status of utilization of funds allocated under SBM Phase-II, establishment of more 
plastic waste management units in rural area of the country and delay in achieving the 
targets under Har Ghar Nal – Har Ghar Jal. The queries of Committee were responded 
by the witnesses.  
 
6. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj and Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) for their 
valuable information and requested them to furnish written information on queries/points 
raised by the Members on which the replies were not readily available with them within 
10 days.  
 
 [The Witnesses then withdrew] 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 

 
 
15 
 
Annexure II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ (2024-25) 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
HELD ON FRIDAY, THE 8th AUGUST, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs in Committee Room 'C',  
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka , Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sandipanrao Asaram Bhumare 
3. Shri Raju Bista 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
5. Shri Bhajan Lal Jatav 
6. Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
7. Shri Imran Masood 
8. Shri Janardan Mishra 
9. Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
10. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
11. Shri Ganesh Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha   
12. Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V. K. Shailon  - Director 
3.  Smt Rashmi Roy  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft Reports: 
a. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 
b. Draft Report on “Clean and Green Village: Role of Panchayats” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
3. Above mentioned draft Reports were taken up for consideration one-by-one and after 
discussion, the Committee adopted the same without any modifications. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the aforesaid Draft Reports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________ 
XXX Not related to the Draft Report. 
 