i 
 
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on 
‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 

ii 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on 
‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2025 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) ……………………....….  iv 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 
 
 vi 
CHAPTER  I   Report…………………………………………………………….. 
 
 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted  
 by the Government  
 
 12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not  desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
 
 34 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 35 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  
 replies of the Government are still awaited  
 36 
   
APPENDICES 
 
  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2024-25) held on 5th August, 2025. 
 
 38 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year       2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air 
Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’ 
 
 41 
 
            

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
*Shri N. Chandrasegharan ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee on 
Defence (2024-25) w.e.f. 25 July, 2025 consequent upon cessation of his 
Membership of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2025.
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Naveen Jain 
26 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27 Shri Praful Patel 
28 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
29 Shri Sanjay Singh 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31 Vacant* 

v 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen* - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Anjorem Kerketta - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   *served in the Committee Branch till 14.07.2025 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air 
Force, Joint Staff and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 
21)’.  
 
2.  The Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2024. The Report contained 30 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in April, 2025. 
 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 5th August, 2025. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  

vii 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and ECHS 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 17 December, 2024.  
  
2. The Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 30 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.  Subject  
Army 
1-2 Budget 
3 Percentage Share of Army Budget 
4 Budget for Modernization 
5 Modernization and Modern Warfare Tactics 
6 Indigenization 
7 Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) 
8 Capacity Building 
9 Women empowerment 
10 Role of Army during disaster 
Air Force 
11-12 Budgetary Provisions 
13 Percentage Share of Air Force Budget 
14 Budget for Modernization 
15 Planning and Procurement 
16 Indigenization 
17 Force Level 
18 Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) 
19 Manpower 
Indian Navy 
20 Budget 
21 Indigenisation 
22 Operational Preparedness and threat perception 
23 Manpower 
Joint Staff 
24 Budget 
25 Jointness and integration of Armed Forces 
ECHS 
26 Budget  

2 
 
27-28 Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
29 Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private 
hospitals 
30 ECHS in far-flung areas 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 30 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been examined 
and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II): 
 
  Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24, 
          25,26,27,28,29,30  
 
 (Total - 30) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
 
Para Nos.  -NIL-              (Total -0) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. -NIL-             (Total - 0)  
  
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
  Para Nos.  -NIL- 
 (Total - 0) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and as any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of this report.  
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendation /observations made in the Second Report in the succeeding 
Paragraphs. 
 
 
A. Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 ) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  

3 
 
     “The Committee note that Indian Army is a vital land component of the Armed 
Forces. The Indian Army strengthens the idea of India and lives by national values, 
dedicated to preserving national interests, safeguarding sovereignty, territorial 
integrity and unity of our Nation. The challenges before the Army include thwarting 
proxy wars, defeating/arresting internal threats, assist the Government and the 
people of India during all needs and crises including natural and manmade 
disasters. To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army needs Revenue as well 
as Capital Budget as per the projection. For the financial year 2024-25, the Army 
projected for Rs. 2,14,577.03 Crore and allocated Rs. 1,91,319.60 Crore, just Rs. 
23,257.43 Crore less than the projection. During the financial year 2023-24, against 
the projection of Rs 1,84,989.60 Crore, it was allocated Rs. 1,81,371.97 Crore, 
which was reduced by Rs. 3,617.63 Crore. In the RE same year, the Army made a 
projection of Rs.1,97,628.57 Crore but the allocation was Rs 1,95,032.23 Crore. The 
Committee find that during FY 2023-24 only Rs 1,91,602.05 Crore was spent and Rs 
3,430.18 Crore remained unutilized by the Army. This, in the opinion of the 
Committee, would require prudent fiscal planning and concerted efforts. The 
Committee would like to know the final outcome in this regard from the Ministry 
consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the Action Taken Notes. 
The Committee understand that a major portion of the budget head primarily goes 
towards salary expenses which is a fixed expenditure. The non-salary expenditure 
caters to the expenses on stores, ration, transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential 
for regular training and operational preparedness of the Army. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the trend which has been introduced with favourable 
allocation this year under the Revenue Head should be continued in the coming 
years also. It is needless to state here that regular interactions may be held with the 
Ministry of Finance as soon as the proposals for the subsequent budget are formed.” 
 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “The Committee may be apprised that this Ministry submits the requirements 
projected by the Services to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. In 
the pre-budget meeting with M/o Finance, broad reasons for requirements 
projected by the Services are justified/ elaborated. While allocating funds, 
Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available 
and pressing demands from other quarters etc.  Based on the overall ceilings 
conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocate funds among the 
Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services 
priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.” 
 
 
8. The Committee note from the action taken reply that the Ministry of Defence 
submits the requirements projected by the Services to Ministry of Finance for 
favourable consideration during the pre-budget meeting, specifying the broad 
reasons for requirements projected by the Services. Further, the Committee has 
also been apprised that while allocating funds, Ministry of Finance takes into 
account the trends of the past absorption capacity, pace of expenditure during the 
current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available, alongwith pressing 
demands from other quarters, etc.  The Committee further note that the Ministry of 

4 
 
Defence consequently allocates funds among the Services and Organisations, 
taking into account Inter-Services priorities, pace of expenditure, pending 
committed liabilities etc. The Committee in their original report had recommended 
for continuance of favourable allocation under Revenue Head in coming years as 
per the projection to the Army. The Committee therefore, while acknowledging the 
importance of non-salary expenditure which caters to crucial expenses such as 
stores, ration, transportation, fuel etc., essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Army, would reiterate for favourable allocation during the FY 
2024-25 and in future under Revenue Head.  Notwithstanding, the upkeeping trend, 
it must be ensured that variation between demand and allocation is minimised to 
the extent possible, so as to not affect the operational preparedness and 
requirements of the Army, due to lack of availability of resources. 
 
 Keeping in mind the underutilization of fund to the tune of Rs. 3,430.18 Crore, 
during the Financial Year, 2023-24, the Committee in their original Report had 
recommended the Ministry for ensuring prudent fiscal planning commensurate with 
concerted efforts. They further desired the Ministry to be apprised of the final out 
come there on.  However, the Ministry has not furnished action taken in this regard.  
Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
the Ministry to furnish the same while furnishing Action Taken Statement. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2 ) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
    “The Committee deduce that under Capital Head, in BE for the financial year 
2024-25, Army’s projection was Rs. 35,664.95 Crore and the same amount has 
been allocated to it. In RE 2023-24, the projection of the Army was Rs. 33,412.16 
Crore and there was no deduction in allocation. However, the expenditure in FY 
2023-24 was Rs. 28,613.45 Crore. The Committee understand that Capital Budget 
usually provides for expenditure on modernization, enhancement of force level, 
infrastructure development, etc, which are essential not only for the modernization 
of the Army but also to safeguard territorial integrity of the nation. The Committee 
feel that Capital Projection should be incremental in nature, invariably consistent 
and it should not be less than that of a previous year so that it can absorb the 
inflationary trends. The Committee opine that though the expenditure on salaries of 
manpower deployed is fixed and is an essential component, the budget should 
cater as to induct state-of-the-art weapon systems and development of other 
infrastructure at the borders which, at any cost, cannot be compromised. Our 
expenditure should be in proportion to the increase in Defence spending of our 
neighbours. Therefore, the Committee feels that the Capital Budget of the Army 
should be sufficient to have a deterrent capacity to ward off adversaries in case of 
any hostility.” 
 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 

5 
 
      “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it may be assured 
that the allocated funds will be optimally utilized and on the basis of additional 
requirement, funds will be sought at Supplementary stage. Also, if required, 
through reprioritization, it will be ensured that the Capital Budget of the Army is 
sufficient enough to have a deterrent capacity to ward off adversaries in case of 
any hostility.” 
 
 
B. Percentage Share of Army Budget 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3 ) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
   “Notwithstanding the percentage share of the Army budget, the Committee have 
been assured by the representative of the Ministry of Defence that any additional 
budget required for priority operations, sustenance and Modernization of the 
Indian Army will be met at the revised/supplementary stage. Keeping in view the 
important role of Army’s responsibility to secure the vast land borders and 
operating as an agency for counterinsurgency, the Committee hope that fund will 
not be an issue of concern for the Army and as per submission made by the 
Ministry, Army’s further requirement will be met at the revised/supplementary 
stage” 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and if required, 
additional funds will be sought at revised Supplementary stage.” 
 
C. Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4 ) 
 
13. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note from the replies submitted that in the Defence Services 
Estimates (DSE), there is no separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities 
(CL) and New Schemes (NS). In the Financial Year 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 
30163.00 Crore was allocated to Army at BE stage under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernization) Head. The submissions made by the Ministry during oral 
evidence revealed that the Capital Budget has two major heads: modernisations 
through procurement of new equipment and weapon platforms which amounts to 
Rs.27,421 Crore or 77 per cent of the total allocation. With the balance Rs.8,227 
Crore or 23 per cent being allocated for development of key infrastructure in the 
financial year 2024-25, the Committee have been informed that the allocation will 
take care of renewed focus on expenditure on infrastructure to safeguard the 
northern borders as well as improvement of habitat in field areas and military 
stations. Modernization budget would be utilized to make delivery-based 
payments for weapons, ammunition and other warlike equipment as also for 
payment against new acquisitions. The Committee have also been informed that 

6 
 
Major focus has been in areas of precision targeting, long-range vectors, 
intelligence, surveillance and recce systems, satellite communication enablement, 
night vision equipment, unmanned aerial systems and counter-unmanned aerial 
systems. The Committee are happy to know that this year also, modernisation 
through induction of indigenous weapons and platforms is being explored further. 
In the current financial year, acceptance of necessity worth Rs.1,06,974 Crore 
has been accorded for procurement of new equipment and weapons from 
indigenous sources. In view of this renewed emphasis on modernization, the 
Committee feel that modernization of the Army will be accorded top priority in view 
of the current global scenario and they also hope that in case of any further need, 
effort will be made by the Ministry to substantiate at the revised/supplementary 
grant stage.” 
 
14. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it may be 
assured that the allocated funds will be optimally utilized and on the basis of 
additional requirement, funds will be sought at Supplementary stage under 
Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head of Army.” 
 
D. Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14 ) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that in the Defence Services Estimates (DSE), there is no 
separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities (CL) and New Schemes (NS). 
Further, earmarking between Committed Liabilities and New Schemes is carried 
out by Service HQrs based on a prioritization among the projects/schemes and the 
progress of contractual milestones. The Committee also note that in the Financial 
Year 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 54,024.37 crore was allocated at BE stage under 
Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities and 
New Schemes). Moreover, in RE 2023-24, allocation to Air Force was increased by 
Rs. 602.62 Crore (to Rs. 54,626.99 Crore) over BE 2023-24. Further, at MA stage, 
the allocation was increased to Rs. 59271.16 crore. Against these allocations, an 
expenditure of Rs. 57427.53 crore has been incurred in Financial Year 2023-24. 
The Committee hope that keeping the modernization of the Armed Forces in view 
of the current global scenario, the Ministry will ensure modernization and 
technological upgradation in armament procurement in the Forces.” 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “Adequate budget is allocated for modenisation (Capital Acquisition) of Indian 
Armed Forces every Financial Year as per their requirement and earnest efforts are 
made to ensure maximum utilization. For the Financial Year 2025-26, Rs 1,80,000 
crore has been allocated on Capital Outlay. Out of this, Rs 1,48,722.80 crore is 
planned to be spent on the Capital Acquisition, termed as modernization budget of 
the Armed Forces and remaining Rs 31,277.20 crore is for capital expenditure on 
Research & Development and creation of infrastructural assets across the country.  
 

7 
 
Moreover, with reference to technological upgradation, the Services Qualitative 
Requirements (SQRs) are formulated after due cognizance of appreciated 
adversary capabilities and comparative analysis of all available & future 
technologies. These are regularly revised, thus, ensuring currency & relevance of 
the technologies in the procurement of armament of the Armed forces ensuring 
contemporary weapon systems availability. 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Further, all efforts are 
made to ensure modernisation and technological upgradation in armament 
procurement in the Forces and if required, additional funds are sought at RE/ 
Supplementary stages during the financial year.” 
 
17. The Committee note that with regard to the recommendations number 2,3,4 
and 14, the Ministry has stated that adequate budget is allocated for Modernisation 
(Capital Acquisition) of Indian Armed Forces for every Financial Year as per their 
requirement, alongwith making earnest efforts to ensure maximum utilization. The 
Committee also note that for the Financial Year 2025-26, Rs 1,80,000 crore has been 
allocated for Capital Outlay, out of which, Rs 1,48,722.80 crore is proposed to be 
spent on Capital Acquisition, termed as modernization budget of the Armed Forces, 
while remaining Rs 31,277.20 crore is for capital expenditure on Research & 
Development and creation of infrastructural assets across the country.  The 
Committee also appreciate the efforts being made to ensure modernisation and 
technological upgradation with regard to  armament procurement across the 
Forces.  Regarding this, additional funds would also be sought at RE/ 
Supplementary stages during the financial year.  At this stage, the Committee 
desire that they may be apprised about the additional fund requirements raised by 
the Ministry of Defence and the response of the Ministry of Finance thereon. 
 
 
 
E. Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
18. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
   “From the written replies submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note that 
Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) against various protection levels are being developed & 
produced within the country. The development agencies include R&D agencies like 
DMSRDE, Kanpur (a unit of DRDO), IIT Delhi etc. Adequate industry base is 
available indigenously for production and manufacture of BPJ as per the 
requirement of Service HQrs and State Police Forces. Bullet Proof Jackets are 
being procured by SHQs and the Ballistic Testing is carried out in accordance with 
General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR), Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
and approved testing plan formulated through collegiate with testing agencies like 
Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory (TBRL), Chandigarh or National Forensic 
Sciences University (NFSU), Gandhinagar. The Committee further note that till 
date, a total of 41 licences have been issued for manufacturing of Bullet Proof 
Jackets/Body Armour/Body Protector since 2001 by private industries. Out of these 
companies, 10 companies have commenced manufacturing. The Committee also 

8 
 
note that Troop Comforts Limited (TCL) [erstwhile Ordnance Equipment Group of 
Factories] is also involved in the development of Bullet Proof Jackets and Vests for 
various threat levels. Ordnance Equipment Factory (OEF), Kanpur has developed 
one version of BPJ in collaboration with MIDHANI as ‘BHABHA KAVACH’ based 
upon the technologies developed by DRDO and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
(BARC). Another Unit of TCL, Ordnance Clothing Factory (OCF) Avadi has 
developed another version of BPJ as per MHA requirement and State Police 
Forces. The Committee are happy to note that our soldiers will get protection 
through the indigenously made BPJs to save their precious lives. The Committee 
hope that the remaining 31 companies, which got licences for manufacturing BPJs, 
be pursued to start manufacturing at the earliest with a view to meet the urgent 
need of BPJs in the Armed Forces.” 
 
19. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
  “The Defence Industry sector, which was hitherto reserved for the public sector, 
was opened up to 100% for Indian private sector participation in May, 2001. Till 
date, a total of 43 license have been issued for manufacture of Bullet Proof 
Jackets/Body Armour/Body Protector since 2001. Further, as per the data 
available in D(DIP), 10 companies have commenced manufacturing. 
The initial validity of Industrial License for Defence Sector has been 
relaxed from 3 years to 15 years, further extendable up to 18 years for existing as 
well as future Licences. However, in case a license has already expired, the 
Licensee has to apply afresh for issue of license.” (a copy of Press Note No. 10 
(2015 Series) is enclosed)”. 
 
20.  The Committee are pleased to note that the Defence Industry sector was 
opened up to 100% for participation by Indian private sector in May, 2001. The 
Committee note that till date, a total of 43 licenses have been issued for 
manufacture of Bullet Proof Jackets/Body Armour/Body Protector since 2001, 
whereas, only 10 companies have commenced manufacturing. Further, the initial 
validity of Industrial License for Defence Sector had been relaxed from 3 years to 
15 years, further extendable up to 18 years for existing as well as future Licences. 
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Government to ensure increased 
participation of private sector along with relaxing the timeline for initial validity of 
Industrial Licensing for Defence Sector.  However, the Committee note that 33 out 
of 43 licensed companies have not commenced their manufacturing Bullet Proof 
Jackets.  To this extent, the Committee would like the Ministry to ascertain the 
reasons for avoidable delay on part of such companies.  The Committee would like 
to reiterate the recommendation that the remaining 33 companies be pursued to 
commence manufacturing at the earliest, with full capacity to meet regular and 
urgent requirements of BPJs for the Armed forces and other consumers. The 
Committee would also like the Ministry of Defence to share a status report in this 
regard with the Committee within three months of presentation of the report. 
 
F. Budgetary Provisions 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 

9 
 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under: 
    “The Committee find that in Capital segment, the allocation has been same as that of 
the projected during 2024-25. It is a known fact that the Capital Budget of a 
department primarily provides for expenditure on modernisation, enhancement of 
force level, infrastructure development etc. and allocating as per projection shares 
determination on the part of the Government for potential development of the force. 
Moreover, during oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry informed the 
Committee that over the last five years, there has been a comfortable allocation of 
funds, both for the capability enhancement as well as sustenance. IAF’s total 
budgetary allocation in the last five years has grown at an average rate of 
approximately 11 per cent. The Committee was further informed that the capital 
budget allocation in the last five years has grown at an average growth rate of 8 per 
cent, whereas the revenue budget has seen an enhancement by approximately 9.71 
per cent. In line with the Government’s initiative of Aatmanirbhar Bharat, IAF’s capital 
acquisition expenditure towards foreign sources will be kept below the given target of 
30 per cent. In this current financial year, IAF is expected to surpass the domestic 
expenditure target of 70 per cent. Approximately 50 per cent of the revenue budget is 
utilised for other than salary. However, the Committee expect the Ministry to ensure 
that the allocated resources are fruitfully and judiciously utilized in full by Air Force so 
that modernisation trajectory of Air Force is not adversely affected.” 
  
 
22. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
    “In BE 2024-25, Air Force had been allocated an amount of Rs. 54,569.91 Crore 
under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head which has been reduced to Rs. 
43,736.15 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage based on the pace of expenditure, status of 
conclusion on New Schemes, carry over liabilities and overall availability of resources 
with MoF and competing demands from other Ministries. However, the Committee 
may be assured that the allocated funds will be judiciously utilized and on the basis of 
additional requirement, funds will be sought at Supplementary stage.” 
 
 
23. The Committee note from the action taken reply that in BE 2024-25, the Air 
Force had been allocated an amount of Rs. 54,569.91 Crore under Modernisation 
(Capital Acquisition) Head which was reduced to Rs. 43,736.15 Crore at RE 2024-25 
stage based on reasons like the pace of expenditure, status of conclusion on new 
schemes, carry over liabilities and overall availability of resources with Ministry of 
Finance and competing demands from other Ministries. The Committee in their 
considered opinion had observed that the Capital Budget primarily provides for 
expenditure on modernisation, enhancement of force level, infrastructure 
development etc. and allocation as per projection shares determination on the part 
of the Government for potential development of the force. Therefore, the Committee 
are of the view that in line with the government’s initiatives of Atmanirbharata, 
IAF’s domestic capital acquisition expenditure target should be more than 70 
percent.  Further, the Committee take positive note of the reaffirmation given by the 
government that the allocated funds would be judiciously utilized, alongwith 
additional funds being provided at the supplementary stage.  The Committee expect 
the government to ensure speedy and time bound modernization of IAF alongwith  
a substantial increase in indigenous components under ‘Atmanirbharata’ 

10 
 
programme.  To this extent, the Committee reiterate that the IAF’s capital 
acquisition expenditure be incrementally  increased,  while also ensuring to cover 
any shortfall of funds at BE stage, to be reinforced with positive allocation at 
RE/Supplementary Stage, as per the requirements of IAF. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. Planning and Procurement 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
24. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Committee note that acquisitions planned for fighter aircrafts include LCD 
Mk1A, Multi Role Fighter Aircraft (MRFA) LCA Mk-II, Advance Medium Combat 
Aircrafts (AMCA); Helicopter Flee i.e. Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light utility 
Helicopter (LUH MK-I), Indian Multi-Role Helicopter (IMRH) & Deck Based Multi 
Role Helicopter (DBMRH); Transport Fleet I.e, Avro Replacement (C-295MW), 
Avionics Upgrade of Dornier aircraft; combat enablers i.e. Flight Refueling Aircraft 
(FRA), SIGINT and COMJAM aircraft (SCA), AEW&C Mk 1A AEW&C Mk-II, 
transport fleet i.e. HTT-40, Surface to Air Guided Weapons i.e. Close-in Weapon 
System (CIWS),  VSHORADS, RPAs and UAVs, Radars {LLTR (Ashwini)}, 
Indigenous weapons development i.e. New Generation Anti-Radiation Missile, 
Astra Mk-I & Mk-II BVR AA Missile, Pralay, LR-SOW, Tactical Advance Range 
Augmentation Kit, Long range Glide Bomb, SAAW Weapon System. The 
Committee wish that the Ministry of Defence will negotiate and finalise the 
acquisition plans in a time bound manner to help maintain equipment and aircraft at 
an optimum level.” 
 
25. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
  
  “MoD is pursuing a number of schemes, including Design & Development with 
Defence Research & Development Organisation(DRDO), to fill the critical voids in 
capabilities. Ministry is striving and making concerted efforts to finalise the 
acquisition plans in a time bound manner to help IAF to maintain equipment and 
aircraft at an optimum level. 
 
(a)  HTT-40. A contract for supply of 70 x HTT-40 Basic Trainer Aircraft 
(BTA) and associated equipment to IAF was signed between MoD and 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited in March, 2023. In October,2024, HAL has 
intimated that there are no major issues envisaged that will have impact on the 
proposed series production of aircraft and delivery schedule. 
 
(b)  Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)  Mk 1A. A contract was signed with HAL on 
25 Jan 21 for delivery of 83 x LCA Mk 1A along with associated equipment. 
However, the delivery of aircraft is delayed due to Design and Development 

11 
 
(D&D) activities and delivery of GE-404 engines from M/s GE. HAL has stated 
that delivery of engines is likely to commence very soon. Additionally, IAF has 
progressed a case for procurement of 97 x LCA Mk 1A, AoN was obtained on 
15 Jan 24.  
 
(c)  Su-30 MKI. MoD has signed a contract with HAL for procurement of 12 x 
SU 30 MKI aircraft with associated equipment on 12 December,2024. 
 
(d)  C-295 MW. IAF has signed a contract for 56 x C-295 MW transport aircraft. 
Till date, eight aircraft have been delivered. 
 
(e)  SIGINT & COMJAM Aircraft (SCA) and Aerial Early Warning & Control 
Systems(AEW&C).  MoD plans to procure three SIGINT and COMJAM 
aircraft (SCA) and AEW&C where  AoN have been accorded by Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC).  The D&D of mission system will be carried out 
indigenously by DRDO. 
 
(f) Low Level Transportable Radar (Ashwini). AoN for procurement of  
LLTR (Ashwini) was obtained from DAC on 22 December, 22. The acquisition 
is under process.” 
  
26. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry is pursuing a number of 
schemes including design & development with Defence Research & Development 
Organisation (DRDO) to address all existing shortcomings in capabilities. The 
Committee note that the Ministry endeavors to make concerted efforts to finalise all  
acquisition plans in a time bound manner to ensure that IAF maintains equipment 
and aircraft at an optimum level which include HTT-40, Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)  
Mk 1A, Su-30 MKI, C-295 MW, SIGINT & COMJAM Aircraft (SCA) and Aerial Early 
Warning & Control Systems(AEW&C) and Low Level Transportable Radar 
(Ashwini). The Committee appreciate the development regarding the contracts 
mentioned in the planned acquisitions that have already been signed in respect of 
HTT-40, LCA Mk 1A, Su-30 MKI and C-295 MW alongwith AoN for procurement 
accorded by Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) in respect of SIGINT & COMJAM 
Aircraft (SCA) and AEW&C and LLTR (Ashwini). The Committee would like the 
Ministry to address all concerns regarding the delay in delivery of LCA  Mk 1A 
aircraft due to Design and Development (D&D) activities alongwith the issue of 
delivery of GE-404 engines from M/s GE. In this regard, the Committee have been 
apprised that the delivery of engines is likely to commence very soon.  The 
Committee are of the considered view that the Air Force plays a pivotal role in any 
country's defence and therefore, planning and timely procurement should be 
accorded top priority which certainly galvanizes the force. The Committee therefore 
reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry ensure the delivery of engines for 
LCA, Mk 1A aircraft at the earliest, so that the planned acquisition is executed 
within the given timeframe. The Committee also hope that the planned acquisitions 
of all equipment and aircrafts be worked out in a meticulous manner to translate 
the planning of acquisitions into tangible accomplishments. The Committee may 

12 
 
also be informed of the developments in this regard within three months of 
presentation of the report.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Army 
Budget 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 ) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Army is a vital land component of the Armed Forces. 
The Indian Army strengthens the idea of India and lives by national values, dedicated to 
preserving national interests, safeguarding sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of our 
Nation. The challenges before the Army include thwarting proxy wars, defeating/arresting 
internal threats, assist the Government and the people of India during all needs and crises 
including natural and manmade disasters. To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army 
needs Revenue as well as Capital Budget as per the projection. For the financial year 2024-
25, the Army projected for Rs. 2,14,577.03 Crore and allocated Rs. 1,91,319.60 Crore, just 
Rs. 23,257.43 Crore less than the projection. During the financial year 2023-24, against the 
projection of Rs 1,84,989.60 Crore, it was allocated Rs. 1,81,371.97 Crore, which was 
reduced by Rs. 3,617.63 Crore. In the RE same year, the Army made a projection of 
Rs.1,97,628.57 Crore but the allocation was Rs 1,95,032.23 Crore. The Committee find that 
during FY 2023-24 only Rs 1,91,602.05 Crore was spent and Rs 3,430.18 Crore remained 
unutilized by the Army. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would require prudent fiscal 
planning and concerted efforts. The Committee would like to know the final outcome in this 
regard from the Ministry consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the Action 
Taken Notes. The Committee understand that a major portion of the budget head primarily 
goes towards salary expenses which is a fixed expenditure. The non-salary expenditure 
caters to the expenses on stores, ration, transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for 
regular training and operational preparedness of the Army. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the trend which has been introduced with favourable allocation this year 
under the Revenue Head should be continued in the coming years also. It is needless to 
state here that regular interactions may be held with the Ministry of Finance as soon as the 
proposals for the subsequent budget are formed.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that this Ministry submits the requirements projected 
by the Services to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. In the pre-budget 
meeting with M/o Finance, broad reasons for requirements projected by the Services are 
justified/ elaborated. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource 

13 
 
envelope available and pressing demands from other quarters etc.  Based on the overall 
ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocate funds among the Services 
and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, pace of 
expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.   
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee deduce that under Capital Head, in BE for the financial year 2024-25, 
Army’s projection was Rs. 35,664.95 Crore and the same amount has been allocated to it. In 
RE 2023-24, the projection of the Army was Rs. 33,412.16 Crore and there was no 
deduction in allocation. However, the expenditure in FY 2023-24 was Rs. 28,613.45 Crore. 
The Committee understand that Capital Budget usually provides for expenditure on 
modernization, enhancement of force level, infrastructure development, etc, which are 
essential not only for the modernization of the Army but also to safeguard territorial integrity 
of the nation. The Committee feel that Capital Projection should be incremental in nature, 
invariably consistent and it should not be less than that of a previous year so that it can 
absorb the inflationary trends. The Committee opine that though the expenditure on salaries 
of manpower deployed is fixed and is an essential component, the budget should cater as to 
induct state-of-the-art weapon systems and development of other infrastructure at the 
borders which, at any cost, cannot be compromised. Our expenditure should be in proportion 
to the increase in Defence spending of our neighbours. Therefore, the Committee feels that 
the Capital Budget of the Army should be sufficient to have a deterrent capacity to ward off 
adversaries in case of any hostility. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it may be assured that 
the allocated funds will be optimally utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds 
will be sought at Supplementary stage. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it will be 
ensured that the Capital Budget of the Army is sufficient enough to have a deterrent capacity 
to ward off adversaries in case of any hostility. 
 
 
Percentage Share of Army Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
Notwithstanding the percentage share of the Army budget, the Committee have been 
assured by the representative of the Ministry of Defence that any additional budget required 
for priority operations, sustenance and Modernization of the Indian Army will be met at the 
revised/supplementary stage. Keeping in view the important role of Army’s responsibility to 
secure the vast land borders and operating as an agency for counterinsurgency, the 
Committee hope that fund will not be an issue of concern for the Army and as per 
submission made by the Ministry, Army’s further requirement will be met at the 
revised/supplementary stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

14 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and if required, additional 
funds will be sought at revised Supplementary stage. 
 
 
Budget for Modernization  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note from the replies submitted that in the Defence Services 
Estimates (DSE), there is no separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities (CL) and 
New Schemes (NS). In the Financial Year 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 30163.00 Crore was 
allocated to Army at BE stage under Capital Acquisition (Modernization) Head. The 
submissions made by the Ministry during oral evidence revealed that the Capital Budget has 
two major heads: modernisations through procurement of new equipment and weapon 
platforms which amounts to Rs.27,421 Crore or 77 per cent of the total allocation. With the 
balance Rs.8,227 Crore or 23 per cent being allocated for development of key infrastructure 
in the financial year 2024-25, the Committee have been informed that the allocation will take 
care of renewed focus on expenditure on infrastructure to safeguard the northern borders as 
well as improvement of habitat in field areas and military stations. Modernization budget 
would be utilized to make delivery-based payments for weapons, ammunition and other 
warlike equipment as also for payment against new acquisitions. The Committee have also 
been informed that Major focus has been in areas of precision targeting, long-range vectors, 
intelligence, surveillance and recce systems, satellite communication enablement, night 
vision equipment, unmanned aerial systems and counter-unmanned aerial systems. The 
Committee are happy to know that this year also, modernisation through induction of 
indigenous weapons and platforms is being explored further. In the current financial year, 
acceptance of necessity worth Rs.1,06,974 Crore has been accorded for procurement of 
new equipment and weapons from indigenous sources. In view of this renewed emphasis on 
modernization, the Committee feel that modernization of the Army will be accorded top 
priority in view of the current global scenario and they also hope that in case of any further 
need, effort will be made by the Ministry to substantiate at the revised/supplementary grant 
stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it may be assured that 
the allocated funds will be optimally utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds 
will be sought at Supplementary stage under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head of 
Army.  
 
Modernization and Modern Warfare Tactics 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 The Committee understand that conventional wars were fought in only three modes 
i.e. land, air and water, but recently there is a paradigm shift in the technology used in 
fighting a war. There have been innovations and experiments in western countries, and 
the use of drones, space, cyberspace, kinetic and non-kinetic format etc. has enveloped 
the sphere of war, which can be fought from very distant locations through a remote 
controlled mode. In this regard, the Committee are confident that the effect of 

15 
 
modernization will definitely will our country to develop a robust digital infrastructure, 
besides improving the exiting weaponry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the on-going Information Age, information, cyber and digital media have 
acquired considerable significance. The Armed Forces are also correspondingly 
increasingly dependent on digital assets. These digital assets are vulnerable to 
deliberate/unintended disruption/infection, which may have an effect on the operational 
performance of the Armed Forces and needs to be guarded against. 
 The Framework for enhancing the Cyber posture of Defence Forces was approved 
by the Government of India in 2018. DCyA and Army, Navy and Air Force Cyber Groups 
along with certain other structures have been established to protect & defend the Defence 
Forces information & Communication Technology assets. 
 Armed Forces have undertaken numerous initiatives to improve upon the Space 
Situational Awareness. Defence Space Agency (DSA) has been created as the nodal 
agency for the three Services in defence related space activities. The agency deals with 
all issues of Space Warfare including integration of all aspects affecting military assets in 
space and their operations. 
 HQ IDS serves as the apex organization to foster Jointness among the three 
Services. It is responsible for consolidating operational requirements, long-term planning, 
roll on Plan and prioritizing procurements for the Armed Forces in view changing security 
and technological advancement. 
 Modernisation ensure that defence forces existing capabilities remain relevant 
efficient and integrated with contemporary technologies. The services are seized of the 
multi-domain operations in future, such as kinetic and non-kinetic and are progressing 
rapidly towards building of capabilities in this domain. By representing the services’ 
needs, HQ IDS provides the foundational input necessary to guide defence production 
initiatives. HQ IDS also coordinates with DDP, DRDO, private industry & Production 
agencies engaged in indigenous development of futuristic weapons and systems. 
 The domain of modern warfare is a dynamic and rapidly evolving field. Threat 
actors, vectors malware, ‘Tactics, Techniques & Procedures’ (TTP), and technologies are 
undergoing continuous change. The contest between the attacker and defender is always 
ongoing, with either side gaining transient advantage at different points in time. 
 
 
 
Indigenization 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 

16 
 
The Committee find from the replies submitted by the Ministry that during the last 
five financial year (2019-20 to 2023-24) and the current Financial year 2024-25 (upto 
September, 2024), a total of 330 capital acquisition contracts have been signed for capital 
procurement of Defence equipment for Army, out of which 278 contracts worth about 88% 
of total contracts value, with Indian Vendors for capital procurement of Defence 
equipment. 
 
 Further, the Committee find that the Ministry of Defence is committed to 
Aatmanirbharta in Defence. The Ministry emphasized on self reliance & Make in India, 
which is evident from the initiatives undertaken i.e. Highest priority to procurement under 
Buy (Indian-IDDM) category, introduction of new category of Buy (Global-Manufacture in 
India) to give push to ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government, increased Indigenous 
Content (IC) in various categories of procurement under DAP-2020, inclusion of provision 
for minimum 50% IC in the form of indigenous material/components/software in the 
equipment being acquired with an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce 
import dependency, notification of ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ on a periodic basis to 
promote Aatmanirbharta out of which five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 
platforms/equipment have been issued, Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with 
“No foreign sourcing”, foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of 
Defence Acquisition Council and earmarking of 75% of the total capital budget for 
domestic Capital procurement for FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25. 
 
 The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry towards indigenization 
and expect that this would continue unabated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry is thankful to the Committee for recognizing and appreciating efforts of 
Deptt/Ministry for promoting “Make in India” & Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
 
Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 From the written replies submitted by the Ministry, the Committee note that Bullet 
Proof Jackets (BPJs) against various protection levels are being developed & produced 
within the country. The development agencies include R&D agencies like DMSRDE, 
Kanpur (a unit of DRDO), IIT Delhi etc. Adequate industry base is available indigenously 
for production and manufacture of BPJ as per the requirement of Service HQrs and State 
Police Forces. Bullet Proof Jackets are being procured by SHQs and the Ballistic Testing 
is carried out in accordance with General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR), Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS) and approved testing plan formulated through collegiate with 
testing agencies like Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory (TBRL), Chandigarh or 
National Forensic Sciences University (NFSU), Gandhinagar. The Committee further note 
that till date, a total of 41 licences have been issued for manufacturing of Bullet Proof 
Jackets/Body Armour/Body Protector since 2001 by private industries. Out of these 
companies, 10 companies have commenced manufacturing. The Committee also note 
that Troop Comforts Limited (TCL) [erstwhile Ordnance Equipment Group of Factories] is 
also involved in the development of Bullet Proof Jackets and Vests for various threat 
levels. Ordnance Equipment Factory (OEF), Kanpur has developed one version of BPJ in 
collaboration with MIDHANI as ‘BHABHA KAVACH’ based upon the technologies 

17 
 
developed by DRDO and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC). Another Unit of TCL, 
Ordnance Clothing Factory (OCF) Avadi has developed another version of BPJ as per 
MHA requirement and State Police Forces. The Committee are happy to note that our 
soldiers will get protection through the indigenously made BPJs to save their precious 
lives. The Committee hope that the remaining 31 companies, which got licences for 
manufacturing BPJs, be pursued to start manufacturing at the earliest with a view to meet 
the urgent need of BPJs in the Armed Forces. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Defence Industry sector, which was hitherto reserved for the public sector, was 
opened up to 100% for Indian private sector participation in May, 2001. Till date, a total of 
43 license have been issued for manufacture of Bullet Proof Jackets/Body Armour/Body 
Protector since 2001. Further, as per the data available in D(DIP), 10 companies have 
commenced manufacturing. 
The initial validity of Industrial License for Defence Sector has been relaxed from 3 
years to 15 years, further extendable up to 18 years for existing as well as future 
Licences. However, in case a license has already expired, the Licensee has to apply 
afresh for issue of license.” (a copy of Press Note No. 10 (2015 Series) is enclosed)”. 
 
Capacity Building    
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 
The Committee is happy to note that Indian Army remains committed to build its 
capability and be ready to operate in all kinds of operating environments thereby ensuring 
territorial integrity of our nation. The Committee understands that the nomenclature of 
modern warfare has drastically changed and it warrants coordinated and concerted efforts 
by the three forces jointly to mitigate any evil design of the adversaries. They are happy 
that besides taking various steps such as the Inter-Services Organisation (Command, 
Control & Discipline) Bill, Joint Logistics Nodes, joint exercises and HADR, etc., Army has 
also supported other policies like Nari Shakti, Gati Shakti, Digital India, Start-up India etc. 
Indian Army’s engagement in intense counter-terrorism and counter insurgency 
operations is yet another fur in the cap of success. The Committee has also been given to 
understand that rigorous training is being imparted to the Army personnel so as to 
maintain high standard of efficiency. Restructuring of training has been undertaken in 
synchronization with current realities and requirements. The Committee expresses their 
immense satisfaction over the continuous effort being made to further augment the 
capacity of the hitherto existing capable forces in the Army. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 

18 
 
 
 
 
Women Empowerment 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
  
 
The Committee is happy that in connection with the policy of ‘Nari Shakti’, the 
Indian Army is committed towards women empowerment. The Army has deployed its 
women officers in difficult areas such as Siachen Glacier, Line of Actual Control, along the 
Northern Borders, and women pilots have been inducted in Army Aviation. The 
Committee was informed that two officers and 25 sepoys form part of the all women 
contingent to the United Nations Mission in Sudan. Even this year saw the first all women 
officers and soldiers marching contingent in the Republic Day Parade. The Committee 
appreciated the efforts made by the Indian Army for their commitment towards women 
empowerment. This, the Committee feels, will go a long way in creating a level playing 
field for women in society at large.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
 
Role of Army during Disaster 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
  
Role of the Army in providing relief during natural disasters and calamities is yet 
another success story. Indian Army is often the first responder in times of natural disaster 
and calamities by virtue of its inherent organisational structure and deployment pan India. 
Providing humanitarian assistance and speedy relief during calamities remains a priority 
for the Indian Army for which the Army trains and liaises with civilian administration and 
other stakeholders on a periodic basis. The Committee wish the Army all success in their 
endeavour, for which people of our country feel secure even during calamities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This is factual information and Ministry has no comments to offer. 
 
 
 
 
Air Force 
 
Budgetary Provisions  
 

19 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
While examining Demand Nos. 19 & 20 in respect of the Air Force for the year 2024-
25, the Committee find that in Revenue Section, Air Force projected Rs. 60,847.17 Crore 
against which an allocation of Rs. 46,223.49 Crore has been made. The allocation is 
deficient by Rs. 14,623.68 Crore and approximately 24 per cent lower than the projection. As 
informed, the non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, transportation, 
fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational preparedness of the Air 
Force, therefore, 24 per cent cut in the allocation may hamper the training and operational 
preparedness of the Air Force. Therefore, to avoid any such contingency situation, the 
Committee hope that during Supplementary Grants and Revised Estimate stages, the 
Ministry will take into consideration this fact and make additional allocation as per the need 
of the force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Air Force had been allocated an amount of Rs. 46,223.49 Crore under 
Revenue Head which is further enhanced by Rs. 4,153.28 Crore to Rs. 50,376.77 Crore at 
RE 2024-25 stage. Further, the Committee may be assured that the allocated funds will be 
optimally utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds will be sought at 
Supplementary stage.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee find that in Capital segment, the allocation has been same as that of 
the projected during 2024-25. It is a known fact that the Capital Budget of a department 
primarily provides for expenditure on modernisation, enhancement of force level, 
infrastructure development etc. and allocating as per projection shares determination on the 
part of the Government for potential development of the force. Moreover, during oral 
evidence, the representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that over the last five 
years, there has been a comfortable allocation of funds, both for the capability enhancement 
as well as sustenance. IAF’s total budgetary allocation in the last five years has grown at an 
average rate of approximately 11 per cent. The Committee was further informed that the 
capital budget allocation in the last five years has grown at an average growth rate of 8 per 
cent, whereas the revenue budget has seen an enhancement by approximately 9.71 per 
cent. In line with the Government’s initiative of Aatmanirbhar Bharat, IAF’s capital acquisition 
expenditure towards foreign sources will be kept below the given target of 30 per cent. In this 
current financial year, IAF is expected to surpass the domestic expenditure target of 70 per 
cent. Approximately 50 per cent of the revenue budget is utilised for other than salary. 
However, the Committee expect the Ministry to ensure that the allocated resources are 
fruitfully and judiciously utilized in full by Air Force so that modernisation trajectory of Air 
Force is not adversely affected. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

20 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Air Force had been allocated an amount of Rs. 54,569.91 Crore under 
Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head which has been reduced to Rs. 43,736.15 Crore at 
RE 2024-25 stage based on the pace of expenditure, status of conclusion on New Schemes, 
carry over liabilities and overall availability of resources with MoF and competing demands 
from other Ministries. However, the Committee may be assured that the allocated funds will 
be judiciously utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds will be sought at 
Supplementary stage. 
 
 
 
 
Percentage Share of Air Force Budget  
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
From the data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee note an evident increase in the 
percentage share of the revenue budget of the Air Force, out of Defence Services Estimates. 
The budget of the Air Force increased from 9.70 per cent of DSE in 2019-20 to 10.25 per 
cent in 2023-24. At the same time, there is an increase in capital budget share from 12.89 
per cent in 2019-20 to 13.47 per cent in 2023-24. The Committee are of the considered view 
that % increase in both capital and revenue segment of the Air Force in the DSE budget will 
further help galvanise the Indian Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry agrees with the views of the Committee.  
 
 
Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 
The Committee note that in the Defence Services Estimates (DSE), there is no 
separate allocation of funds for Committed Liabilities (CL) and New Schemes (NS). 
Further, earmarking between Committed Liabilities and New Schemes is carried out by 
Service HQrs based on a prioritization among the projects/schemes and the progress of 
contractual milestones. The Committee also note that in the Financial Year 2023-24, an 
amount of Rs. 54,024.37 crore was allocated at BE stage under Modernisation (Capital 
Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities and New Schemes). Moreover, in 
RE 2023-24, allocation to Air Force was increased by Rs. 602.62 Crore (to Rs. 54,626.99 
Crore) over BE 2023-24. Further, at MA stage, the allocation was increased to Rs. 
59271.16 crore. Against these allocations, an expenditure of Rs. 57427.53 crore has been 
incurred in Financial Year 2023-24. The Committee hope that keeping the modernization 
of the Armed Forces in view of the current global scenario, the Ministry will ensure 
modernization and technological upgradation in armament procurement in the Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 

21 
 
Adequate budget is allocated for modenisation (Capital Acquisition) of Indian 
Armed Forces every Financial Year as per their requirement and earnest efforts are made 
to ensure maximum utilization. For the Financial Year 2025-26, Rs 1,80,000 crore has 
been allocated on Capital Outlay. Out of this, Rs 1,48,722.80 crore is planned to be spent 
on the Capital Acquisition, termed as modernization budget of the Armed Forces and 
remaining Rs 31,277.20 crore is for capital expenditure on Research & Development and 
creation of infrastructural assets across the country.  
 
Moreover, with reference to technological upgradation, the Services Qualitative 
Requirements (SQRs) are formulated after due cognizance of appreciated adversary 
capabilities and comparative analysis of all available & future technologies. These are 
regularly revised, thus, ensuring currency & relevance of the technologies in the 
procurement of armament of the Armed forces ensuring contemporary weapon systems 
availability. 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Further, all efforts are 
made to ensure modernisation and technological upgradation in armament procurement 
in the Forces and if required, additional funds are sought at RE/ Supplementary stages 
during the financial year. 
 
Planning and Procurement 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 
 The Committee note that acquisitions planned for fighter aircrafts include LCD 
Mk1A, Multi Role Fighter Aircraft (MRFA) LCA Mk-II, Advance Medium Combat Aircrafts 
(AMCA); Helicopter Flee i.e. Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light utility Helicopter (LUH 
MK-I), Indian Multi-Role Helicopter (IMRH) & Deck Based Multi Role Helicopter (DBMRH); 
Transport Fleet I.e, Avro Replacement (C-295MW), Avionics Upgrade of Dornier aircraft; 
combat enablers i.e. Flight Refueling Aircraft (FRA), SIGINT and COMJAM aircraft (SCA), 
AEW&C Mk 1A AEW&C Mk-II, transport fleet i.e. HTT-40, Surface to Air Guided Weapons 
i.e. Close-in Weapon System (CIWS),  VSHORADS, RPAs and UAVs, Radars {LLTR 
(Ashwini)}, Indigenous weapons development i.e. New Generation Anti-Radiation Missile, 
Astra Mk-I & Mk-II BVR AA Missile, Pralay, LR-SOW, Tactical Advance Range 
Augmentation Kit, Long range Glide Bomb, SAAW Weapon System. The Committee wish 
that the Ministry of Defence will negotiate and finalise the acquisition plans in a time 
bound manner to help maintain equipment and aircraft at an optimum level. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 MoD is pursuing a number of schemes, including Design & Development with 
Defence Research & Development Organisation(DRDO), to fill the critical voids in 
capabilities. Ministry is striving and making concerted efforts to finalise the acquisition 
plans in a time bound manner to help IAF to maintain equipment and aircraft at an 
optimum level. 
 
(g) HTT-40. A contract for supply of 70 x HTT-40 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) and 
associated equipment to IAF was signed between MoD and Hindustan Aeronautics 

22 
 
Limited in March, 2023. In October,2024, HAL has intimated that there are no major 
issues envisaged that will have impact on the proposed series production of aircraft and 
delivery schedule. 
 
(h) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)  Mk 1A. A contract was signed with HAL on 25 Jan 
21 for delivery of 83 x LCA Mk 1A along with associated equipment. However, the delivery 
of aircraft is delayed due to Design and Development (D&D) activities and delivery of GE-
404 engines from M/s GE. HAL has stated that delivery of engines is likely to commence 
very soon. Additionally, IAF has progressed a case for procurement of 97 x LCA Mk 1A, 
AoN was obtained on 15 Jan 24.  
 
(i) Su-30 MKI. MoD has signed a contract with HAL for procurement of 12 x SU 30 
MKI aircraft with associated equipment on 12 December,2024. 
 
(j) C-295 MW. IAF has signed a contract for 56 x C-295 MW transport aircraft. Till 
date, eight aircraft have been delivered. 
 
(k) SIGINT & COMJAM Aircraft (SCA) and Aerial Early Warning & Control 
Systems(AEW&C).  MoD plans to procure three SIGINT and COMJAM aircraft (SCA) and 
AEW&C where  AoN have been accorded by Defence Acquisition Council (DAC).  The 
D&D of mission system will be carried out indigenously by DRDO. 
 
(l) Low Level Transportable Radar (Ashwini). AoN for procurement of  LLTR 
(Ashwini) was obtained from DAC on 22 December, 22. The acquisition is under process. 
 
 
Indigenization  
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 
The Committee note that Air Force is vigorously pursuing indigenisation and 
expenditure is being made as per committed liabilities and internal budgetary allocation 
for domestic capital acquisition. During deliberations also, a representative of the Air 
Force apprised the Committee that the capability of Su-30 is being upgraded though 
indigenous upgraded programme. The Committee have also been informed that Mark 1A 
would be a good example to showcase wherein IAF, DRDO and HAL have been able to 
build a contemporary all-weather light combat aircraft, which is designed on modular 
concept. It boasts of advance avionics and a fully indigenous Fly-by Wire system which is 
comparable to the best in the world. It is capable of air-to-air refuelling, and in the ongoing 
contract, its airborne radar will eventually be replaced by an indigenous Uttam Radar. The 
Committee further note that Air Force has indigenized many  components required for 
regular use through its Base Repair Depots. The Committee understand that 100 per cent 
indigenization is not possible and feasible, however, they recommend that constant, and 
continuous efforts should be made towards achieving whatever is achievable towards 
making the country self-reliant. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 

23 
 
-Classified- 
 
Force Level  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that the authorized strength of the IAF is 42 
fighter squadrons, however, as on date it has 31 active fighter squadrons. The Air Force 
also has an ageing fleet of MiG 21, MiG 23 and MiG-27 and other aircraft which are soon 
going to be phase out from the services, making rapid depletion in squadron strength of 
the force. The Committee have also been informed that IAF has received and 
operationalized two squadrons of Tejas Mk1 ac. The aircraft is being employed for 
operational roles and participated in the recently concluded international exercise Tarang 
Shakti. The Committee also find that Tejas Mk-1A programme has been delayed due to 
design & development issues. The Ministry have also informed that HAL has been asked 
to increase the production of Tejas. IAF has also progressed as case for procurement of 
additional 97 LCA Mk IA aircraft for which AoN was accorded and RFP was issued. The 
Committee have been informed that with these acquisitions, IAF will have 220 LCA Mk-I & 
Mk-IA ac. In addition, the Committee find that Tejas Mk 2 which is under design and 
development, will be a day and night capable, all weather multirole combat aircraft with 
adequate self Defence capability to operate in a dense and hostile AD environment. The 
Committee at this stage would like to impress upon the Ministry to sensitize HAL to 
augment production of Tejas so that operational role of Air Force is not affected due to 
depletion in squadrons strength. They would also like to urge upon the Ministry to 
expedite  procurement of contracted fighter aircrafts. The Committee may be informed of 
the outcome of the effort made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
-Classified- 
 
Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 
During deliberation before the Committee, a representative of the Air Force 
submitted that under the IAF's Modernisation of Airfields Infrastructure Programme, all 52 
airfields are being equipped with the Modern Airfield System. 39 of the airfields are 
operating as joint user airfield. It was also submitted that the project of Next Generation 
Hardened Aircraft Shelters is being implemented at the forward airfield for the protection 
of critical assets. The Committee find that the joint usage of the Air Force airfields along 
with some of the advanced landing ground help in enhancing regional connectivity as part 
of Government UDAN scheme. All this, in turn, leads to significant financial and carbon 
emission saving. It was also informed that IAF is cognisant of the enormous human and 
material costs that are involved in military aviation and hence, pays great emphasis on 
aerospace safety. To complement its substantial flying effort, IAF has a comprehensive 
inbuilt safety programme that works towards prevention and minimising accidents and 
these efforts have paid dividends in the form of a steady decline in the accidents. While 
appreciating the pace of work, the Committee emphasize that the endeavour made by the 

24 
 
Indian Air Force towards achieving the targets should be accomplished within a given 
time-frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
Manpower  
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
The Committee have been informed that as on 01 Oct 24, there were 11,916 
officers (except Med/Dental branch) against an establishment of 12,929 leading to a 
deficiency of 1,013. The induction plans have been revamped so as to gradually bring the 
strength at par with the sanctioned establishment. IAF selection process comprises of  
AFCAT, AFSB evaluation, Computerised Pilot Selection System (when applicable) and 
stringent medical criteria. The Committee note that while adequate candidates register for 
joining IAF in the officer cadre, total number of candidates who eventually get 
commissioned varies. The Committee have also been informed that efforts are in place to 
increase the induction of officers which include establishing a dedicated department 
named ‘DISHA’ by Indian Air force as the tag line, a focused Digital Publicity campaign is 
being undertaken on all social media platforms. They are also happy to note that the IAF 
has come up with a new concept of installing Facilitation cum Publicity Pavilion (FCPs) at 
prominent locations across the country. FCP is a technologically advanced platform to 
provide information about the IAF and its career opportunities in a trendy, logical and 
appealing manner. In addition, Air Force participates in various exhibitions and fairs. 
Publicity stalls at various forums including youth festivals, career conclaves, youth related 
exhibitions etc. that are set up from time to time for the benefit of the targeted youth. Two 
customized buses with information displayed about IAF and consisting of a flying 
simulator in each bus, visit various educational institutes across the county to motivate 
students. The Committee find that these initiatives have borne positive results and there 
has been an increase in number of aspiring youth getting commissioned. While 
appreciating the fact that recruitment in IAF is an ongoing process based on scheduled 
and unscheduled discharges, the Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure that 
there is no shortage of manpower essential for the operations of the Indian Air Force. 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Indian Navy 
 
Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
The Committee understand that the Indian Navy has been playing a maritime 
leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region due to its multi-dimensional capabilities and 
active presence in the region. The environment in India’s maritime neighbourhood is 
dynamic, with increasing instabilities, deepening geopolitical and ethnic faultiness, growing 
military capabilities and wide range of security challenges. These pose a combination of 
conventional and sub-conventional threats emanating from the seas. In this regard, a 
representative of Navy, during the presentation before the Committee, stated that a major 
share in the Navy’s budget (i.e. Rs. 90,998.95 Crore) devoted towards the substantial 
increase in capital expenditure. The Committee find that under Capital Head in BE 2024-25, 
allocation has been same as that of projected of Rs. 62,545.98 Crore. The allocation of BE 
2024-25 is an increase of Rs. 9,741.23 in compare to BE 2023-24. The Committee are of the 
considered view that increase in capital segment of the Navy budget will further help 
strengthen the Indian Navy. In the revenue head, the Committee find that the allocation in 
2024- 25 is, however, marginally higher than the previous years. Noticing a higher projection 
during 2024-25, the Committee hope that the Ministry would provide additional grant during 
the supplementary/revised stage, if needed, to carry out their modernisation plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Navy had been allocated an amount of Rs. 58,700.00 Crore under 
Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head which is further enhanced by Rs. 1,058.87 Crore to 
Rs. 59,758.87 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage. Further, the Committee may be assured that the 
allocated funds will be judiciously utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds 
will be sought at Supplementary stage. 
 
 
Indigenisation  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
During the oral evidence, a representative of Ministry informed the Committee that 
a total of 65 ships and submarines are under construction at the moment. These will be 
inducted into the Navy. The Navy submitted that they continue their relentless efforts 
towards the country ‘s technological and industrial self-reliance. The committee note that 
Navy has played a major role in the development of Indigenous Shipbuilding. The first 
indigenous naval ship was ready in the 60s and till date they have inducted around 130 
ships and submarines made in the country. The committee have also been informed that 
as on date, 63 Naval Ships and Submarines are under construction in Indian shipyards. 3 
such projects have got government sanction. The committee are happy to note that to 
promote self-reliance in the field of aviation, work on several important projects such as 
TEDBF and DBMRH is underway. Work is underway on 187 projects under Make, IDEX 
and DDF schemes of the Government of India. Appreciating the efforts made by the Navy 
towards achieving indigenisation, the committee desire that concerted efforts be made to 
expedite completion of the ongoing projects so that the Navy attains greater degree of 
‘Aatmanirbharta’ in near future.    

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Indian Navy is committed to become fully Atmanirbhar by 2047, with its 
modernisation programme centered on Atmanirbharta. 
 
(ii) Currently, 60 of the 61 warships under construction are being built in India, while 
orders for 62 more ships and submarines, and 120 Fast Interceptor Craft, to be built in 
domestic shipyards, are also at advanced stages. Achieving higher Indigenous Content 
arcoss weapons, sensors and equipment that supports the growth of Indian shipbuilding 
sector continues to be a key focus area. Ongoing shipbuilding/ aviation projects are being 
actively pursued with concerned shipyards and development/ production agencies for 
timely fructification. 
 
(iii) Besides, Indian Navy continues to pursue the development of weapons, sensors 
and equipment in close coordination with DRDO and DPSUs. Primary radars and critical 
Air Defence missiles for future frigates are earmarked to be developed by DRDO. Other 
smaller weapon Systems are also being pursued through domestic defence industry, 
including start-ups/ MSMEs. Indian Navy has been in the first Service to conclude a 
contract for 12.7 mm Stabilised Remote Control Gun in ‘Buy and Make’ category as well 
as for Fire Fighting BOT, under the iDEX scheme. It has also issued Project Sanction 
Order under Make-II category for Deep Sea Side Scan Towing Winch, thereby 
recognising efforts by industry to promote indigenous development. 
 
(iv) In the last 10 years, an average of 65% of the total expenditure has been focused 
towards indigenous procurement. During FY 2023-24, the ratio of 83.91:16.09 between 
Indian and foreign sources has been achieved. 
 
Operational Preparedness and threat perceiption 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
1.  The Committee is of the considered view that for the safety and security of 
India's national Interest, it is important to maintain peace and security in the maritime 
space. The Committee feels that there are two types of threats to the peace and 
security of our maritime space threat from traditional sources like China and Pakistan, 
non
-traditional sources like piracy, drone attacks, missile attacks, human drug trafficking 
illegal fishing etc. 
2. The Committee finds that Indian Navy's operations are conducted to mitigate all 
these threats The Indian Navy's Area of Operation extends from the West coast of the 
African continent in the West to Australia in the East Further, this part is divided into two 
parts, the western part comes under the jurisdiction of the Western Naval Command 
and the eastern part comes under the jurisdiction of the Eastern Naval Command Naval 
ships aircraft, autonomous aircraft are always deployed to keep the maritime coastal 
areas under 24/7 constant surveillance. 
3. The Committee have further been informed that besides attending to maritime 
territorial integrity, it is also the responsibility of the Indian Navy to act against piracy 
and 
narco-trading. The Committee also notes that the Indian Navy has been continuously 

27 
 
deployed in the Gulf of Aden and Advisory Area since 2008 for anti-piracy operations, 
During the year 2024, the Navy has conducted six successful operations and rescued 
around 120 people, The Gulf of Guinea region in West Africa is also a major source of 
oil imports, In view of the increasing incidents of piracy in that region, the Navy has in 
2022, started deploying ships at regular intervals in the Gulf of Guinea, The Committee 
are aware that in the year 2024, shipping attacks by  Yemen's Houthi group made the 
maritime situation in the Western Indian Ocean even more serious. To protect the ships 
engaged in import and export from India, the Navy has so far deployed 30 naval ships, 
made direct intervention in about 25 incidents, saved about 400 lives. Expressing their 
satisfaction over the role and preparedness of the Indian Navy, the Committee feels that 
keeping in view the drastic change in the modern warfare tactics, the Navy will 
continue to protect the maritime zone and prevent piracy and other 
maritime security 
threats. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Indian Navy is committed to safeguarding national interests in the maritime domain 
and 
strengthen the strategic narrative of being the 'First Responder' and Preferred 
Security Partner' in the region. 
 
2. Maritime challenges arise from both traditional and non-traditional threats, with the 
former comprising conventional and non-conventional warfare by potential adversaries. 
Non-traditional threats include Piracy and Armed Robbery, Terrorist act from the sea, 
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, drug smuggling, gun running and human 
trafficking. Additionally, natural disasters and pandemics also entail deployment of 
military resources for intervention as required. 
 
3. Manifestation of conflicts in the maritime domain threatens our maritime interests 
and complicates the maritime security calculus. Indian Navy in close coordination with 
all elements of Higher Defence Organisation, sister Services and Ministries dealing with 
aspects of maritime security and coastal defence, constantly analyses the geopolitical 
developments and emerging threats challenges, and reviews its operational 
preparedness to retain an edge over potential adversaries during crisis or conflict at sea. 
Indian Navy maintains a near continuous surveillance in maritime areas of interests, 
through consistent deployment of Indian Navy assets. Also, capability development by 
potential adversaries, as well as activities by both state and non-state actors, that 
threaten our national interests, are closely monitored.               Further, coastal defence 
mechanism is periodically assessed towards necessary refinement. 
Manpower 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
During deliberations, a representative of the Navy informed the Committee that the 
Indian Navy has 10,143 officers 64,770 sailors, 9,413 Agniveers and 32,171  Defence 
Civilians. The Committee has been informed that all personnel are fully trained for their 
work and are fully capable of maintaining combat-worthiness and operational 
preparedness of the Navy. The initial training of naval officers takes place at the Indian 
Naval Academy. Further, professional training is done in different professional schools 
according to their branch and trade. The Indian Navy also trains naval personnel from 
neighbouring and friendly countries, So far, more than 20 thousand professionals from 


28 
 
about 50 countries have been trained The Committee, while appreciating the measures 
taken by the Navy for enriching Human Resources Management, hopes that they would 
continue to impart state-of-art training, both in logistics management and technology 
management. 
Reply of the Government 
1.  The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Salient 
aspects relevant in this regard are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs. 
2.  The training in Indian Navy is regularly reviewed and updated as per requirements. 
There is a robust mechanism in place for the same, with details as follows:- 
 
 (a)  Comprehensive Assessment/ Review of Traininq. The training  in Indian 
Navy has been tailored to meet emerging requirements, based on  feedback/ 
training gaps as received from Commands/ units and newly  inducted equipment 
and systems. Headquarters, Southern Naval Command  (HQ SNC) is the Training 
Command' of Indian Navy. The training needs  across Indian Navy are assessed 
by HQ SNC through a robust feedback mechanism at multiple levels, as elucidated 
below:- 
 (i) At the apex level, Annual Training Meeting (ATM)/ Annual 
 Training Conference (ATC), chaired by Flag Officer Commanding-in-
 Chief (South), with representation from Naval Headquarters, all 
 Commands and both the Fleets, is conducted on yearly basis. 
 (ii) Quarterly training meetings are held at Southern Naval 
 Command to discuss training needs and issues related to training. 
 Feedback received from the field is a key agenda during discussion. 
 (iii) Evolving training philosophy for future inductions is an ongoing 
 process to future proof training in the Indian Navy. Regular revision of 
 syllabus and exchange of information/ linkages between professional 
 directorates at Naval Headquarters and Headquarters, Southern Naval 
 Command, keeps the training current. A mechanism to facilitate early 
 induction of training aids pertaining to the equipment/ systems 
 inducted/ planned to be inducted, has been set-up in the Indian Navy. 
 This is termed as New Induction Training Committee (NITC). NITC is 
 chaired by Assistant Chief of Personnel (Human Resources  Development) 
and discusses training needs arising from induction of  new equipment and 
accords approval for induction of requisite training  aids. The NITC has 
members from Naval Headquarters, Headquarters  Southern Naval 
Command and various training establishments/  schools. NITC meetings 
are conducted annually and induction of  training aids commensurate to the 
newly inducted/ under induction  equipment are addressed on priority. 
 (b) Revision of Syllabi and Upskilling of Indian Navy Personnel.  Indian 
Navy's maritime operations heavily rely on complex networks and 
 systems. The 
rapidly emerging technologies and threats necessitate Indian Navy to regularly 
upskill its personnel in niche technology domains such as Cyber Security, Artificial 
Intelligence, Big Data Analysis, etc., in association  with reputed civilian 
institutes. Accordingly, periodic review of syllabi for  various courses is being 

29 
 
conducted at training schools of Indian Navy, based  on policies promulgated by 
Naval Headquarters and training directives promulgated by Headquarters, 
Southern Naval Command 
 (c) In addition to the basic and advanced training, Indian Navy also has 
 been imparting training on future technologies. The following are relevant in 
 this regard:- 
(i) Training on Niche Technoloqies. Training on future  technologies 
 such as Electric Propulsion and Medium Voltage (MV), 
 Artificial 
Intelligence and Big Data Analytics, are being given due  impetus. IITs 
and other reputed institutes are being engaged for  specialised training 
 to equip Indian Navy personnel with skills and expertise in  military 
decision-making 
wrt allocation of scarce resources, selection of new 
equipment and processes, optimal deployment of available resources to 
achieve success in missions. 
 (ii)  Training on New Induction Equipment. For newly inducted 
 equipment, reference systems for training establishments are being 
 included as part of the contracts. 
 
(d) Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with industry/ academia towards 
strengthening industry-academia relation, research collaboration, technology 
development and technical solutions, have been undertaken with IISc 
(Kharagpur, Kanpur and Bombay), IISc Bangalore and Indian Maritime 
University. 
 
 
Joint Staff 
 
Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 24 & 25) 
 
The Committee note that in the Budget Estimates for 2024-25, Joint Staff has made a 
projection of Rs. 5,312.40 Crore against which an allocation of Rs. 5,075.76 Crore has been 
provided resulting into a shortfall of Rs. 236.64 Crore. However, during the deliberations 
before the Committee, a representative of Joint Staff apprised the Committee that BE from 
the FY 2023-24 onwards Ministry of Defence has allotted substantially higher BE to 
Headquarter IDS vis-a-vis the previous years and the enhancement at BE stage has 
benefitted the joint staff organizations for growing not only in structure and size but also in 
overall responsibilities in undertaking their plan, training, operations and other functional 
activities smoothly. The Committee understand that Joint Staff act as single point 
organization for jointmanship in Ministry of Defence which integrates policy, doctrine, war-
fighting and procurement and find that during the years role of Joint Staff has risen many 
folds. Presently, it supports financial aspects and capability building of more than 120 units. 
The Committee further note that Integrated Defence staff (IDS) formulates policies and 
doctrines to coordinate, synergize, enhance and optimise operation capability, training and 
other functional aspects such as foreign cooperation, logistics, communications, medical, 
and harmonises identification and acquisition of modern capabilities and technologies by the 
three services. The Committee, while appreciating the role and responsibilities of HQ 

30 
 
Integrated Defence staff/Joint Staff express their hope that the Ministry would provide 
additional grant, if required, at the supplementary/revised stage in order to strengthen the 
Joint Staff. 
 
The Committee note that Headquarter IDS is responsible to enhance the jointness 
and integration of Armed Forces so as to ensure that the resources of three services can 
optimally be utilized to meet the challenges across the spectrum of war fighting and security 
of the nation. The Committee have been informed that the Joint Staff includes operational 
commands like Andaman and Nicobar, signal intelligence units, premier training 
establishments such as National Defence Academy, Defence Services Staff College and 
College of Defence Management. Only two units namely Headquarters Integrated Defence 
Staff (IDS) and Andaman-Nicobar Command were supported through Joint Staff budget in 
2001, yet there is an increase in the list and it has grown progressively and currently there 
are 13 JSOs. The Committee have also been informed that IDS also includes oversight of 
three joint logistics nodes and with the additional four joint logistics nodes strengthen the 
objective of optimization. There is an increase in the growth in accordance with budgetary 
allocation. The Committee also note that the Command also safeguards strategic interests of 
the nation in Eastern Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea abutting Southeast 88 Asia and the 
strategic waterway Straits of Malacca, an important choke point in the Indian Ocean region 
from where the majority of maritime trade passes. Keeping in view the role played by the 
Command in securing Indian Ocean Region, the Committee are more than hopeful that the 
Ministry would provide additional grant at supplementary/revised stage in case of any future 
need in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Joint Staff had been allocated an amount of Rs. 5,075.76 Crore 
(including Revenue and Capital Heads) which was further enhanced by Rs. 1,232.00 Crore 
to Rs. 6,307.76 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage. Further, the Committee may be assured that the 
allocated funds will be judiciously utilized and on the basis of additional requirement, funds 
will be sought at Supplementary stage. 
 
 
ECHS 
 
Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee note that close to 59 lakh beneficiaries including ESM and their 
dependents are presently availing ECHS benefits. In the financial year 2023-24, the 
projection of ECHS was Rs. 9880.99 and there was no deduction in allocation. However, 
the expenditure was Rs. 9831.86 crore. The Committee have also been informed that 
ECHS was also provided additional allocation of Rs. 3789.74 crore against projected 
requirement of Rs. 3600.00 crore at supplementary stage. During the FY 2024-25 the 
projection was Rs. 9683.72 crore, however, allocation was Rs. 6968.00 crore. During oral 
evidence, the representatives of ECHS informed the Committee that 84 percent of the 
budget incurred in medical expenditure includes expenses on empanelled hospitals, 
dental care institutions, diagnostic laboratories, various investigations, etc. out of which 
around 13 percent incurred in medicine and 3 percent on salary. The Committee desire 
that the budget allocated at BE or RE stage may be fully utilized as such expenditure is 
for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen of our country.   

31 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The status of current year budget is as under:- 
 
Allotment Expenditure Remarks 
 
Rs.9429.00 Cr.Rs.7003.72 Cr.Out of this RE allotment of Rs. 9429 crore,      
Rs. 7531 crore is for MTRE Head which is 80% 
of total allotment. The point regarding full 
utilisation of the above allocated  budget has 
been noted. 
 
 
 
Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 The Committee find that there is a gap between authorized and actual manpower 
at ECHS Polyclinics. The Committee have also been apprised that Government has 
sanctioned 23 New PCs, upgradation of 50 PCs and an additional 1357 contractual 
manpower in the year 2024. The Committee note that remedial measure have been taken 
by the Ministry to overcome unutilized vacancies in ECHS polyclinics. Since vacancies in 
hospitals/ polyclinics affect the healthcare facilities being provided to the Ex-servicemen, 
the Committee recommend that such vacancies be fill-up in a time-bound manner to 
provide adequate healthcare facilities to our ex-soldiers so that they do not feel neglected 
after exiting the service. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The additional vacancies sanctioned by the MoD have already been allocated to 
the Polyclinics for carrying out contractual employment in a time bound manner.  
 
Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 Establishment of new polyclinics is yet another phenomena which has come to the 
notice of the Committee. They find that a case for De-Novo review of ECHS Polyclinics 
has already been carried out which would include the establishment of 21 new Polyclinics, 
upgradation of 50 ECHS Polyclinics. The establishment of new polyclinics and the 
upgradation of polyclinics will enhance the authorised number of contractual employees 
by around 2000. The proposal is stated to have been under consideration with MoD. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the pending proposal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India, Ministry of Defence has accorded sanction for establishment 
of 21 new ECHS Polyclinics including two in Nepal and upgradation of 50 Polyclinics on 

32 
 
01 Nov 2024. Accordingly, executive instructions on the subject have been issued to 
concerned formations on 07 Nov 2024.  The progress on the subject is being monitored 
on regular basis. 
 
Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private hospitals 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 From the reply submitted by the Ministry to resolve perennial problem of unsettled 
ECHS medical bills of the private recognized hospitals, the Committee note that the 
Ministry is continuously monitoring Turn Around Time (TAT) with Bill Processing Agencies 
(BPA), monitoring response to ‘Need More Information (NMI)’ cases with empanelled 
hospitals for early processing, assignment of more doctors to Regional Centres (RCs) 
under heavy bill processing workloads to accelerate approvals, establishment of 
centralized dashboard to track the status of all submitted, approved and pending bills, 
ensuring better transparency and faster processing and exploring the use of artificial 
intelligence (AI) to streamline bill processing and detect fraudulent claims. Currently, 
inflated bills from empanelled hospitals are leading to multiple review cycles, increasing 
approval times. Introducing AI could significantly reduce processing time and improve 
accuracy. The Committee wish and hope that such regular allotments are being provided 
by the Ministry to the ECHS, so the inconvenience being faced by the ESM would be 
resolved, and the private hospital would not reject ESM for admission and treatment. 
  
 While lauding the efforts taken by the Ministry in clearing the pending bills, the 
Committee express their concern that the issue of pendency surfaces before the 
Committee during the examination of DFGs every year. In this regard before commenting 
anything substantial, the Committee would like to be apprised on the following sets of 
information: 
 
(i) The numbers of ESM/Dependents who approached all the polyclinics 
combined during the last three years; 
 
(ii) The number of ESM who approached all Defence hospitals combined for 
 treatment of themselves and the dependent during the last three years; and   
(iii) The number of ex-serviceman/dependent who were referred for super 
specialty treatment in private hospitals. 
 
 The idea to gather such statistics is to come to a conclusion as to arrive at a 
comparable figure whether more referrals were done or they were treated in polyclinics/ 
Defence hospitals. These figures may be supplied while furnishing the Action Taken 
Notes to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The points are as follows :- 
  
 (i) Data on the number of ESM/ dependents who approached all the PCs 
 during the last three years. 
 
Ser Year No of Patients Visit in PCs 

33 
 
No 
(i) 2022 15837777 
(ii) 2023 17177491 
(iii) 2024 20112732 
 
(ii) Number of ESM who approved all Defence Hospitals combined from 
treatment of self & dependent during the last three years.  
 
Ser 
No 
Year No of Patients Referred to 
Service Hosp 
(i) 2022 783708 
(ii) 2023 316133 
(iii) 2024 634771 
 
(iii) Number of ESM/ dependents referred for speciality/super-speciality 
treatment in private hospitals in the last year  is 10,07,994. 
 
 
ECHS in far-flung areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee note that in order to increase the outreach of ECHS in far-flung 
areas, the Ministry have sanctioned 17 Mobile Polyclinics in the State of Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal. These Mobile Polyclinics offer Medical Services to 
all beneficiaries including women & children also. Besides this, the Performance Bank 
Guarantee (PBG) rates were reduced in non-CGHS areas/cities to facilitate more 
hospitals to empanel with the ECHS. Further, the Ministry has submitted a proposal for 
the establishment of 130 Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) including the existing 20 Type ‘E’ 
(Mobile) Polyclinics under consideration to increase the reach of ECHS to remote 
locations and hilly/mountainous terrain.  In addition to that, a Fixed Medical Allowance 
(FMA) has been granted to all ECHS beneficiaries who are residing in far flung areas 
where Polyclinics are not available. Further, the requirement of new Polyclinics as also 
dependency of ESM on Polyclinics is reviewed from time to time with an objective to open 
new Polyclinics as also for upgrading/downgrading the existing ones. 
 
 The Committee express their satisfaction that over the years with the increase in 
ESM, the organization is growing and devising new methods to help ESM. The Committee 
hope that with these new proposed arrangements to be put in place in the coming years, 
medical related problems of ESM would be minimized and ex-soldiers will not be facing 
any healthcare problems. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Matter of fact. The progress on the subject is being monitored on regular basis.  
 

34 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 

35 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05 August, 2025                    Chairperson 
 14  Sravana, 1947 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence 

37 
 


38 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1600 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 1, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
16 Shri Naresh Bansal 
17 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
18 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
19 Shri Praful Patel 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

39 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar    - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the draft 
Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 1st, 2nd, 
3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-
25 and briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the subject 
‘Consolidation of Defence lands by Defence Estates Organization and working of 
Cantonment Boards’.  
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, 
Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, 
Welfare of Ex Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 

40 
 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) 
– New DPSUs and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 
and 21). 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him.  
 
5. ***********         ***********        **********      ******   ******** 
 
 
 
 
 
               The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****Does not pertain to the Reports 

41 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2024-25 ON ARMY, 
NAVY, AIR FORCE, JOINT STAFF AND ECHS (DEMAND NOS. 20 AND 21)’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations            30 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16, 
17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29 and 30. 
        
   Total  : 30 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter 
III): Recommendation Para Nos. -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): -Nil- 
  
Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V)  -Nil- 
                                                    
 
   Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
 