i 
 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand 
No. 21)’] 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand 
No. 21)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) ……………………....….  iv 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 
 
 vi 
CHAPTER  I   Report…………………………………………………………….. 
 
 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted 
by the Government 
 
 13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not  desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
 
 27 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 28 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final  
 replies of the Government are still awaited  
 29 
   
APPENDICES 
 
  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2024-25) held on 5th August, 2025. 
 
 30 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/      
Recommendations contained in the Third Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning 
(Demand No. 21)’ 
 
 
 33 
 
            

iv 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
*Shri N. Chandrasegharan ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25) w.e.f. 25 July, 2025 
consequent upon cessation of his Membership of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2025
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Naveen Jain 
26 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27 Shri Praful Patel 
28 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
29 Shri Sanjay Singh 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31 Vacant* 

v 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen* - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vikas Kumar  - Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      *served in  the Committee Branch till 14.07.2025 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of Standing Committee 
on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence 
Planning (Demand No. 21)’ 
2.  The Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17th December, 2024. The Report contained 15 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in April, 2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 5th August, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence 
  

vii 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence 
Planning (Demand No. 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 17.12.2024. 
 2.        The 3rd Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 15 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 Para No. Subject  
1 Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2024-25: An 
Overview  
2 Capital Outlay on Defence Services: BE 2024-25 and BE2023-24 
3 Utilisation of Capital budget 
4 Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services 
5 Modernization of Defence Forces 
6 Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
7-8 Defence Procurement Policy 
9-10 Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
11 Dependence on Foreign Suppliers 
12 Self Reliance and Make in India 
13 Offset Clause 
14 Foreign Direct Investment 
15 Defence Planning 
   
3.        The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 15 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on             9th 
April, 2025. Replies to the recommendations have been examined and categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Para Nos.   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15 
  
              (Total - 15) 
 
 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
Para Nos. –Nil- 
(Total - 00)  

2 
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
            Para Nos.    –Nil- 
(Total - 00) 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                      (Total - 00) 
 
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
 
 
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-eighth Report of the Committee in 
the succeeding Paragraphs.  
 
 
A. Capital Outlay on Defence Services: BE 2024-25 and BE2023-24 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that the capital budget of defence services is bifurcated into 
capital acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays of ₹1,40,691.24 Crore 
and ₹31,308.76 Crore respectively in BE 2024-25. The Committee take note of this fact 
with satisfaction that the total capital outlay of Defence services has registered an 
increase of 5.79 per cent from that of BE 2023-24. The capital acquisition expenditure 
which is also known as the modernisation budget of the Defence Services – Army, 
Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff – reflects an increase of 6.34 per cent in comparison 
with BE 2023-24. Other than the Capital Acquisition segment, which consists of the 
land and works expenditure of the Armed Forces and the capital budget of DRDO, 
DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services), has seen an increase of 
3.33 percent when compared to BE 2023-24.At this stage, the Committee desire that the 
total Capital Outlay projected for Revised Estimates 2024-25 be allocated so as to 
maintain upward trajectory of Capital budget allocation for the Defence Services.  
 
 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of 
₹1,72,000.00Crore under Capital Head. However, this allocation has been reduced to 

3 
 
₹1,59,500.00 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption capacity of the 
Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year and overall resource envelope 
available and pressing demands of other Ministries etc. Having said that, it may also be noted 
that if need be, additional funds can be sought at Supplementary stage. The progress of 
expenditure is reviewed from time to time to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally 
utilized towards operational activities so that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired 
without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
 
B. Utilisation of Capital budget  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 
The Committee learn that the total allocation under Capital Head at Revised Estimates 
2023-24 to Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & 
Services) and R&D stood at ₹33,412.16 Crore, ₹51,052.18 Crore, ₹58,500.51 Crore, 
₹1,396.18 Crore, ₹1,310.50 Crore and ₹12,942.85 Crore, respectively. The Committee, on 
examination of the budgetary documents in connection with DFG 2024-25, find that 
barring Army and Joint staff, the other Services and Organizations are able to fully 
utilize the funds allocated at RE 2023-24 for Capital Budget.While noting that about 65 
percent of the grants could be utilized till the completion of the third quarter of the 
Financial Year, the Committee would like to be apprised as to what are the 
plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for utilizing the remaining 35 percent until 
the time this Financial Year draws to a close. The Committee, at this stage, hope that 
the Ministry would undertake a pragmatic approach while seeking further allocations at 
RE stage for making a realistic assessment of the allocations sought.  
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that necessary measures are taken for modernization 
of the Armed Forces, through procurement of new equipment and upgrading of existing 
equipment and systems. The modernization projects are being progressed as per the 
approved Capital Acquisition Plans and in terms of the extant Defence Procurement 
Procedure. Further, Acquisition Wing, being a specialist organization created on the basis of 
the Kargil Committee Report and recommendations of the Group of Ministers looks after all 
capital acquisition projects from inception to finality. In addition, the Defence Procurement 
Board, which is chaired by Defence Secretary and the Defence Acquisition Council headed by 
RakshaMantri comprising of all stakeholders, monitor adherence to broad timelines in 
Defence Procurement.   
2. In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,72,000 Crore 
under Capital Head. However, this allocation has been reduced to ₹1,59,500 Crore at RE 
2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption capacity of the Services, pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year and overall resource envelope available etc. Further, 
it may be stated that allocation made for defence under Capital Head is adequate to sustain 

4 
 
the desired level of defence preparedness. If required, based on expenditure during the year, 
pending committed liabilities and critical/operational requirements, threat perception etc., 
additional funds are sought at Supplementary stage. The progress of expenditure is reviewed 
from time to time to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational 
activities so that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
C. Modernization of Defence Forces 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
10.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee glean through the available facts before them that the 
Modernisation of Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the Defence 
budget. Modernisation involves the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, 
technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment defence capabilities. It 
is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational challenges and 
technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the 
entire spectrum of security challenges. The equipment requirements of the Armed 
Forces are planned and progressed through a detailed process which includes 15 
Year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a 5 year Service-wise 
Capability Acquisition Plan, a 2 year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and 
deliberations by the Defence Acquisition Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri. The 
Committee note that in 2024-25, out of the amount of ₹1,72,000 Crore allocated for 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services for the Services/Organisations covered under 
Defence Services Estimates, ₹1,40,691.24 Crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition 
/Modernisation Head of the three Services viz. Army, Navy (including Joint Staff) 
and Air Force.The Committee also find that the allocation for Modernisation Head of 
the Services has seen an increase of ₹8,000 Crore from BE 2023-24. Keeping in 
view the need for maintaining credible war deterrence at all times, the Committee 
recommend that enhanced budgetary allocation, if sought, under Capital Head for 
modernization purpose at Revised Estimates 2024-25 may be given to ensure state-
of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for the Armed Forces. 
 
11. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,40,691.24 
Crore under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. However, this allocation has been 
reduced to ₹1,30,916.35 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year,overall 
resource envelope available etc.. However, if required, additional funds will be sought at 
supplementary stageto meet any liability arisen out of conclusion of new scheme(s) in the 
current financial year. In addition to this any expected cash outgo in the last days of the 

5 
 
Financial Year as conclusion of new schemes or against committed liability is planned on 
priority in the first quarter. Therefore all efforts are made to ensure that acquisition of the 
equipments/weapons do not suffer due to want of funds till the end of the Financial Year.  
 
D. Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
Recommendation No. 6 
12.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee also learn that Committed Liability means payments anticipated 
during a financial year in respect of contracts concluded in previous years and 
holds first charge on the budget allocation. Committed Liabilities constitute a 
significant element in respect of the capital acquisition segment, since one project 
may span several financial years. New Schemes include new projects/proposals 
which are at various stages of approval and are likely to be approved and contracts 
concluded during the year. The Committee further learn that in the Defence 
Services Estimates (DSE), there is no separate allocation of funds for Committed 
Liabilities (CL) and New Schemes (NS) and these are catered through the Capital 
Acquisition (Modernization) budget. In the current financial year 2024-25, an 
amount of ₹1,40,691.24 Crore is allocated in BE 2024-25 under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernisation) Head. The Committee are satisfied to note that there is no gap 
between projection and allocation in BE 2024-25 under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernisation) Head for the three Services. The Committee at this stage can only 
recommend that like for BE 2024-25, projected amount under this Capital 
Acquisition (Modernisation) Head at Revised Estimates stage of 2024-25 may be 
favourably considered by the Ministry to ensure unhampered and continuous 
modernization process of the Defence Forces. 

6 
 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,40,691.24 
Crore under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. However, this allocation has been 
revised to ₹1,30,916.35 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall 
resource envelope available etc. However, if required, additional funds will be sought at 
supplementary stage to ensure unhampered and continuous modernization process of the 
Defence Forces. 
14. In the reply to the recommendations number 2, 3, 5, and 6, the Ministry had 
stated that the allocation for capital outlay at RE for the year 2024-25 has been 
reduced to Rs 1,59,500/- crore from Rs 1,72,000/-crore allocated at BE stage. The 
reduction is of Rs. 12,500 crore. This is based on absorption capacity of the 
services, pace of expenditure in the current financial year and overall resource 
envelope available and pressing demands of other Ministries, etc.  However, the 
Committee are happy to note that additional funds can be sought at supplementary 
stage, if needed, based on periodic review of expenditure.  The Committee also 
note that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without compromising 
operational preparedness of the Defence Service.  The Committee fully trust the 
Ministry of Defence and desire that they may be apprised of the demand raised by 
the Ministry of Defence at supplementary stage, the allocation made by the Ministry 
of Finance and the actual expenditure thereof. 
 
E. Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
15.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection 
with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2024-25, the Committee note that 
since 2019-20 onwards, the 'Revenue' component of the total outlay for the three 
Services overshadows the 'Capital’ component significantly. The overall ‘Revenue’ to 
‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary allocation for the Services stands at 66:34, 61:39, 64:36, 
65:35, 66:34 and 67:33 for 2019- 20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, 
respectively. For 2024-25, this ‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary allocation 
stands at 66:34. The Committee are given to understand that Revenue expenditure 
(Demand No. 20) includes expenditure on pay & allowances, transportation, revenue 
stores (like ordnance stores, rations, petrol, oil and lubricants, spares, maintenance of 
various platforms/equipment etc.), revenue works (which include maintenance of 
buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and taxes, etc.) and other 
miscellaneous expenditure; Capital expenditure includes expenditure on land, 

7 
 
construction works, plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, 
Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc.In the considered view of the 
Committee, both Revenue and Capital expenditure play significant roles in operational 
preparedness of our Forces. Therefore, the Committee hope that allocations under 
Capital head need to be suitably matched to balance the ratio of Revenue and Capital 
outlay for the Services. 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 In BE 2019-20, M/o Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,03,394.31 Crore 
under Capital Head which is enhanced by ₹68,605.69 Crore (66.35%) to ₹1,72,000 Crore in 
BE 2024-25. On the other hand, allocation to M/o Defence under Revenue Head has 
increased by ₹80,870.91 Crore (40.05%) in BE 2024-25 from BE 2019-20 allocation of 
₹2,01,901.76 Crore. It may be seen that the allocation made under Capital Head has seen a 
bigger jump than the allocation made under Revenue Head in the last five years. Further, the 
Committee may be apprised that allocation made to Ministry of Defence under Revenue Head 
is more than the allocation under Capital Head as a large portion of the funds allocated under 
Revenue Head is spent on the pay and allowances of the employees.  
 
 
17. During examination of Demands for Grants for the year,2024-25, the 
Committee had noticed the allocation of higher proportion towards Revenue 
component of defence Budget vis-à-vis the Capital Component. While 
acknowledging the significant role of both Revenue and Capital component in 
operational preparedness of the forces, the Committee in their original Report had 
hoped for suitable enhancement in the ratio of Capital Component to balance the 
Revenue and Capital ratio. The Committee are happy to note that during the year 
2024-25 the allocation made under Capital head has been increased to Rs. 1,72,000 
Crore from Rs. 1,03,394.31 Crore in the year 2019-20. The increase is Rs.68,605.69 
crore, i.e. 66.35 percent. Against this the increase in Revenue Head during the year 
2024-25 from the year 2019-20   is only 40.05 percent. This is 26.3 percent lower 
than the increase in Capital Head. The Committee while appreciating the efforts of 
the Ministry in this direction, would wish that keeping in mind the positive impact of 
Capital Head towards creating assets and in continuous enhancement of capacity 
of the Armed Forces, it should be appropriately enhanced at the RE stage, at 
supplementary stage and in the future budget allocation. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  

8 
 
 
F. Procurement Policy 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
18.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the 
Armed Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting 
the security and operational needs. The thrust remain to buy contemporary 
armaments in a time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make 
India self-reliant in defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to develop 
India as a global defence manufacturing hub. The policy is implemented through 
the mechanism of Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find 
that the Defence Procurement Procedure 2016 has been revised as Defence 
Acquisition Procedure 2020 which is driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms 
announced as part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In order to promote 
indigenous design and development of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian-IDDM 
(Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured)}’ category which was 
introduced in 2016 and was accorded top most priority for procurement of capital 
equipment, has been retained in DAP 2020. The Committee were also informed that 
Ministry of Defence has notified a second positive Indigenization List comprising 
108 items for which there would be an interim embargo on the import.  Some 
special features, which have been included in the DAP 2020 are special chapters on 
Information and Communication Technology requiring more security, ruggedness 
as well as technological obsolescence in a faster timeframe. The Committee were 
informed by the Ministry that the last Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) came out 
in 2016 and is presently under revision to incorporate the latest orders and other 
developments.  The Ministry in its submission has stated that it has been revised 
nine times during last 11 years and due to diversity of our geographical terrain the 
procurement manual has to cater for all eventualities. Though the Committee take 
cognizance of the fact that the requirements of each of the armed forces are very 
complex yet the Committee expect that the Ministry to accelerate the revision of 
Manual on Defence Acquisition Procedure as this will not only put the procedurefor 
procuring fast track the arms, ammunition and defence equipment in fast lane but 
also propel the country towards self-reliance. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that time bound and determined efforts must be made by all stakeholders involved 
in the process of procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces and 
private sector as this is vital for realization of the goal of self reliance in Defence 
Sector. 
 
19. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 

9 
 
The Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces are 
sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. Capital Acquisition for the 
Indian Armed Forces is made as per guidelines under the Defence Acquisition Procedure 
(DAP), 2020 which is a flexible document continuously evolving on the basis of 
operational experience, changing threat perceptions and technological advancements. 
Continuous review of DAP ensures that hurdles in speedier acquisitions are identified and 
removed swiftly which ultimately reduces the acquisition cycle.  DAP 2020 has been kept 
updated via Business Processing Reengineering (BPR) wherein 103 amendments have 
been carried out to align the same towards more efficient and effective processes. For 
promoting indigenous defence industry, following amendments were made to DAP-2020: 
- 
 
(a) Increased Indigenous Content (IC) in various categories of procurement 
under DAP-2020. Inclusion of provision for minimum 50% IC in the form of 
indigenous material/ components/ software in the equipment being acquired with 
an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce import dependency. 
(b) Notification of ‘Positive Indigenisation Lists’ on a periodic basis to promote 
Aatmanirbharta. Five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 platforms/ 
equipment have been issued. 
(c) Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with “No foreign sourcing”. 
Foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council. 
 
A comprehensive review of DAP 2020 is due in the current year to ensure timely 
acquisitions in transparent manner. 
 
Further, 64.09% of the total capital budget has been earmarked for domestic 
Capital procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% for FY 2022-23 and 
75% for FY 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
 
20. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that various initiatives are 
being taken under the Defence Procurement Policy to develop the capability of the 
Armed Forces, alongwith fulfilling security and operational needs.  The Committee 
take positive note with regard to the highest priority accorded by the Government 
towards ensuring and fulfilling all operational requirements by sufficiently 
reinforcing the indigenous production and procurement processes through various 
programmes and projects.   Further, the Committee applaud the Ministry of Defence 
for undertaking initiatives to boost self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system.  viz 
(i) increased Indigenous Content(IC) in various categories of procurement under 
DAP 2020,(ii)notification of Positive Indigensiation List on a periodic basis to 
promote Atmanirbharata and issuance of 509 platforms/equipment in Five 
Indigenisation List ii) inclusion of the provision like “No foreign sourcing” and go 

10 
 
for Foreign procurement only as an  exception with prior approval of Defence  
Acquisition Council  etc. The Committee are happy to note that the gradual increase 
in earmarking of domestic capital procurement from 64.09 percent in the financial 
year 2021-22 to 68 percent in the financial year 2022-23 and 75 percent in the year 
2024-25 and 2025-26. This testifies the seriousness of the Ministry of Defence to 
boost Self-reliance in Indian Defence - eco system. The Committee also note that a 
comprehensive review of DAP 2020 is due in the current year to ensue timey 
acquisitions in transparent manner. The Committee hope that the Ministry of 
Defence would complete this review in a time bound manner and revise Defence 
procurement manual accordingly. The Committee further desire the Ministry to 
ensure collaborative participation of all the stakeholders like the Ministry of 
Defence, DPSUs, the Armed Forces and the Private Sectors in the review process 
for further augmentation of Atmanirbharata. The action taken in this regard may be 
apprised to this Committee. 
 
Recommendation No. 8. 
21.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
acquisition time line is 74-106 Weeks/19-26 Months, which according to the 
Committee is a much stretched period of time in terms of strategic risks involved. 
The Committee is of the view that with high level of dynamism in the field of 
technology such a long timeline can result in technology becoming obsolete and 
redundant hence directly having adverse impact on the security of the country. 
Furthermore, the dynamism of international geopolitics relations can also threaten 
the acquisition through traditional channels and allies which is evident in the recent 
Russo-Ukraine War. Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in terms of 
technological development and global relations, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should try to identify ways in which the defence equipment acquisition can 
be accelerated without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the 
process. This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as 
deterrent for hostile countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard. 

11 
 
 
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
The Government is maintaining the highest standards of transparency, probity, public 
accountability and a balance between competing requirements such as expeditious 
procurement, high quality standards and appropriate costs in capital acquisition process. 
Ministry of Defence has aligned its acquisition process with Atmanirbhar Bharat clarion 
and it is focused towards enhancing self-reliance in defence production and the 
Indigenisation of spares.  
Some of the measures being undertaken to accelerate defence equipment acquisition are 
simplification of trials based on certification, compression of timelines for capital 
acquisitions and revision of Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020 in the current 
year.  
 
23. The Committee in their original report had felt that the acquisition timeline i.e. 
74-106 weeks/19-26 weeks is a much stretched period of time in terms of strategic 
risk and high level of dynamism in the field of technology and international geo-
political relation.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to 
identify ways and means to accelerate the defence acquisition process without 
compromising transparency and accountability.  The Ministry in their action taken 
replies has stated that the Government is maintaining the highest standard of 
transparency, probity, public accountability and maintaining balance between 
expenditure, procurement, high quality standard and appropriate cost in capital 
acquisition.  The Committee are pleased to note the visible steps taken by the 
Ministry towards “Aatmnirbhar Bharat” in defence production.  The Committee also 
note that the Ministry has taken steps to accelerate defence equipment acquisition 
by simplification of trials, compression of timeline in capital acquisition and 
revision of defence acquisition procedure 2020 in the current year. The 
Committee may be apprised of the effects of all such measures. 
G. Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
 
Recommendation No. 9. 
24.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in 
Defence Procurement cases, the Ministry has taken various measures like 
interactive policy reviews with Indian defence industry, use of certification, 
simulation, visibility of Capability Development Plan to Indian Defence Ecosystem, 
hosting of policy changes, AoNs, RFI, etc. on MoD websites, etc. The Committee 
appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry for ensuring accountability and 
transparency in the Defence Sector but would also recommend the need to warrant 
that all the measures/steps taken are implemented stringently at all levels and a 
robust monitoring mechanism must be formulated for ensuring fair and timely 

12 
 
procurement of weapon systems. At the later stage the Committee may also be 
apprised of the number of cases, if any, when persons were found guilty after 
implementation of guidelines.  
25. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, 
public accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards ensuring 
accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit. Any 
discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for the same. 
26. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry for ensuring accountability 
and transparency in Procurement cases, the Committee in the original Report had 
recommended to ensure stringent implementation of those measures at all level 
and a robust monitoring mechanism to put into place to oversee and ensure timely 
procurement of weapon systems. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the 
number of cases if any, when persons found guilty after implementation of the 
guidelines. The Ministry in the action taken replies has mentioned that all measures 
are being adhered diligently and discrepancies, if noticed are handled as per the 
extant provisions. The Committee may be apprised of the number of such cases 
where persons found guilty. 
 
  

13 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the Defence Budget is 
categorised/grouped under four Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of 
Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – Capital 
Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – Defence Pensions. Demand Nos. 19 and 
22 come under Civil/Pension Estimates and Demand Nos. 20 and 21 constitute Defence 
Services Estimates. Grant Number 20 caters to revenue expenditure which includes 
expenditure on pay & allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, ration, 
petrol, oil and lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms / equipment etc), revenue 
works (which include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and 
taxes, etc) and other miscellaneous expenditure. Grant Number 21 caters to Capital 
expenditure which includes expenditure on land, construction works, plant and machinery, 
equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, 
Dockyards, etc. During the examination of the subject, the Committee find that re-structuring 
of Capital budget has been done with effect from FY 2024-25 wherein budgetary allocation of 
the three Services under common minor heads has been clubbed under the newly introduced 
Sub Major Head 09 i.e Defence services. Allocation under 39 other minor heads which are not 
common to the Services remain unchanged. During the examination of Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for 2024-25, the Committee learn that the total allocated budget for 
the Ministry of Defence for Financial Year 2024-25 is ₹6,21,940.85 Crore. Out of this amount, 
the largest share of 73.12 percent, i.e. ₹4,54,772.67 Crore has been allocated for Defence 
Services Estimates (Grant Number 20 and 21). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
(Grant number 21) has been allocated an amount of₹1,72,000 Crore. An amount of 
₹2,82,772.67 Crore has been allocated to Defence Services Revenue (Grant Number 20). 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry fully agrees with the observations of the Committee.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee note that the capital budget of defence services is bifurcated into capital 
acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays of ₹1,40,691.24 Crore and 
₹31,308.76 Crore respectively in BE 2024-25. The Committee take note of this fact with 
satisfaction that the total capital outlay of Defence services has registered an increase of 5.79 
per cent from that of BE 2023-24. The capital acquisition expenditure which is also known as 

14 
 
the modernisation budget of the Defence Services – Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff – 
reflects an increase of 6.34 per cent in comparison with BE 2023-24. Other than the Capital 
Acquisition segment, which consists of the land and works expenditure of the Armed Forces 
and the capital budget of DRDO, DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & 
Services), has seen an increase of 3.33 percent when compared to BE 2023-24.At this stage, 
the Committee desire that the total Capital Outlay projected for Revised Estimates 2024-25 be 
allocated so as to maintain upward trajectory of Capital budget allocation for the Defence 
Services.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of 
₹1,72,000.00Crore under Capital Head. However, this allocation has been reduced to 
₹1,59,500.00 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption capacity of the 
Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year and overall resource envelope 
available and pressing demands of other Ministries etc. Having said that, it may also be noted 
that if need be, additional funds can be sought at Supplementary stage. The progress of 
expenditure is reviewed from time to time to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally 
utilized towards operational activities so that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired 
without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
 
Utilisation of Capital budget  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee learn that the total allocation under Capital Head at Revised Estimates 2023-
24 to Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services) 
and R&D stood at ₹33,412.16 Crore, ₹51,052.18 Crore, ₹58,500.51 Crore, ₹1,396.18 Crore, 
₹1,310.50 Crore and ₹12,942.85 Crore, respectively. The Committee, on examination of the 
budgetary documents in connection with DFG 2024-25, find that barring Army and Joint staff, 
the other Services and Organizations are able to fully utilize the funds allocated at RE 2023-
24 for Capital Budget.While noting that about 65 percent of the grants could be utilized till the 
completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year, the Committee would like to be apprised 
as to what are the plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for utilizing the remaining 35 
percent until the time this Financial Year draws to a close. The Committee, at this stage, hope 
that the Ministry would undertake a pragmatic approach while seeking further allocations at 
RE stage for making a realistic assessment of the allocations sought.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee may be apprised that necessary measures are taken for modernization 
of the Armed Forces, through procurement of new equipment and upgrading of existing 
equipment and systems. The modernization projects are being progressed as per the 
approved Capital Acquisition Plans and in terms of the extant Defence Procurement 
Procedure. Further, Acquisition Wing, being a specialist organization created on the basis of 
the Kargil Committee Report and recommendations of the Group of Ministers looks after all 
capital acquisition projects from inception to finality. In addition, the Defence Procurement 
Board, which is chaired by Defence Secretary and the Defence Acquisition Council headed by 
RakshaMantri comprising of all stakeholders, monitor adherence to broad timelines in 
Defence Procurement.   
2. In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,72,000 Crore 
under Capital Head. However, this allocation has been reduced to ₹1,59,500 Crore at RE 
2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption capacity of the Services, pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year and overall resource envelope available etc.Further, 
it may be stated that allocation made for defence under Capital Head is adequate to sustain 
the desired level of defence preparedness. If required, based on expenditure during the year, 
pending committed liabilities and critical/operational requirements, threat perception etc., 
additional funds are sought at Supplementary stage. The progress of expenditure is reviewed 
from time to time to ensure that the allocated funds are optimally utilized towards operational 
activities so that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services  
 
Recommendation No. 4 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection with 
examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2024-25, the Committee note that since 
2019-20 onwards, the 'Revenue' component of the total outlay for the three Services 
overshadows the 'Capital’ component significantly. The overall ‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of 
the budgetary allocation for the Services stands at 66:34, 61:39, 64:36, 65:35, 66:34 and 
67:33 for 2019- 20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24, respectively. For 2024-25, this 
‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary allocation stands at 66:34. The Committee are 
given to understand that Revenue expenditure (Demand No. 20) includes expenditure on pay 
& allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, rations, petrol, oil and 
lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms/equipment etc.), revenue works (which 
include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and taxes, etc) 
and other miscellaneous expenditure; Capital expenditure includes expenditure on land, 
construction works, plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval 
Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc.In the considered view of the Committee, 
both Revenue and Capital expenditure play significant roles in operational preparedness of 

16 
 
our Forces. Therefore, the Committee hope that allocations under Capital head need to be 
suitably matched to balance the ratio of Revenue and Capital outlay for the Services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In BE 2019-20, M/o Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,03,394.31 Crore 
under Capital Head which is enhanced by ₹68,605.69 Crore (66.35%) to ₹1,72,000 Crore in 
BE 2024-25. On the other hand, allocation to M/o Defence under Revenue Head has 
increased by ₹80,870.91 Crore (40.05%) in BE 2024-25 from BE 2019-20 allocation of 
₹2,01,901.76 Crore. It may be seen that the allocation made under Capital Head has seen a 
bigger jump than the allocation made under Revenue Head in the last five years. Further, the 
Committee may be apprised that allocation made to Ministry of Defence under Revenue Head 
is more than the allocation under Capital Head as a large portion of the funds allocated under 
Revenue Head is spent on the pay and allowances of the employees.  
 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee glean through the available facts before them that the Modernisation of 
Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the Defence budget. Modernisation 
involves the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, technologies and weapon systems 
to upgrade and augment defence capabilities. It is a continuous process based on threat 
perception, operational challenges and technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a 
state of readiness to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges. The equipment 
requirements of the Armed Forces are planned and progressed through a detailed process 
which includes 15 Year Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a 5 year Service-
wise Capability Acquisition Plan, a 2 year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by 
the Defence Acquisition Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee note that in 
2024-25, out of the amount of ₹1,72,000 Crore allocated for Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services for the Services/Organisations covered under Defence Services Estimates, 
₹1,40,691.24 Crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition /Modernisation Head of the three 
Services viz. Army, Navy (including Joint Staff) and Air Force.The Committee also find that 
the allocation for Modernisation Head of the Services has seen an increase of ₹8,000 Crore 
from BE 2023-24. Keeping in view the need for maintaining credible war deterrence at all 
times, the Committee recommend that enhanced budgetary allocation, if sought, under 
Capital Head for modernization purpose at Revised Estimates 2024-25 may be given to 
ensure state-of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for the Armed Forces. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,40,691.24 
Crore under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. However, this allocation has been 

17 
 
reduced to ₹1,30,916.35 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource 
envelope available etc.. However, if required, additional funds will be sought at supplementary 
stage to meet any liability arisen out of conclusion of new scheme(s) in the current financial 
year. In addition to this any expected cash outgo in the last days of the Financial Year as 
conclusion of new schemes or against committed liability is planned on priority in the first 
quarter. Therefore, all efforts are made to ensure that acquisition of the equipments/weapons 
do not suffer due to want of funds till the end of the Financial Year.  
 
Committed Liabilities and New Schemes 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee also learn that Committed Liability means payments anticipated during a 
financial year in respect of contracts concluded in previous years and holds first charge on the 
budget allocation. Committed Liabilities constitute a significant element in respect of the 
capital acquisition segment, since one project may span several financial years. New 
Schemes include new projects/proposals which are at various stages of approval and are 
likely to be approved and contracts concluded during the year. The Committee further learn 
that in the Defence Services Estimates (DSE), there is no separate allocation of funds for 
Committed Liabilities (CL) and New Schemes (NS) and these are catered through the Capital 
Acquisition (Modernization) budget. In the current financial year 2024-25, an amount of 
₹1,40,691.24 Crore is allocated in BE 2024-25 under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) 
Head. The Committee are satisfied to note that there is no gap between projection and 
allocation in BE 2024-25 under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head for the three 
Services. The Committee at this stage can only recommend that like for BE 2024-25, 
projected amount under this Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Head at Revised Estimates 
stage of 2024-25 may be favourably considered by the Ministry to ensure unhampered and 
continuous modernization process of the Defence Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2024-25, Ministry of Defence had been allocated an amount of ₹1,40,691.24 
Crore under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. However, this allocation has been 
revised to ₹1,30,916.35 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage by M/o Finance based on absorption 
capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall resource 
envelope available etc. However, if required, additional funds will be sought at supplementary 
stage to ensure unhampered and continuous modernization process of the Defence Forces. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the 
Armed Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting the 
security and operational needs. The thrust remain to buy contemporary armaments in a 

18 
 
time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make India self-reliant in 
defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to develop India as a global defence 
manufacturing hub. The policy is implemented through the mechanism of Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find that the Defence Procurement 
Procedure 2016 has been revised as Defence Acquisition Procedure 2020 which is driven 
by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as part of Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In 
order to promote indigenous design and development of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian-
IDDM (Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured)}’ category which was 
introduced in 2016 and was accorded top most priority for procurement of capital 
equipment, has been retained in DAP 2020. The Committee were also informed that 
Ministry of Defence has notified a second positive Indigenization List comprising 108 
items for which there would be an interim embargo on the import.  Some special features, 
which have been included in the DAP 2020 are special chapters on Information and 
Communication Technology requiring more security, ruggedness as well as technological 
obsolescence in a faster timeframe. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that 
the last Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) came out in 2016 and is presently under 
revision to incorporate the latest orders and other developments.  The Ministry in its 
submission has stated that it has been revised nine times during last 11 years and due to 
diversity of our geographical terrain the procurement manual has to cater for all 
eventualities. Though the Committee take cognizance of the fact that the requirements of 
each of the armed forces are very complex yet the Committee expect that the Ministry to 
accelerate the revision of Manual on Defence Acquisition Procedure as this will not only 
put the procedure for procuring fast track the arms, ammunition and defence equipment in 
fast lane but also propel the country towards self-reliance. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that time bound and determined efforts must be made by all stakeholders 
involved in the process of procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces 
and private sector as this is vital for realization of the goal of self reliance in Defence 
Sector. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces are 
sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. Capital Acquisition for the 
Indian Armed Forces is made as per guidelines under the Defence Acquisition Procedure 
(DAP), 2020 which is a flexible document continuously evolving on the basis of 
operational experience, changing threat perceptions and technological advancements. 
Continuous review of DAP ensures that hurdles in speedier acquisitions are identified and 
removed swiftly which ultimately reduces the acquisition cycle.  DAP 2020 has been kept 
updated via Business Processing Reengineering (BPR) wherein 103 amendments have 
been carried out to align the same towards more efficient and effective processes. For 
promoting indigenous defence industry, following amendments were made to DAP-2020: 
- 
 
(d) Increased Indigenous Content (IC) in various categories of procurement 
under DAP-2020. Inclusion of provision for minimum 50% IC in the form of 

19 
 
indigenous material/ components/ software in the equipment being acquired with 
an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce import dependency. 
(e) Notification of ‘Positive Indigenisation Lists’ on a periodic basis to promote 
Aatmanirbharta. Five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 platforms/ 
equipment have been issued. 
(f) Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with “No foreign sourcing”. 
Foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council. 
 
A comprehensive review of DAP 2020 is due in the current year to ensure timely 
acquisitions in transparent manner. 
 
Further, 64.09% of the total capital budget has been earmarked for domestic 
Capital procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% for FY 2022-23 and 
75% for FY 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
 
Recommendation No. 8. 
 The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that acquisition 
time line is 74-106 Weeks/19-26 Months, which according to the Committee is a much 
stretched period of time in terms of strategic risks involved. The Committee is of the view 
that with high level of dynamism in the field of technology such a long timeline can result 
in technology becoming obsolete and redundant hence directly having adverse impact on 
the security of the country. Furthermore, the dynamism of international geopolitics 
relations can also threaten the acquisition through traditional channels and allies which is 
evident in the recent Russo-Ukraine War. Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in 
terms of technological development and global relations, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should try to identify ways in which the defence equipment acquisition can be 
accelerated without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the process. 
This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as deterrent for hostile 
countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is maintaining the highest standards of transparency, probity, 
public accountability and a balance between competing requirements such as expeditious 
procurement, high quality standards and appropriate costs in capital acquisition process. 
Ministry of Defence has aligned its acquisition process with Atmanirbhar Bharat clarion 
and it is focused towards enhancing self-reliance in defence production and the 
Indigenisation of spares.  
 
Some of the measures being undertaken to accelerate defence equipment 
acquisition are simplification of trials based on certification, compression of timelines for 
capital acquisitions and revision of Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020 in the 
current year.  

20 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9. 
 The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in Defence 
Procurement cases, the Ministry has taken various measures like interactive policy 
reviews with Indian defence industry, use of certification, simulation, visibility of Capability 
Development Plan to Indian Defence Ecosystem, hosting of policy changes, AoNs, RFI, 
etc. on MoD websites, etc. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Ministry for 
ensuring accountability and transparency in the Defence Sector but would also 
recommend the need to warrant that all the measures/steps taken are implemented 
stringently at all levels and a robust monitoring mechanism must be formulated for 
ensuring fair and timely procurement of weapon systems. At the later stage the 
Committee may also be apprised of the number of cases, if any, when persons were 
found guilty after implementation of guidelines.  
Replyof the Government 
 All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence (MoD) to promote probity, 
public accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards ensuring 
accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit. Any 
discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for the same.  
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that to ensure level-playing field for private defence industry 
vis-a-vis the DPSUs, various measures like enhanced opportunities through DND 
categories which have been given to the private industry since the Ordinance Factory 
Board (OFB) has been corporatized, there are seven DPSUs which have been added, 
and there has been a parity in securities and payment terms between the DPSUs and 
bank guarantees which were earlier five to ten per cent were reduced to three per cent 
and they remain at three per cent as on today. The Committee applaud the initiatives 
taken to attract the private enterprisers in the defence sector but there is still a lot more to 
be done in this direction. Amongst the private players in defence sector, the Committee 
prescribe that the Ministry should try to encourage indigenous private enterprises instead 
of foreign conglomerates. Considering long and arduous gestation period in defence 
manufacturing sector, the Committee would recommend the Ministry to enhance capital 
procurement and augment design and research assistance for indigenous players in order 
to create vibrant indigenous privatise defence manufacturing hub which is also the 
essence of the AtmaNirbhar Bharat program. The Committee would also like to point that 
existence of flourishing private defence sector would necessitate the need for articulated 
design and patent laws synchronised with the unique needs of defence manufacturing 
sector.  
 
 
 

21 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Ministry has launched various schemes to encourage indigenous private 
enterprises instead of foreign conglomerates like the launch of Innovations for Defence 
Excellence (iDEX), Make Schemes (Make I, Make II & Make III) & Technology 
Development Fund (TDF). 
 
2. The Ministry encourages participation in R&D by Indian Industries. Buy (Indian-
IDDM) has been given the highest priority for capital acquisition of Defence Equipment, as 
per DAP-2020.  
 
3. Patents obtained by DRDO are available on DRDO website for use by industries, 
which are available free of cost to the industry. Ownership of IPR generated in iDEX and 
Make cases is also provided to the Industry. Ministry monitors the IPRs filed and granted 
in case of Indian designs developed by DPSUs and Industry under “Mission RakshaGyan 
Shakti”. A dedicated IP cell has been created in the MoD. 
 
4. Department of Military Affairs (DMA), Ministry of Defence, has notified five Positive 
Indigenisation Lists (PILs) comprising of 509 items. These include some high technology 
weapon systems like artillery guns, assault rifles, corvettes, sonar systems, transport 
aircrafts, light combat helicopters (LCHs), radars, wheeled armoured platform, rockets, 
bombs, armoured command post vehicle, armoured dozer and many other items to fulfil 
the needs of our Defence Services. To minimize import by DPSUs, DDP/MoD has also 
notified five Positive Indigenisation list of total 5012 major LRUs/ sub-systems/ 
assemblies/sub-assemblies/ spares & components. The timelines beyond which these 
items will be procured from domestic industry only, has also been given in these lists. As 
on 01.12.2024, 3010 items out of 5012 have been indigenised. 
 
5.  For providing opportunities to Indian industry under ‘Make in India’ in Defence a 
portal, namely SRIJAN DEFENCE has been launched in August 2020 for 
DPSUs/Services with an industry interface to provide development support to MSMEs/ 
Startups/ Industry for import substitution.  
 
  
Recommendation No. 11. 
 
The capital procurement of Defence equipment from Indian and foreign vendors is 
carried out as per the provisions of the Defence Procurement Procedure. Defence 
equipment is being imported from various countries as per the operational requirements of 
Armed Forces. The committee have been informed that during the last financial year 
(2023-24) and current Financial year 2024-25 (upto September, 2024), total 271 capital 
acquisition contracts have been signed for capital procurement of defence equipment for 
Armed forces, out of which 6 contracts have been signed with vendors from foreign 
countries (Russia and USA) for capital procurement of defence equipment. The major 

22 
 
Defence equipment imported includes Assault Rifles, Missiles, etc. The committee also 
note that the value of foreign capital procurement has also gone down drastically during 
the last three years and current year. All these data show that dependence on foreign 
Suppliers is decreasing substantially thus committee is hopeful that India would soon 
become self-reliant in defence sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
This is a statement. Ministry of Defence as a whole is committed to               Atma-
Nirbharta in Defence. 
 
Self Reliance and Make in India 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee note that the ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government is devised 
to transform India into a global design and manufacturing hub. ‘Make in India’ in defence 
sector is primarily driven by providing preference to procurement from Indian vendors 
under the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), promoting indigenous design, 
development and manufacture of defence equipment, and other policy measures such as 
launch of iDEX and ADITI, simplification of Make procedure, introduction of simplified 
procedure for Make-II sub category, liberalization of the licensing regime and FDI policy 
by raising the cap on FDI in the defence sector, simplification of export procedure, 
streamlining of defence offset guidelines, creation of level playing field between public and 
private sector, formulation of outsourcing and vendor development guidelines, setting up 
of ‘Technology Development Fund’ to public and private sector industry especially 
Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME) etc.  The proposals for capital acquisition 
in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) are categorized as ‘Buy (Indian-IDDM)’, Buy 
(Indian)’,‘Buy …and Make (Indian)’ & ‘Buy and Make’ with preference over ‘Buy (Global)’ 
category, to make the country self-reliant in defence production after deliberations in 
various Committees such as SPB/ DPB/ DAC. The Ministry has also made allocation of 
75% per cent of Modernization Defence Budget for Domestic Procurement in financial 
year 2024-25. Similarly, for promoting ‘Make in India’ several policy measures have been 
taken by way of revising FDI policy, enhancing indigenous/local contents to minimum 
50%, creation of Defence Industrial Corridors in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and 
delivery of offsets through Indian partners with higher multipliers etc. The Committee are 
happy with the progress being made towards promotion of Make In India and making 
India Atmanirbhar in defence sector. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry is thankful to the Committee for recognizing and appreciating efforts of 
Deptt/Ministry for promoting “Make in India” &AtmanirbharBhart. 
 
 

23 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee note that the Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were 
introduced in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee.  The Offset guidelines in DPP have been amended 
6 times thereafter. As per Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP 2020) offset provisions 
are applicable only on “Buy Global” categories of capital acquisitions. They apply in 
capital acquisition contracts which are more than Rs. 2,000 Crore.  However, the offsets 
are not applicable to procurements under “Fast Track Procedure” and in “Option Clause” 
cases if the same was not envisaged in the original contract. Further no offsets will be 
applicable in all ab-initio Single Vendor Cases including procurements based on Inter 
Governmental Agreements/Foreign Military Sales (IGA/FMS) and the offset applicability 
on Indian companies under ‘Buy Global’ cases do not arise in case the indigenization 
component is 30% or more. The Committee also note that offset contracts are co-
terminus with the main procurement contract and signed along with the main procurement 
contract after approval of Competent Financial Authority (CFA) and the period of offset 
discharge can be extended on exceptional ground by a maximum period of two years. 
Further the DAP stipulates eligible products/services for discharge of offset obligations 
which covers defence products and Maintenance, Repair and Operations (MRO) related 
to helicopters and aircrafts. Though the responsibility for fulfilment of offsets obligations 
lies with the main vendor, however, the vendor is permitted to discharge his obligations 
through Tier 1 sub-vendors based on their work share. In case of investment and/or 
transfer of technology the offset discharge can be permitted by entities other than 
vendor/Tier-I Sub-vendor on case to case basis and the vendors are free to select their 
Indian Offset Partners (IOP) from DPSU/OFB/DRDO/Private Industry.  The Offset Policy 
further allows vendors to submit offset details at later stage after signing of the contract 
i.e. either at the time of seeking offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset 
obligations.  
The Committee are given to understand that the vendors have been expressing 
difficulties in providing the details of Indian Offset Partners, products and work share 
along with supporting documents in the technical offset proposal as per offset guidelines 
at Technical Offset Evaluation Committee (TOEC) stage, sighting that these activities 
would be undertaken number of years later which would then cause seeking changes to 
the contract. Another major challenge towards post contract management had been timely 
and meaningful disposal of contract amendment requests received from the vendors for 
change of IOP/Product etc. The resolution of these issues have been catered for by 
introducing an amendment to the offset guidelines with the approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council, whereby vendors have been given an option to provide details of 
IOPs and products even after signing of contracts, thereby making it more realistic. 
Although the Committee appreciate the fact that the process for contract amendment has 
been made flexible by allowing change of Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) and offset 
components, for the signed contracts yet there is scope for the Ministry to strive further 
towards effective implementation of offset guidelines based on the feedback received 
from the vendors at the grass-root level. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 

24 
 
Ministry of Defence play more proactive role in selection of offset partners since the 
inception of such agreement in order to avert any kind of breach of offset agreement at 
any level. Furthermore, the Committee is in total concurrence that the success of 
indigenization of defence sector is adhered to fulfilment of offset agreement in toto. 
Additionally, therefore the Committee recommend that Ministry should work out a 
mechanism to ensure that all the offset agreements are implemented thoroughly at all 
level to give momentum to indigenization programmes. The violators of offset agreement 
may be penalized appropriately keeping the security perception in mind. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
1. As per the Defence Offset Guidelines under extant DPP/DAP, the Vendor/Tier–1 
sub vendor will be free to select the Indian Offset Partner (IOP) for implementing the 
offset obligation. The function of Defence Offset Management Wing (DOMW) in the 
Ministry includes assisting vendors in interfacing with Indian Industry. Ministry is 
organizing Conclaves/Webinars/Seminars/Interactive Sessions primarily through Industry 
Associations to facilitate interface of vendors with Indian defence companies. 
2. Ministry has streamlined the process of management of offset contracts through 
digitisation of the offset claim submission, audit, verification and calculation of shortfalls. 
This has enhanced transparency, accountability and efficiency in offset management. 
3. For unfulfilled offset obligations, the vendors are penalized as per the terms and 
conditions of the offset contracts governed by the applicable Defence Procurement 
Procedure. 
 
 
Foreign Direct Investment 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
The committee note the Government has reviewed the Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) policy in Defence sector in September 2020 thereby allowing FDI under Automatic 
Route up to 74% and beyond 74% through Government Route wherever it is likely to 
result in access to Modern technology or for other reasons to be recorded. The 
Committee note that this FDI limit was increased from 49% to 74% to ensure that it will 
come along with the technology also and the FDI limit has also been made attractive 
enough as it facilitate up to 100% through Government Route. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry should ensure that despite raising the limits of FDI to as 
high as 74%, the purpose of self -reliance should not be hampered. Furthermore, the 
Committee note that current FDI policy facilitate up to 100 per cent by Government route 
wherever, it is likely to result in access to modern technology or for other reasons to be 
recorded. The Ministry also submitted that consequently increasing FDI through automatic 
route to 100 per cent will nullify the ownership of domestic partner. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that in addition to the measures taken for making FDI more 
attractive, focused efforts may be undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen indigenous 

25 
 
R&D base of the country and increase coordination between the public and private sector 
within the country, so that the indigenous defence sector is encouraged to develop and 
manufacture technologies/systems/accessories independently which are presently being 
acquired through the FDI route. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to boost Research & Development infrastructure in the country, Ministry of 
Defence has taken various measures so that the indigenous defence sector is 
encouraged to develop & manufacture technologies/systems/accessories. The initiatives 
inter-alia include Buy (Indian-IDDM) has been accorded top priority for procurement of 
capital equipment; Simplification of Make Procedure; Launch of Innovations for Defence 
Excellence (iDEX) scheme involving startups& Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs); Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, startups 
and academia; implementation of New Transfer of Technology Policy; Contest to Support 
Start Ups & Innovators; Exclusive Technologies/Systems for industry to develop, 
Provisional access to domestic industry to test facilities of DRDO; Free access for Indian 
Industry to DRDO Patents, MoU with Defence Industrial Corridor to impact skill training, 
hand holding & guidance; To augment the knowledge potential, DRDO is imparting 
Apprenticeship scheme & Internship training. 
 
Recommendation No.15 
 The Committee note that the Defence Planning process caters to the need of the 
current and future modernization need of the Armed Forces. The Committee understand 
that since this is an exhaustive process involving lot of internal and external variables of 
dynamic nature, it needs to be dynamic and adaptive. The Committee have been 
informed that keeping in mind the diverse need of all the three services, Headquarters 
Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) had been made as a single point contact to ensure a 
joint planning for all the three services. The Committee are happy to note that HQ IDS has 
developed Integrated Capability Development System (ICDS) which carries out the 
defence planning through an interactive process. The committee have been informed that 
Integrated Capability Development Plan will be prepared which will comprise Five Year 
Defence Acquisition plan and Two-Year Annual Acquisition Plan which will factor in 
budgetary projections. The committee would like to be informed of the current status of 
ICDP as well as the benefits accrued due to this plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 With an aim to achieve the objectives of Joint Capability Planning, a framework 
bound process termed as Integrated Capability Development System (ICADS) has been 
adopted. ICADS is a five-stage process and deliverables of the process are the 10 Year 
Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP), two 5 Year Defence Capital Acquisition 
Plans (DCAP) and Two Year Roll-On Annual Acquisition Plans (AAP). Presently, Stage-III 
of ICADS is in progress. ICDP post approval and promulgation, will enhance Integration 
and Jointness in Capability Planning leading to identification/acquisition of modern 
capabilities and technologies required by the three Services in consonance with the likely 

26 
 
budgetary support from the Government. This strategic roadmap will not merely be a list 
of acquisitions but a meticulously crafted plan emanating from higher directives and 
aligned with long-term defence objectives. ICADS would address the specific needs of the 
armed forces identified through rigorous threat assessments and capability gap analyses, 
ensuring a holistic approach to capability enhancement, primarily through “Make in India” 
initiative of GoI. 
 

27 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
-Nil- 

28 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

29 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
5 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14  Sravana, 1947 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence 
 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1600 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 1, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
16 Shri Naresh Bansal 
17 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
18 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
19 Shri Praful Patel 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

31 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar    - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the 
draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2024-25 and briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the 
subject ‘Consolidation of Defence lands by Defence Estates Organization and working 
of Cantonment Boards’.  
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, 
Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 
22)’;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 

32 
 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services) – New DPSUs and Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21). 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him.  
 
5. ***********         ***********        **********      ******   ******** 
 
 
 
 
 
               The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****Does not pertain to the Reports 

33 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT (18TH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2024-25 ON ‘CAPITAL 
OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, PROCUREMENT POLICY AND DEFENCE 
PLANNING (DEMAND NO. 21)’. 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             15 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15         
   Total  : 15 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:0 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 