i 
 
14 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on 
‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on 
‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) ……………………....….  iv 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 
 
 vi 
CHAPTER  I   Report…………………………………………………………….. 
 
 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 8 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
                        Government 
 
 22 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
 23 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final  
 replies of the Government are still awaited  
 24 
   
APPENDICES 
 
  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2024-25) held on 5th August, 2025. 
 
 25 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/      
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’ 
 
 
 28 
 
            
  
 
 
  
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
*Shri N. Chandrasegharan ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25) w.e.f. 25 July, 2025 
consequent upon cessation of his Membership of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2025.
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Naveen Jain 
26 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27 Shri Praful Patel 
28 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
29 Shri Sanjay Singh 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31 Vacant* 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen* - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vikas Kumar  - Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      *served in the Committee Branch till 14.07.2025 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee 
on Defence (18th Lok Sabha)  on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs 
and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’.  
2.  The Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2024. The Report contained 10 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in March, 2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 5th August, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  
 
 

vii 
 
 
 

viii 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024. 
 2.        The 4thReport (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 10 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No. Subject 
 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs 
 
1 Budget 
2 Budget for modernisation 
3 Order Book Position 
4 Research and Development Expenditure  
5 Indigenisation 
6 Export 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
7 Budget  
8-9 DRDO collaboration with private industries 
10 Self-reliance and indigenization   
   
3.        The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 10 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on            7th 
March, 2025. Replies to all the recommendations have been examined and categorized 
as follows: 
 
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Para Nos.   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and 10. 
  
              (Total - 10) 
 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 

2 
 
Para Nos. –Nil- 
(Total – Nil)  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
            Para Nos.    -Nil-  
(Total - Nil) 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                      (Total - Nil) 
 
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
 
 
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations/recommendations made in the Fourth Report of the Committee in the 
succeeding Paragraphs. 
 
 
Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs 
 
A.        Budget for Modernisation: 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
  
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 During the oral evidence, the representatives of the new DPSUs apprised the 
Committee about various measures being taken i.e. renewal, reconditioning and 
acquisition of high value/heavy duty Plant and Machinery (P&M), 
creating/developing infrastructure etc. to keep pace with contemporary 
manufacturing technologies and to modernize manufacturing Units under them. 
While going through the budget given for modernisation of the new DPSUs, the 
Committee find that during the financial year 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-
25, Rs. 1643 crore, Rs. 1310 crore, Rs. 1310 crore and Rs. 1494 crore were given to 
these DPSUs respectively. The Ministry further informed that out of the total of Rs. 
5757 crores till date, the new DPSUs have incurred cumulative expenditure of Rs. 
2887.43 crore till 30.08.2024. The Committee are of considered view that the 
foremost need of the new DPSUs is modernization and undertaking technology  

3 
 
upgradation. They, therefore, hope that the remaining grant of the modernization 
budget will be utilized by the new DPSUs prudently and productively. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the concrete steps taken in this regard. 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
Out of the total of Rs. 5757 crores distributed till FY 2024-25, the new DPSUs have 
incurred cumulative expenditure of Rs. 3396.91 crore till 31.01.2025. Further, in order to 
ensure efficient utilisation of Capex fund, regular review meetings are held in the 
Department to review the Capex utilisation and initiatives taken by the new DPSUs to 
modernise and upgrade the production facilities, with a commitment to focus on cost and 
quality of the products being manufactured by them. Also, broad guidelines have been 
issued to all the 7 new DPSUs to plan projects under Capex considering following 
aspects: 
i. Long term demand of products 
ii. Modernisation of production lines with latest technologies 
iii. Improving the infrastructure inside the factory 
iv. Improving the Quality of products 
v. Research & Development of niche technologies 
vi. Improving infrastructure in Estate 
Since, the new DPSUs have started their business w.e.f. 01.10.2021, hence they 
did not satisfy the stipulated eligibility criteria set by Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE), and therefore, with the approval of EGoM, delegation of financial powers to incur 
capital expenditure of Rs. 250 Cr have been extended to the Boards of these 7 new 
DPSUs, as an interim measure for the efficient working of these DPSUs, for a period of 
three years. 
Furthermore, new DPSUs have been making concerted efforts in achieving 
Aatmanirbharta in production of existing products as well as in the development of new 
products with niche technologies to meet futuristic requirement of the Armed Forces.  
 
8. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation for prudent 
and productive utilization of the remaining grant of the modernization budget by the 
new DPSUs, regular review meetings have been held in the department to review 
CAPEX utilization and also to review the initiatives undertaken by the new DPSUs 
to modernize and upgrade the production facilities. They are also happy to note 
that the review meetings focused on the commitment of the new DPSUs towards 
cost and quality of the products being manufactured by them. The Committee also 
find that the issue of broad guidelines for all the new DPSUs to plan their projects 
under CAPEX is, yet another positive development towards utilization of the Budget 
for Modernization. Moreover, the committee feel that the wide gamut of aspects 

4 
 
covered under the guidelines will certainly motivate the new DPSUs not merely to 
modernize their product and technologies, but will also encourage to broad base 
their R&D of niche technologies. Appreciating the steps taken by the department in 
consonance with their recommendation contained in their report, the Committee 
wish to be informed of the planned projects undertaken by the 7 new DPSUs while 
utilizing the remaining grant of the budget towards achieving modernization and 
technology upgradation. 
B. Export 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
9. The Committee are happy to note that export value of the new DPSUs jumped to 
1976.51 cr. in 2023-24 from a meagre Rs.82.18 cr. during the previous year 2022-23. 
The Committee also find that the present order book position of MIL & YIL are 
Rs.6100 cr. and 1915 cr. approximately, which indicates a positive trend for future. 
Anticipating that these two new DPSUs will achieve their targeted development 
soon, they also hope that the remaining new DPSUs will also strive to achieve 
similar targets in their future manufacturing activities. 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
In order to boost exports and increase global presence, New DPSUs have identified major 
target countries and exportable products as per the target country's existing and futuristic 
requirements. Like MIL & YIL, AWEIL has also successfully established a customer base 
in Asia, Africa, North America and Europe and has secured export orders of more than 
Rs. 600 crore, since its incorporation. As on 31.01.2025, the cumulative Exports book of 
the new DPSUs is more than Rs. 8500 crore. 
Further, the new DPSUs are making efforts in expanding its global footprints by focusing 
on competitive prices, promotion & marketing through direct engagement with potential 
customers, engaging channel partners, participation-in international exhibitions and 
interaction with foreign OEMs for getting exports order. 
 

5 
 
Also, the new DPSUs are proactively pursing various leads received from Government 
and other channels and are also in close contact with the Indian Defence Attachés posted 
abroad in Indian embassies and Missions for assistance in marketing their products. 
11.  The Committee are happy to note that in order to boost exports and increase 
global presence, the new DPSUs have identified major target countries and 
explorable products. They also find that besides MIL and YIL, AWEIL has also 
successfully established a customer base in Asia, Africa, North America and 
Europe and have secured export orders of more than Rs. 600 cr. since its 
incorporation. The reply of the govt. vociferously eulogizes the fact that the new 
DPSUs are making sincere efforts in expanding their global footprints by series of 
activities inter-alia participating in international exhibitions and interactions with 
foreign OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers) for getting export orders. The 
Committee also note that the new DPSUS are proactively pursuing various leads 
received for govt. and other channels and are in close contact with the Indian 
Defense Attaché posted abroad in Indian embassies and missions for assistance in 
marketing their products. Appreciating the efforts being made by the new DPSUs, 
the Committee, at this stage, would like to be informed of the value of export orders 
being secured by the new DPSUs because of such outstanding efforts. 
C.        Defence Research and Development Organisation 
Budget 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7) 
 
 
12. The Committee find that during the year 2024-25 Rs. 23855.61 crore was 
allocated which is 5.25% of the current Defence Budget. The Committee have been 
informed that DRDO has identified 183 exclusive systems for development by 
industry which will not be taken up by DRDO and this will substantially cut 
expenditure on development of technologies. 
The Committee also find that DRDO envisages to take up 
projects/programme for development of technologies for large warfare systems, 
platforms and sensors in future. The Committee hope that the budgetary allocation 
will sufficiently cater to the R&D needs of DRDO and expect that the Ministry would 
provide additional grant at supplementary stage, if need be, in future.  
The Committee are of the view that the modern warfare 
applications/platforms/systems have drastically changed due to the introduction of 
kinetic and non-kinetic hybrid mode. They, therefore, recommend that DRDO 

6 
 
should explore new areas of research not only to counter such threats but make 
the forces ready for such threat perceptions amalgamating the fast changing 
scenario.  
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
DRDO concentrates on the design and development of critical and advanced 
technologies, as well as complex systems which industry does not do due to ‘high risk’ 
and ‘high cost’. This focus aligns with DRDO's core competencies and ensures that it is at 
the forefront of cutting-edge Defence technology development. 
DRDO has started developing products through a number of new mechanisms such as 
Technology Development Fund (TDF), Development cum Production Partner (DcPP) and 
through DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoE) 
This year, competent authority has finalized following deep tech areas to be given impetus 
in R&D: 
i. Artificial Intelligence 
ii. Cognitive Technology 
iii. Quantum Technology 
iv. Neuromorphic Computing 
v. Military Cyber Technology 
vi. Advanced Materials 
vii. III-V Compound Semiconductor 
viii. Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Technologies  
Projects are being focused in these areas. 
 
14.  The Committee note that their concern for drastic change in the modern 
warfare tactics owing to the introduction of kinetic and non-kinetic format and the 
Committee's recommendation for DRDO to explore new areas of research has been 
aptly responded to by the Ministry. From the reply furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee find that DRDO concentrates on the design and development of critical 
and advanced technologies as well as complex systems which industry does not 
do due to 'high risk' and 'high cost', which eloquently speaks of DRDO's high 
degree of commitment and competencies. The Committee also note that besides 
commencing development of products through a number of mechanisms such as 

7 
 
TDF (Technology Development Fund), DCPP (Development cum Production 
Partner), DIA-COE (DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence), DRDO has 
finalized several deep tech areas such as Artificial Intelligence (Al), Quantum 
technology, Advanced Materials, III-V Compound Semiconductor etc. for providing 
further impetus in R&D. The Committee are of the considered view that DRDO will 
certainly achieve high degree of success in the new areas of research identified to 
make our forces further-ready. They would like to be informed of the tangible 
benefits accrued to the armed forces as a result of progress made by DRDO in the 
new areas of research. 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  

8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Budget 
Recommendation No.1: 
 Consequent to the gleening through of all the information available before the 
Committee, they note that consequent to the corporatization of OFB, the Directorate of 
Ordnance (Coordination & Services) has been constituted under Department of Defence 
Production, Ministry of Defence w.e.f. 01.10.2021. On scrutiny of budget grants for 
preceding years, the Committee find that in 2022-23, i.e. post-corporatization of OFB, an 
amount of Rs. 4212.00 crore was allocated in RE to the Directorate of Ordnance, out of 
which, an expenditure of Rs. 2845.71 crore has been incurred upto December, 2022. This 
means that an amount of Rs. 1366.29 crore remained unutilized in financial year 2022-23. 
Meanwhile, a projection of Rs. 1310 crore has been made by the Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services) for the year 2023-24. During oral evidence a representative 
of the Ministry also apprised that Rs. 2500 crore have been kept as Emergency 
Authorization Fund in RE 2020-21 and RE 2021-22. The Committee at this stage 
recommend that the amount allocated would now be prudently distributed on accrued 
liabilities and the modernization of the newly created DPSUs. In this regard, the 
Committee wish to be informed about Modified Allocation (MA) at the time of submitting 
Action Taken Replies. 
Reply of the Government 
Post-corporatization of OFB, Directorate of Ordnance was allocated Rs. 4212.00 
crore in RE 2022-23, out of which, an expenditure of Rs. 2845.71 crore was incurred up to 
December, 2022. This expenditure includes Rs. 2500 crore of Emergency Authorisation 
Fund to new DPSUs, which were released to new DPSUs and Rs. 287.11 crore for the 
revenue expenditure of this Directorate. However, under capital head, the booking was 
Rs. 3810 crore against allocation of Rs. 3810.10 crore in Modified Allocation (MA) for 
2022-23. The details of Modified Allocation (MA) and the expenditure booking of the 
Directorate for FY 2022-23 are as under: 
Head Modified Allocation (MA) 
(Rs in Crore) 
All India Compilation (AIC) 
Booking (Rs in Crore) 
Revenue Rs 384.00  Rs 359.92 
Receipts/Recoveries Rs. 1.00  Rs. 5.55 
Total Revenue (Net) Rs 383.00 Rs 354.37 
Capital Rs 3810.10 Rs 3810.10 
Total Rs. 4193.10 Rs. 4164.47 

9 
 
Further, a total of Rs. 8745 crores have been approved by Empowered Group of 
Ministers (EGoM) as Capital Outlay to the new DPSUs for modernisation, till FY 2026-27. 
Out of this Rs. 8745 Cr., Rs. 1310 Cr. was allocated for distribution to these new DPSUs 
in FY 2023-24, for which projection was made. Further, a total Rs 5757 crore has been 
distributed up to FY 2024-25 and the balance amount of Rs. 2988 crore will be disbursed 
in FY 2025-26 and FY 2026-27. The details of the outlay provided to the new DPSUs for 
CAPEX, are as under: 
S. 
No. DPSU 
CAPEX 
approved  
from FY 
2021-22 to 
2026-27 
Distributed 
Total 
Balance 
Fund for 
distribution FY 
2021-
22 
FY 2022-
23 
FY 
2023-
24 
FY 
2024-
25 
1 MIL 4090 696.55 577 580 745.45 2599 1491 
2 AVNL 1402 310.14 282 290 173.86 1056 346 
3 AWEIL 1786 347.74 226 225 329.26 1128 658 
4 YIL 1340 252.85 203 200 228.15 884 456 
5 IOL 56 24.82 8 6 5.18 44 12 
6 TCL 51 7.04 7 7 9.96 31 20 
7 GIL 20 3.86 7 2 2.14 15 5 
8 Total 8745 1643 1310 1310 1494 5757 2988 
Budgetary 
Allocation -- 
1643 
(RE 
21-22) 
1310 
(RE-22-
23) 
1310 
(RE 
23-
24) 
1494 
(BE/RE 
24-25) 
--- 
 
--- 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2: 
Budget for Modernization: 
 During the oral evidence, the representatives of the new DPSUs apprised the 
Committee about various measures being taken i.e. renewal, reconditioning and 
acquisition of high value/heavy duty Plant and Machinery (P&M), creating/developing 
infrastructure etc. to keep pace with contemporary manufacturing technologies and to 
modernize manufacturing Units under them. While going through the budget given for 
modernisation of the new DPSUs, the Committee find that during the financial year 2021-
22, 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25, Rs. 1643 crore, Rs. 1310 crore, Rs. 1310 crore and 
Rs. 1494 crore were given to these DPSUs respectively. The Ministry further informed 
that out of the total of Rs. 5757 crores till date, the new DPSUs have incurred cumulative 
expenditure of Rs. 2887.43 crore till 30.08.2024. The Committee are of considered view 
that the foremost need of the new DPSUs is modernization and undertaking technology 
upgradation. They, therefore, hope that the remaining grant of the modernization budget 
will be utilized by the new DPSUs prudently and productively. The Committee would like 
to be informed of the concrete steps taken in this regard. 
 

10 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Out of the total of Rs. 5757 crores distributed till FY 2024-25, the new DPSUs have 
incurred cumulative expenditure of Rs. 3396.91 crore till 31.01.2025. Further, in order to 
ensure efficient utilisation of Capex fund, regular review meetings are held in the 
Department to review the Capex utilisation and initiatives taken by the new DPSUs to 
modernise and upgrade the production facilities, with a commitment to focus on cost and 
quality of the products being manufactured by them. Also, broad guidelines have been 
issued to all the 7 new DPSUs to plan projects under Capex considering following 
aspects: 
i. Long term demand of products 
ii. Modernisation of production lines with latest technologies 
iii. Improving the infrastructure inside the factory 
iv. Improving the Quality of products 
v. Research & Development of niche technologies 
vi. Improving infrastructure in Estate 
Since, the new DPSUs have started their business w.e.f. 01.10.2021, hence they 
did not satisfy the stipulated eligibility criteria set by Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE), and therefore, with the approval of EGoM, delegation of financial powers to incur 
capital expenditure of Rs. 250 Cr have been extended to the Boards of these 7 new 
DPSUs, as an interim measure for the efficient working of these DPSUs, for a period of 
three years. 
Furthermore, new DPSUs have been making concerted efforts in achieving 
Aatmanirbharta in production of existing products as well as in the development of new 
products with niche technologies to meet futuristic requirement of the Armed Forces.  
 
 
Order Book Position: 
Recommendation No. 3: 
 From the information furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the Order Book 
position for the newly created DPSUs for the next five years, it is found that there exists 
large variation of Order Book position amongst different PSUs. The Committee 
understand that this variation is also because of the nature of products they 
produce/provide/supply. The Ministry has also added that with more functional and 
financial autonomy, these new DPSUs are exploring newer markets both in country as 
well as abroad. Further, the Ministry is providing financial and non-financial support to the 
new DPSUs to make them productive and profitable. Therefore, the Committee believe 
that the order book positions of the new DPSUs will improve in future. 

11 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that the new DPSUs are also 
venturing into new areas of operations thereby fulfilling the requirements of Indian 
Defence Forces, especially the Army. The role of these new DPSUs during wartime is yet 
another facet to be reckoned with. Therefore, the Committee feel that the Department of 
Defence Productionmay explore possibilities for promoting the prospects of these DPSUs 
in new areas so that they grow strong and become potential sources of ammunition 
support to the Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Order Book position (as on 31.01.2025) available with the newly created 
DPSUs for the next five years, DPSU wise, is as under: 
(Rs in Crore) 
S.N. DPSU As on 31.01.2025 
1 MIL 23366 
2 YIL 3700 
3 AWEIL 10643 
4 AVNL 35020 
5 IOL 7333 
6 TCL 897 
7 GIL 267 
 Total 81226 
 
Further, post corporatization, with increased focus on product development to meet 
evolving requirement of the Services and to keep pace with changing technology in order 
to manufacture and supply quality products to Armed Forces, some of the new products 
developed by new DPSUs in order to supply to the Services are as under: 
i. Area Denial Munitions (DPICM Pinaka) 
ii. Pinaka Mk-I enhanced Rocket 
iii. Commander Thermal Imager for T-Series Tanks 
iv. Fusion Technology based Driver’s Night Sight for BMP-II 
v. Day telescopic sight for assault rifle 
vi. Anti Material Rifle 
vii. 7.62mm Ishapore Assault Rifle 
viii. Mine Protected Vehicle 6x6 
ix. Bullet resistant jacket NIJ level IV 
x. Ballistic helmet NIJ level IIIA 
 
Furthermore, the new DPSUs are also making efforts in development of latest state 
of the art Armoured Fighting Vehicles, Artillery Guns and Ammunition as per requirements 
floated through various RFPs. 
 
 

12 
 
Research and Development Expenditure: 
Recommendation No.4: 
 The Committee note that the manufacturing units under new DPSUs take up in-
house Research and Development (R&D) projects for design development & product 
upgrade of armament, ammunition and equipment. Ordnance Development Centres 
(ODCs) in the DPSUs are working in specific technological areas to carry out their 
respective R&D. The major products being developed are: guided bomb, development of 
Automatic Gear Shifter for T-90 Bhishma Tank, development/production of Electronic 
Point Detonation (PD Mode) Fuze for Artillery Ammunition, Parachute Tactical Assault 
Gajtaj-2 system (PTA G-2), Area Denial Munitions (DPICM Pinaka), Military Combat 
Parachute System (MCPS) etc. From the data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee 
are happy to note that the R&D expenditure of all the new DPSUs except YIL and GIL has 
increased significantly from 2022-23. The same increasing trend is visible from the data 
on year wise projection for R&D expenditure till year 2028-29. The Committee 
recommend in no uncertain words that the new DPSUs undertake and adopt best of the 
planning implementation practices and maintain this trend in their future endeavours. 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to adopt the best practices and to keep pace with emerging technologies in 
their respective area of operations, all the units of the new DPSUs are having R&D units 
with a focus on product & process improvement and new product development. Some of 
the major ongoing R&D projects by the new DPSUs are as under:  
i. Automatic Target Tracker & Digital Ballistic Computer for T-90 
ii. Gunner’s Main Sight for MBT Arjun MK-1A 
iii. Guided Bomb 
iv. 155 mm Smart ammunition 
v. Parachute Tactical Assault Gajraj (PTA G-2) 
vi. Military Combat Parachute System (MCPS) 
vii. 155 x 52 Calibre Towed Gun 
viii. 155 x 52 Calibre Mounted Gun System 
ix. 60mm Mortar 
x. 155 mm Bourrelet shells for extended range 
xi. Anti G Suit 
xii. Bomb Disposal Suit 
The newly created DPSUs also take up collaborative development projects for new 
technologies/products under the umbrella of Make-II as well as iDEX with assistance from 
the government academic institutions, government owned laboratories and Indian private 
manufacturers. 

13 
 
Further, at present the new DPSUs are spending nearly 1% of their turn over on 
R&D. On the basis of their profitability & need, the new DPSUs will try to spend funds on 
R&D and will try to reach 3% of turnover on R&D by FY 2028-29. 
 
 
Recommendation No.5: 
 
The Committee are happy to know that the Government has taken several policy 
Initiatives in the past few years and brought in reforms to encourage indigenous design, 
development and manufacture of Defence equipment, there by promoting self-reliance in 
Defence manufacturing & technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia, include 
according priority to procurement of capital items from domestic sources under Defence 
Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020; Notification of five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 
509 items of Services as notified by DMA and Five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 
5012 items of Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) as notified by DDP; 
Simplification of Industrial licensing process with longer validity period; Liberalization of 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy allowing 74% FDI under automatic route; 
Simplification of Make Procedure; Launch of Mission DefSpace; Launch of Innovations for 
Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme involving start-ups & Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs); Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
Order 2017; Launch of an Indigenization portal namely SRIJAN to facilitate Indigenization 
by Indian Industry including MSMEs; Reforms in Offset policy with thrust on attracting 
investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing by assigning higher 
multipliers; Establishment of two Defence Industrial corridors, one each in Uttar Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu; Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, 
startups and academia; Progressive increase in allocation of Defence Budget of military 
modernization for procurement from domestic sources, etc. Furthermore, in line with the 
Government’s ‘Make in India’ initiative, MoD had earmarked 64% of the total capital budget 
for domestic Capital Procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% for FY 
2022-23 and 75% for 2023-24 and 2024-25. While appreciating the measures being 
undertaken, the Committee must be informed of the perspective plans along with their 
phase-wise implementation so that it has every reason to be confident that defence sector 
will achieve higher degree of Atmanirbharta in near future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The ministry has taken various initiatives to encourage indigenous design, 
development and manufacture & technology. This include according priority to procurement 
of capital items from domestic sources under Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020; 
Notification of five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 509 items of Services by DMA and 
Five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ of total 5012 items of Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs) by DDP; Simplification of Industrial licensing process with longer 
validity period; Liberalization of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy allowing 74% FDI 
under automatic route; Simplification of Make Procedure; Launch of Mission DefSpace; 

14 
 
Launch of Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme involving start-ups & Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs); Implementation of Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India) Order 2017; Launch of an indigenization portal namely 
SRIJAN to facilitate indigenisation by Indian Industry including MSMEs; Reforms in Offset 
policy with thrust on attracting investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence 
manufacturing by assigning higher multipliers; Establishment of two Defence Industrial 
Corridors, one each in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu; Opening up of Defence Research & 
Development (R&D) for industry, startups and academia; Progressive increase in allocation 
of Defence Budget of military modernization for procurement from domestic sources, etc. 
Furthermore, in line with the Government’s ‘Make in India’ initiative, MoD had earmarked 
64% of the total capital budget for domestic Capital Procurement in 2021-22, which has 
been increased to 68% for FY 2022-23 and 75% for 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
 Further, in Budget 2025-26 Govt. has again earmarked 75% of all capital 
procurement through Domestic Industry and 25% of Domestic Capital Procurement i.e., 
27,888.21 Crore has been earmarked for procurement through Domestic Private Industry. 
 Department of Defence Production (DDP), MoD has notified Five Positive 
Indigenisation Lists (PILs) with a timeline beyond which they will only be procured from the 
domestic industry. These five lists consist of total 5012 items. Till 31.12.2024, 3025 items 
have been indigenised. The breakup of these items is as under:- 
(a) 1st PIL notified on 27th December, 2021 consists of 2851 major LRUs/Sub-
systems/Components which are to be indigenised within the timelines of December, 
2022 to December, 2024. 2815 items have been indigenised balance items are 
under process. 
(b) 2nd PIL notified on 28th March, 2022 consists of 107 major LRUs/Sub-
systems/Components which are to be indigenised balance items are under process. 
(c) 3rd PIL notified on 28th August, 2022 consists of 780 strategically important Line 
Replacement Units (LRUs)/Sub-systems/Components which are to be indigenised 
within the timelines of December, 2023 to December, 2028. 155 items have been 
indigenised balance items are under process. 
(d) 4th PIL notified on 12th May, 2023 consists of 928 strategically important Line 
Replacement Units (LRUs)/Sub-systems/Components which are to be indigenised 
within the timelines of December, 2023 to December, 2029. 10 items have been 
indigenised balance items are under process. 
(e) 5th PIL notified on 25th June, 2024 consists of 346 strategically important Line 
Replacement Units (LRUs)/Sub-systems/Assemblies/Spares & Components/ Raw 
materials which are to be indigenised within the timelines of December, 2024 to 
December, 2029. 10 items have been indigenised balance items are under process. 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6: 
Export 
 The Committee are happy to note that export value of the new DPSUs jumped to 
1976.51 cr. in 2023-24 from a meagre Rs. 82.18 cr. during the previous year 2022-23. 
The Committee also find that the present order book position of MIL & YIL are Rs. 6100 
cr. and 1915 cr. approximately, which indicates a positive trend for future. Anticipating that 
these two new DPSUs will achieve their targeted development soon, they also hope that 
the remaining new DPSUs will also strive to achieve similar targets in their future 
manufacturing activities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to boost exports and increase global presence, New DPSUs have 
identified major target countries and exportable products as per the target country’s 
existing and futuristic requirements. Like MIL & YIL, AWEIL has also successfully 
established a customer base in Asia, Africa, North America and Europe and has secured 
export orders of more than Rs. 600 crore, since its incorporation. As on 31.01.2025, the 
cumulative Exports book of the new DPSUs is more than Rs 8500 crore. 
Further, the new DPSUs are making efforts in expanding its global footprints by 
focussing on competitive prices, promotion & marketing through direct engagement with 
potential customers, engaging channel partners, participation in international exhibitions 
and interaction with foreign OEMs for getting exports order.  
Also, the new DPSUs are proactively pursing various leads received from 
Government and other channels and are also in close contact with the Indian Defence 
Attachés posted abroad in Indian embassies and Missions for assistance in marketing 
their products. 
Recommendation No. 07 
 
The Committee find that during the year 2024-25 Rs. 23855.61 crore was allocated 
which is 5.25% of the current Defence Budget. The Committee have been informed that 
DRDO has identified 183 exclusive systems for development by industry which will not be 
taken up by DRDO and this will substantially cut expenditure on development of 
technologies. 
The Committee also find that DRDO envisages to take up projects/programme for 
development of technologies for large warfare systems, platforms and sensors in future. 
The Committee hope that the budgetary allocation will sufficiently cater to the R&D needs 
of DRDO and expect that the Ministry would provide additional grant at supplementary 
stage, if need be, in future.  

16 
 
The Committee are of the view that the modern warfare 
applications/platforms/systems have drastically changed due to the introduction of kinetic 
and non-kinetic hybrid mode. They, therefore, recommend that DRDO should explore new 
areas of research not only to counter such threats but make the forces ready for such 
threat perceptions amalgamating the fast changing scenario.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO concentrates on the design and development of critical and advanced 
technologies, as well as complex systems which industry does not do due to ‘high risk’ 
and ‘high cost’. This focus aligns with DRDO's core competencies and ensures that it is at 
the forefront of cutting-edge Defence technology development. 
DRDO has started developing products through a number of new mechanisms such as 
Technology Development Fund (TDF), Development cum Production Partner (DcPP) and 
through DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoE) 
This year, competent authority has finalized following deep tech areas to be given impetus 
in R&D: 
i. Artificial Intelligence 
ii. Cognitive Technology 
iii. Quantum Technology 
iv. Neuromorphic Computing 
v. Military Cyber Technology 
vi. Advanced Materials 
vii. III-V Compound Semiconductor 
viii. Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Technologies  
Projects are being focused in these areas. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 08: 
 
The Committee note that the union budget 2024 has made significant 
announcements to promote deep tech innovation in India under which a new scheme will 
be launched to strengthen deep technologies for defence purposes and expedite 
‘Atmanirbharta’ in the defence sector. Technology Development Fund (TDF) policy is 
being modified to support Deep Tech technology projects for defence applications. The 
DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) and Research Boards are 
prioritized DT & ISR. The process for execution is being simplified & time for sanction is 
being shortened. In this connection, the Committee recommend that efforts must be 
intensified to ensure better collaboration between the public and private sector for 
improved results and given the sensitive nature of this work, due monitoring mechanism 
needs to be developed and put in place to ensure that no pilferage of data takes place.  
 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the DRDO policy of Directed Research DFTM has established 15 nos. of 
DRDO Industry Academia Centre of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) at various IITs, IISc and 
Central Universities across the country. Through DIA-CoEs, DFTM funds the Grants in aid 
projects of the institutes/ universities in 65 identified research verticals, to encourage 
Directed Research to fulfill the futuristic requirements of Defence and Security of the 
country.  
Project Sanction is obtained on file from competent authority after three tier 
assessment of project proposals with respect to the technical goals envisaged, feasibility 
and relevance for defence applications. Throughout the process of project sanction and 
other administrative approvals of DIA-CoEs, file movement is continuously monitored to 
avoid delays.  
In order to intensify the involvement of industry in translating the Directed Research 
for technology development through DIA-CoEs, DFTM DRDO HQr has released SoP for 
engaging industry through academia. This SoP sets the guidelines as well as the 
procedure for engaging the Industry/MSMEs/Start-ups and Incubation Centres for transfer 
of technology (ToT) or as Co-PI for technology enhancement. Ten engagements with 
Industry have been activated based on this SoP. 
To ensure no pilferage of data takes place, military/services data is retained with 
DRDO and is not shared with academia and industry. Engineering and scientific data is 
shared with academia and industry for scientific and technological developments. 
Procedures like signing of Tri-partite Memorandum of Agreements and Non-Disclosure 
Agreements (NDA) between DRDO, Academia and Industry as applicable are being 
practiced. 
Recommendation No. 09: 
 
The involvement of the private sector in Defence R&D is yet another development. 
The Committee also hope that private sector involvement in Defence production would 
help enrich technological upgradation of Defence products. However, at the same time, 
the Committee desire, that appropriate measures need to be taken to ensure that our 
cutting-edge technologies are not slipped into the hands of our adversaries by 
methodologies such as reverse engineering etc. The Committee wish that the Ministry of 
Defence furnish a detailed note on procedures laid down to ensure our technologies 
related to Defence are fully secured.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO carries out design and development of systems that are required by Indian 
Armed forces. Technologies for system development are transferred to the Indian Industry 
(both Private and Public) for production and supply of the defence products to Armed 
forces. Transfer of Technology (ToT) to Industries are carried out as per the “DRDO’s 

18 
 
Policy for Transfer of Technology”, which was approved and released by Hon’ble Defence 
Minister in August 2019. The ToT policy along with detailed procedure are available on 
DRDO website for reference of Industries. The procedure (major steps) of ToT to industry 
is explained in the following paragraphs. 
Once the system is successfully trial evaluated by DRDO Lab and   concerned DG 
(Technology Cluster) is satisfied with the performance, Lab through their DG (Technology 
Cluster) sends the “Technology Nomination Form” to DRDO Hq for approval of 
Categorization of Technology and number of licenses. Depending upon the nature/ 
sensitivity and application; Technologies are categorised in either of the following 
category: 
a. Category ‘A’ – Technologies for end use of Armed Forces/MHA / Other Govt 
agencies only. These technologies are transferred to Indian Industries only.  
b. Category ‘B’ – Technologies are not security sensitive and having dual use both in 
Government and also in civilian / commercial market.  
Once ToT fee and GST payment is made by Industry, Licensing Agreement for ToT 
(LAToT) is signed by DRDO with Industry and the Lab hands over the Technology 
Transfer Document (TTD) to Industry. The TTD generally consist of all relevant “Know-
how” for realizing the product.   
To prevent the proliferation and security of information, LAToT has provisions wherein 
Industry is not permitted to share the technology with any third party and also binds 
industry to take all measures to ensure the security of documents as per prevalent MoD 
security guidelines in vogue. Industry is made aware of these facts, even before signing of 
LAToT, through sharing of draft LAToT by the Lab with the industries before payment of 
ToT fee itself. This sharing of draft LAToT with industry is carried out with the aim to bring 
to their notice, for implementation / or conformation to the clauses pertaining to security 
mechanism inter-alia, as mandated by Security Manual for Indian Licensed Defence 
Company and the caveat that info shared with the industries will not be further shared with 
any other agencies. Further, industries are also required to follow the LAToT clause 
wherein the industries cannot pass on any info on variants/ improvements with technology 
to other industries. 
 
 
Self-reliance and indigenization 
Recommendation No. 10: 
 
The Committee observe that the country has taken a quantum jump in the 
procurement of defence items from indigenous sources. Schemes like SRIJAN and other 
initiatives  such as ‘Make in India’ initiative, MoD had earmarked 64% of the total capital 
budget for domestic Capital Procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% 
for FY 2022-23 and 75% for 2023-24 and 2024-25 will take way ahead the process of 
indigenization. Notwithstanding this fact the Committee are aware that even today the 
country is heavily dependent on imports to meet its critical defence requirements. Given 
the fact that technologically advanced countries are reluctant to part with their advanced 

19 
 
technologies with developing countries like India, it becomes all the more essential for our 
laboratories to develop each system, sub-systems, components etc. either independently 
or in collaboration with private industry/OEMs. While acknowledging the fact that 
undertaking original research is a lengthy and time-consuming process, DRDO may also 
think of developing products through other available means and short term processes. 
The Committee desire that they be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry of Defence 
to further empower Defence R&D ecosystem in the country at the time of furnishing action 
taken replies on the subject.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the Government's vision of attaining self-reliance in the realm of design, 
development and production of Defence Equipment/Platforms, DRDO has introduced the 
provision of selection of Development cum Production Partner (DcPP) for DRDO 
developed systems. This measure ensures the involvement of industries in the 
development cycle leading to concurrent Transfer of Technology (ToT) which in turn will 
lead to reduced time-frame of the development-to-induction cycle. Thereby enhancing the 
capability development in the overall defence ecosystem. 
 
The steps taken by DRDO to further empower Defence R&D ecosystem in the 
country are: 
 
Through its technology transfer initiatives, DRDO has enabled the industry to take a 
leading role in the manufacturing of defence systems such as missiles, radars, and 
electronic warfare systems. Over ₹ 5.84 lakh crore worth of orders have been placed with 
industries that are utilizing DRDO-developed systems. This vast partnership, involving 
more than 2,000 Tier-1 and Tier-2 industries, is pivotal in enhancing India’s defence 
manufacturing capabilities. The mechanisms for technology sharing with industry are the 
following: 
 
i. Transfer of Technology (ToT):  The technology of DRDO developed systems are 
transferred to Indian Industries at zero ToT fee for DcPP/PA/DP. Consultancy 
Services of DRDO Scientists to Industry is made available. So far 1842 ToT’s on 
DRDO developed systems have been handed over to the Indian Industries out of 
which 218 Licensing Agreements for Transfer of Technology (LAToTs) were signed 
with Indian Industries during 2024 
 
ii. Industry as Development cum Production Partner (DcPP):DcPP / Production 
Agency (PA) / Lead System Integrator (LSI) participation has been made mandatory 
for all Mission Mode and System level Technology Demonstration Projects. The 
DcPP mechanism enables transfer of design and development knowledge and 
capability from DRDO to the industry making them ready for the design & 

20 
 
development of similar defence systems in future. 120 DcPP/ PAs have been 
identified for various systems including Missiles to Private industry. 
 
 
iii. DRDO test facilities have been opened to the Industries for utilisation and more than 
18000 tests have been carried out for private Industries/DPSUs in the past three 
years. 
 
iv. Policy for Free Access of DRDO Patents by Indian Industries has been 
implemented – Presently, DRDO holds 2525 IPRs and they have been opened for 
Indian industries. DRDO was granted more than 201 patents and filed more than 
226 patents in the year 2024 
 
 
v. Technology Development Fund (TDF): The fund is being granted to encourage 
participation of public/private industries especially Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)/ Startups and to promote Self-Reliance in Defence 
Technology for three different categories: 
 
i. Incremental design and development of technologies/prototypes 
ii. Indigenisation of imported systems/components 
iii. Strengthening deep tech capabilities in areas relevant to defence applications, 
such as artificial intelligence, robotics, and quantum computing.  
At present, a total of 77 projects are supported under the TDF scheme with various 
Industries/MSMEs/ Start-ups. The funding for the scheme is now increased from ₹ 10 
crore to ₹ 50 Cr per project, demonstrating DRDO's commitment to supporting MSMEs.  
 
vi. DRDO-Industry-Academia Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoE): DRDO is providing 
support to all stakeholders i.e. industry and academia to carry out directed research 
in critical and futuristic areas related to Defence applications. The total number of 
DIA-CoEs has increased to 15 across major academic institutions to encourage 
research in frontier S&T related to Defence.  The DIA-CoEs bring together 
researchers from DRDO, industry, and academia to work on cutting-edge R&D 
projects. These DIA-CoEs are instrumental in bridging the gap between early-stage 
research (low TRL) and operational sub-system/component (high TRL) by providing 
the necessary infrastructure, expertise, and funding to accelerate the development 
and application of innovative technologies. The 15 DIA-CoEs are collaborating 
under 65 research verticals with DRDO, Industry and Academia. There is a total of 
264 ongoing projects with 43 institutes through these DIA-COEs, which have been 
sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 967 Cr 
vii. 25% Defence R&D Budget opened up for Industry, Start-ups and Academia: 
25% of Defence R&D Budget has been opened up for industry, start-ups and 
academia based on Budget 2022-23 announcement. This is being implemented 
through various schemes for industry, start-ups and academia.  

21 
 
i) During the year 2022-23, approximately Rs 991 Cr (of the allocated Rs 1308 Cr) 
was utilised by industry, start-ups and academia for Defence R&D under various 
schemes w.r.t. this announcement.  
ii) During the year 2023-24, approximately Rs 1882 Cr were spent through various 
schemes bypassing the set target of Rs 1422 Cr. 
During the year 2024-25, Rs 522 Cr (out of Rs 1358 Cr) has been spent (upto Sep 
2024). 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

23 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

24 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05  August, 2025 Chairperson 
14 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Defence 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1600 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 1, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
16 Shri Naresh Bansal 
17 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
18 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
19 Shri Praful Patel 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

26 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar    - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the 
draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2024-25 and briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the 
subject ‘Consolidation of Defence lands by Defence Estates Organization and working 
of Cantonment Boards’.  
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, 
Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 
22)’;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff and Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 

27 
 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services) – New DPSUs and Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21). 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him.  
 
5. ***********         ***********        **********      ******   ******** 
 
 
 
 
 
               The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****Does not pertain to the Reports 
 

28 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2024-25 ON 
‘DIRECTORATE OF ORDANCE (COORDINATION AND SERVICES) – NEW DPSUS 
AND DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DEMAND 
NOS. 20 AND 21)’. 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             10 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and 10.         
   Total  : 10 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
  Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 