i 
 
16 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint 
Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed 
Forces Medical Services (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 

ii 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint 
Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed 
Forces Medical Services (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  09.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….........                  vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  9 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 34 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 35 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  36 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  37 
 (2025-26) held on 4th December, 2025 
 
 
(II) Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of Standing Committee on 
Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2025-26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
40 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri   Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
27 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
28 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
29 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
30 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director  
3.        Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anjorem Kerketta - Under Secretary   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘Army, Air Force, 
Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and Directorate General of 
Armed Forces Medical Services (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’.  
2.  The Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17th March, 2025. The Report contained 33 Observations/ Recommendations. The 
Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in June, 2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th December, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
  04  December, 2025 Chairperson 
  13  Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 

vii 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 17 March, 2025.  
  
2. The Eighth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 33 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.  Subject  
Army 
1-2 Budget 
3 Percentage Share of Army Budget 
4 Budget for Modernization 
5 Modernization and Modern Warfare Tactics 
6 Indigenization 
7 Force level of Army 
8 Women empowerment 
9 Role of Army during disaster 
Air Force 
10-11 Budgetary Provisions 
12 Percentage Share of Air Force Budget 
13 Budget for Modernization 
14 Planning and Procurement 
15 Indigenization 
16 Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) 
17 Manpower 
Indian Navy 
18 Budget 
19 Budget for Modernization 
20 Indigenisation 
21 Operational Preparedness  
22 Manpower 
Joint Staff 
23 Budget 
24 Operationalization of theatre commands 
ECHS 
25 Budget  26 Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
27 Telemedicine 
28 Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private 

2 
 
hospitals 
29 ECHS in far-flung areas 
 
Directorate General Armed Force Medical Services (DFAFMS) 
 
30 DGAFMS 
31 Role of AFMS in War, Peace and HADR duties 
32 Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
33 Achievement of AFMS 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 33 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (Chapter II): 
 
  Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24, 
          25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33  
 
 (Total - 33) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
 
Para Nos.  -NIL-              (Total -0) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. -NIL-             (Total - 0)  
  
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
  Para Nos.  -NIL- 
 (Total - 0) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case 
not later than six months of the presentation of this report.  
 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendation/observations made in the Eighth Report in the succeeding 
Paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
A. Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 ) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
     “The Committee note that Indian Army is a vital land component of the Armed 
Forces. The Indian Army strengthens the idea of India and lives by national values, 
dedicated to preserving national interests, safeguarding sovereignty, territorial 
integrity and unity of our Nation. The challenges before the Army include thwarting 
proxy wars, defeating/arresting internal threats, assisting the Government and the 
people of India during all needs and crises including natural and manmade 
disasters. It is very important to mention here that our Army very deftly leads and 
counters the insurgencies and terrorists infiltrations alongwith the support of other 
Forces.  
 
        To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army needs Revenue as well as 
Capital Budget as per the projection. For the financial year 2025-26, the Army 
projected for Rs. 2,14,727.72 crore and allocated Rs. 2,06,200.00 crore, just Rs. 
8527.72 crore less than the projection. During the financial year 2024-25, against 
the projection of Rs 2,14,577.03 crore, it was allocated Rs. 1,91,319.60 crore, which 
was reduced by Rs. 23257.43 crore. In the RE same year, the Army made a 
projection of Rs. 2,01,289.26 crore but the allocation was Rs 1,98,427.82 crore. The 
Committee find that during FY 2024-25 only Rs 1,49,300.75 crore was spent till 
December, 2024 and Rs 49127.07 crore is to be spent in the coming three months. 
This, in the opinion of the Committee, would require prudent fiscal planning and 
concerted efforts. The Committee would like to know the final outcome in this regard 
from the Ministry consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the Action 
Taken Notes. The Committee understand that a major portion of the budget head 
primarily goes towards salary/recurring expenses which is a fixed expenditure. The 
non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, transportation, fuel, 
etc. which are essential for regular training and operational preparedness of the 
Army. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the trend which has been 
introduced with favourable allocation this year under the Revenue Head should be 
continued in the coming years also. It is needless to state here that regular 
interactions may be held with the Ministry of Finance as soon as the proposals for 
the subsequent budget are formed.” 
 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it will be ensured 
that all possible efforts are made for favourable allocation to Army under 
Revenue Head in the coming years in consultation with MoF.” 
 
 
8. The Committee note from the action taken reply about the assurance 
given by the Ministry that all possible efforts will be made for favourable allocation 
to Army under Revenue Head in the coming years in consultation with Ministry of 

4 
 
Finance.  The Committee observed in the original report that for the financial year 
2025-26, the Army had projected for Rs. 2,14,727.72 crore, however, it was 
allocated Rs. 2,06,200.00 crore, which is  Rs. 8527.72 crore less than the projection. 
The Committee in their original report had also recommended for continuance of 
favourable allocation under Revenue Head in coming years also as per the 
projection of the Army.  The Committee, therefore, while acknowledging the 
importance of non-salary expenditure which caters to the crucial expenses such as 
stores, ration, transportation, fuel etc., essential for regular training and 
operational preparedness of the Army, would reiterate for favourable allocation 
during the FY 2025-26 and in future under Revenue Head.  Notwithstanding, the 
upkeeping trend, it must be ensured that variation between demand and allocation 
is minimised to the extent possible, so as to not affect the operational 
preparedness and requirements of the Army, due to lack of availability of 
resources/funds. 
 
        Further, the Committee in their original report had observed that out of RE 
allocation for FY 2024-25 of Rs. 1,98,427.82 crore, only Rs. 1,49,300.75 crore was 
spent till December, 2024 and Rs. 49,127.07 crore was to be spent in the next three 
months.  Therefore, they had urged for prudent fiscal planning and concerted 
efforts. The Committee had further desired to be apprised of the final outcome 
thereon consequent to the end of Financial Year while furnishing the Action Taken 
Notes.  However, the Ministry has not furnished any information in this regard.  The 
Committee may be informed about the same while furnishing Action Taken 
Statement. 
 
 
B. Indigenisation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
9. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
   “During the oral evidence, a representative of Navy informed the Committee 
that there are plans to increase the number of ships and submarines to 234 in the 
next few years. At present, there are a total of 61 ships under construction, which 
will be inducted into the Navy by the year 2030. The Navy submitted that out of 
this, 60 ships are being built in our Indian shipyards. The Committee have also 
been informed that apart from under-construction projects, the Navy has been 
given the Government's Acceptance of Necessity for these inductions of which 
construction will start in the next one to two years. The Committee have further 

5 
 
been informed that the process of indigenization of Indian Navy started much 
before. The Committee have been apprised that as on date, 72 Naval Ships and 
Submarines are under construction in Indian Shipyards. Appreciating the efforts 
made by the Navy towards achieving indigenization, the Committee recommend 
that concerted efforts be made to expedite completion of the ongoing projects so 
that the Navy attains greater degree of `Aatmanirbharta’ in near future.” 
 
 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
   “Indian Navy’s modernization programme is centered on Atmanirbharta. 
Currently, 60 of the 61 warships under construction are being built in India, while 
contract conclusion in respect of 62 more ships and submarines, and 120 Fast 
Interceptor Craft, to be built in domestic shipyards, is also at advanced stage. 
Achieving higher indigenous content across weapons, sensors and equipment, 
that supports the growth of Indian shipbuilding sector, continues to be a key focus 
area. Ongoing shipbuilding projects are being actively pursued with concerned 
shipyards for timely fructification. To achieve timely completion of ongoing 
projects, the production directorate at NHQ are reviewing the progress of these 
ongoing projects through Warship Oversee Team (WOT) using a structured 
review mechanism.  
 
2. In the last 10 years, an average of 65% of the total expenditure has been 
focused towards indigenous procurement. During FY 2023-24, the ratio of 
83.91:16.09 between Indian and foreign sources has been achieved.” 
 
11. The Committee are pleased to note from the action taken reply that Indian 
Navy’s modernization programme is centered on Atmanirbharta and currently, 60 
of the 61 warships under construction are being built in India, while contract 
conclusion in respect of 62 more ships and submarines, and 120 Fast Interceptor 
Craft, to be built in domestic shipyards, is also at advanced stage. The Committee 
further note that achieving higher indigenous content across weapons, sensors 
and equipment, that supports the growth of Indian shipbuilding sector, continues 
to be a key focus area. The Committee also note that ongoing shipbuilding projects 
are being actively pursued with concerned shipyards for timely fructification. The 
Committee appreciate that for achieving timely completion of ongoing projects, the 
production directorate at NHQ are reviewing the progress of these ongoing 
projects through Warship Oversee Team (WOT) using a structured review 
mechanism.  At this stage, the Committee hope that ongoing shipbuilding  
including submarines and interceptor craft projects shall not lag due to shortage of 
funds and any requirement of  additional funds should be raised by Navy at 
supplementary/revised stage with a view to enable Navy in attaining greater degree 
of `Aatmanirbharta’.  The Committee also appreciate that during FY 2023-24 
indigenous procurement had been 83.91%.  The Committee hope that the country 

6 
 
marches ahead in indigenous content in ships design and construction so as to 
achieve the goal of self-reliance and thereby supporting domestic industrial 
ecosystem in defence sector. 
 
 
C. ECHS in far-flung areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that in order to increase the outreach of ECHS in far-
flung areas, the Ministry have sanctioned 17 Mobile Polyclinics in the State of 
Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal. These Mobile Polyclinics 
offer Medical Services to all beneficiaries including women & children also. 
Besides this, the Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) rates were reduced in non-
CGHS areas/cities to facilitate more hospitals to empanel with the ECHS. In 
addition to that, a Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) has been granted to all ECHS 
beneficiaries who are residing in far-flung areas where Polyclinics are not 
available. Further, the requirement of new Polyclinics as also dependency of 
ESM on Polyclinics is reviewed from time to time with an objective to open new 
Polyclinics as also for upgrading/downgrading the existing ones.  
 
       The Committee express their satisfaction that over the years, with the 
increase in ESM, the organization is growing and devising new methods to help 
ESM. The Committee hope that with these new proposed arrangements to be put 
in place in the coming years, medical related problems of ESM would be 
minimized and ex-soldiers will not be facing any healthcare problems.” 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “During the year 2024, a total of 23 New Polyclinics have been sanctioned 
along with upgradation of 50 Polyclinics. An additional contractual manpower of 
1357 personnel has also been sanctioned.” 
 
14. The Committee are pleased to note that during the year 2024, a total of 23 
New Polyclinics have been sanctioned and 50 Polyclinics were upgraded. The 
Committee are happy to note that an additional contractual manpower of 1357 
personnel has also been sanctioned. 
 
 Keeping in mind the increasing number of ESM in every year, the Committee 
wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation that the requirement of new 
Polyclinics as also dependency of ESM on Polyclinics may be reviewed from time 
to time with an objective to open new Polyclinics as also for 

7 
 
upgrading/downgrading the existing ones so that medical related problems of ESM 
would be minimized and requirement of ex-soldiers be taken care of. 
 
D. Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32 ) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
     “The Committee note that AFMS is the apex premier medical institution which 
provides undergraduate, postgraduate, and super specialization training, as well 
as paramedical training. The Committee have been informed that command 
hospitals, the Army Hospital, the Institute of Aerospace Medicine, INHS Asvini, and 
base hospital Delhi also provide postgraduate and paramedical training. The 
Committee have further been informed that the AFMS has a nursing college and a 
dental wing. The Military Nursing is an all-women service providing training in 
several hospitals, with an intake of 220 per year and various postgraduate 
specialty nursing courses. The Committee have also been apprised that the AFMS 
collaborates with several national bodies, including the AIIMS, Department of 
Biotechnology, IITs, ICMR, DoPT Government of India, and MoHFW for research 
and training. Expressing their satisfaction over the training and research 
programme provided to medical personnel by AFMS, the Committee recommend 
that the AFMS should keep its training and research curriculum up to date with the 
aim of providing medical facilities to armed force personnel at the time of traditional 
as well as modern warfare. It may be emphasised here that AFMS should keep 
abreast with the new and modern courses not only from the viewpoint of diagnostic 
doctors but also in the field of pharmacy related developments which are essential 
for modern medical care.” 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
     “AFMS has signed an MoU with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for 
collaborative research and training. Under the aegis of this MoU, AFMS officers 
have registered for Indian Council of Medical Research- Department of Health 
Research (ICMR-DHR) Young Medical Faculty, PhD program. 
 
2. Two Centres of Advanced Research (CAR), namely, Space Psychology at 
Institute of Aerospace Medicine and AFMS Biomedical Innovations Validation and 
Integration Centre at Armed Forces Medical College, have been established under 
the aegis of ICMR. Regional centre for Health Technology Assessment (HTA) has 
also been opened in AFMS with ICMR support. ICMR has supported AFMS to be 
at the forefront of diagnostics and research with establishment of multiple Virus 
Research & Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) in AFMS institutions. 
 
3.  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has also been signed between 
AFMS and National Institutes of repute like Department of Biotechnology, 
NIMHANS and IITs etc. These MoUs have helped by making it possible for AFMS 
researchers to utilize the expertise of these institutes for research in AFMS.” 
 
17. With respect to the Committee’s recommendation, to keep its training and 
research programme up to date to facilitate the armed forces personnel at the time 

8 
 
of traditional as well as modern warfare, the Committee are pleased to note that 
AFMS has signed an MoU with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for 
collaborative research and training.   Under the aegis of this MoU, AFMS officers 
have registered for Indian Council of Medical Research- Department of Health 
Research (ICMR-DHR) Young Medical Faculty, PhD program. Further, the 
Committee have been apprised that two Centres of Advanced Research (CAR), 
namely, Space Psychology at Institute of Aerospace Medicine and AFMS 
Biomedical Innovations Validation and Integration Centre at Armed Forces Medical 
College, have been established under the aegis of ICMR. The Committee have also 
been apprised that the Regional centre for Health Technology Assessment (HTA) 
has also been opened in AFMS with ICMR support. ICMR has supported AFMS to 
be at the forefront of diagnostics and research with establishment of multiple Virus 
Research & Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) in AFMS institutions. The Committee 
further note that Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has also been signed 
between AFMS and National Institutes of repute like Department of Biotechnology, 
NIMHANS and IITs etc. and it has helped AFMS researchers to utilize the expertise 
of these institutes for research in AFMS.  
The Committee in their original report had recommended that AFMS should 
keep abreast with the new and modern courses in the field of pharmacy related 
developments alongwith diagnostic doctors which are essential for modern 
medical care.  However, the Ministry have not furnished any details in their action 
taken notes. The Committee, therefore, while acknowledging the role and 
importance of pharmacy in medical care amongst Armed Forces, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that AFMS should keep abreast with the new and modern 
courses in the field of pharmacy as pharmacy plays a crucial role in supporting 
and sustaining medical/health care system. 

9 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
ARMY 
Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that Indian Army is a vital land component of the Armed 
Forces. The Indian Army strengthens the idea of India and lives by national values, 
dedicated to preserving national interests, safeguarding sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and unity of our Nation. The challenges before the Army include thwarting proxy wars, 
defeating/arresting internal threats, assisting the Government and the people of India 
during all needs and crises including natural and manmade disasters. It is very important 
to mention here that our Army very deftly leads and counters the insurgencies and 
terrorists infiltrations alongwith the support of other Forces.  
 
To perform all the duties with perfection, the Army needs Revenue as well as 
Capital Budget as per the projection. For the financial year 2025-26, the Army projected 
for Rs. 2,14,727.72 crore and allocated Rs. 2,06,200.00 crore, just Rs. 8527.72 crore less 
than the projection. During the financial year 2024-25, against the projection of Rs 
2,14,577.03 crore, it was allocated Rs. 1,91,319.60 crore, which was reduced by Rs. 
23257.43 crore. In the RE same year, the Army made a projection of Rs. 2,01,289.26 
crore but the allocation was Rs 1,98,427.82 crore. The Committee find that during FY 
2024-25 only Rs 1,49,300.75 crore was spent till December, 2024 and Rs 49127.07 crore 
is to be spent in the coming three months. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would 
require prudent fiscal planning and concerted efforts. The Committee would like to know 
the final outcome in this regard from the Ministry consequent to the end of Financial Year 
while furnishing the Action Taken Notes. The Committee understand that a major portion 
of the budget head primarily goes towards salary/recurring expenses which is a fixed 
expenditure. The non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Army. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the trend which 
has been introduced with favourable allocation this year under the Revenue Head should 
be continued in the coming years also. It is needless to state here that regular 
interactions may be held with the Ministry of Finance as soon as the proposals for the 
subsequent budget are formed. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it will be ensured that 
all possible efforts are made for favourable allocation to Army under Revenue Head in the 
coming years in consultation with MoF. 
 

10 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee note that under Capital Head, in BE for the financial year 2025-26, 
Army’s projection was Rs. 33,400.68 crore and like that of the previous year similar 
amount has been allocated to it. In RE 2024-25, the projection of the Army was Rs. 
34,670.21 crore and Rs. 34226.95 crore was allocated. The Committee find that upto 
December 2024, Rs. 22128.47 crore was spent. They hope that the remaining fund will 
be gainfully utilized by the end of the current financial year. However, the expenditure in 
FY 2024-25 upto December, 2024 was only Rs. 22,128.47 crore. The Committee 
understand that Capital Budget usually provides for expenditure on modernisation, 
enhancement of force level, infrastructure development, etc, which are essential not only 
for the modernization of the Army but also to safeguard territorial integrity of the nation. 
The Committee feel that Capital Projection should be incremental in nature, invariably 
consistent and it should not be less than that of a previous year so that it can absorb the 
inflationary trends. The Committee opine that though the expenditure on salaries of 
manpower deployed is fixed and is an essential component, the budget should ensure 
induction of state-of-the-art weapon systems and development of other infrastructure at 
the borders which, at any cost, cannot be compromised. The Committee feel that our 
expenditure should be in proportion to the increase in defence spending of our 
neighbours. Therefore, the Committee feel that the Capital Budget of the Army should be 
sufficient to have a deterrent capacity to ward off adversaries in case of any hostility. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It may be stated that capital projection and allocation is based on multiple factors, 
which involves trend of expenditure, past absorption capacity of the Services, projections 
made by the Services, inter-Ministry priorities, Committed Liabilities to be fulfilled, critical 
requirements, New Schemes in pipeline etc. So to commit to a specific trend is not 
feasible. Having said that, this Ministry will make every possible effort to ensure that the 
inflationary trends are taken care of and Capital Budget in future is increased so that 
induction of state-of-the-art weapon systems, development of other infrastructure at the 
borders are not compromised.  
 
2. It may also be mentioned that India’s expenditure on Defence is the largest 
amongst the Central Ministries as a percentage of GDP and it has been growing 
consistently. However, the Defence Expenditure may not be fixed in proportion to the 
increase in defence spending of our neighbours as while allocating budget to the 
Ministries multiple factors are taken into consideration by Ministry of Finance(MoF) like 
inter-Ministry priorities, past absorption capacity, pace of expenditure in the current 
Financial Year, overall resource envelope available with MoF, etc. 
 
3. Further, the committee may be apprised that Army had been allocated Rs. 
40,388.44 Crore at MA 2024-25 stage (i.e. an increase of Rs. 6,161.48 Crore over RE 
2024-25) which has been fully utilized. It is further submitted that in spite of the factors as 
mentioned above which affects the budgetary allocation, requisite fund will be provided 
under Capital Head for capability development, acquisition of state-of-the-art weapon 
systems, development of infrastructure at the borders etc. to ward off any adversaries in 
case of any hostility.  
 

11 
 
Percentage Share of Army Budget  
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Notwithstanding the percentage share of the Army budget, the Committee have 
been assured by the representative of the Ministry of Defence that any additional budget 
required for priority operations, sustenance and Modernization of the Indian Army will be 
met at the revised/supplementary stage. 
 
 Keeping in view the important role of Army to secure the vast land borders and 
conduct counter insurgency operations, the Committee hope that fund will not be an issue 
of concern for the Army and as per submission made by the Ministry, Army’s further 
requirement will be met at the revised/supplementary stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Defence takes the recommendation of the Committee into consideration 
and assures the committee that, if need be, this Ministry will seek additional funds at 
Supplementary, RE or MA stage to maintain an optimum level of combat preparedness. 
 
 
 
 
Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note from the replies submitted that in the Financial Year 2024-25, 
an amount of Rs. 27,421.33 crore was allocated to Army at BE stage under Capital 
Acquisition (Modernization) Head. The submissions made by the Ministry during oral 
evidence revealed that the Capital Budget has two components. The first is the 
modernization through the procurement of new equipment and weapon platforms which 
amounts to Rs. 26,100 crore or 78 per cent of the total allocation under the Capital Head 
in the financial year 2025-26. The Committee have been informed that the modernisation 
of the Indian Army is an ongoing process involving significant procurement efforts aimed 
at enhancing its overall combat effectiveness and undertaking the challenges of threat 
perceptions. The Committee have also been informed that the Indian Army is 
concentrating on improving fire power lethality, mobility and night fighting capabilities and 
efforts are also being made to scale up the use of drones and counter-drone technologies 
in response to evolving threats. The Committee have been informed that logistics 
capacities and efficiencies are being enhanced through the utilisation of logistic drones 
and robotic mules and the focus is also on infrastructure development. The Committee 
are happy to know that this year also, modernisation through induction of indigenous 
weapons and platforms is being explored further. The Committee find that there is an 
upward trend in more and more contracts executed by Indian vendors and currently, 154 
out of 175 categories of ammunitions have been indigenized and the Indian Army aims to 
achieve complete indigenization of its ammunition requirements by 2030. The Committee 
appreciate the fact that out of 107 AoNs, 106 AoNs, that is, 99 per cent, have been 
accorded to Indian vendors. In view of this renewed emphasis on modernization, the 
Committee recommend that modernization of the Army should be accorded top priority in 
view of the current global scenario and they also emphasise here that in case of any 

12 
 
further need, all out efforts should be undertaken by the Ministry to meet Army’s 
budgetary requirements at the revised/supplementary grant stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In BE 2025-26, Army has been allocated Rs. 26,100.00 Crore (i.e. 100% of the 
projected amount) under Capital Acquisition (Modernisation) Segment. Further, the 
Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected, if any, by Army at Supplementary/RE/MA stage under Capital Head so that 
modernization of Army does not suffer.  
 
 
Modernisation and Modern Warfare Tactics 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Army is actively involved in various 
technology-related national missions from 6G initiatives to the latest National Quantum 
Mission. They also find that Indian Institutes of Technology and other research and 
development establishments have facilitated technology conversion alongwith identified 
16 technology clusters each with specific responsibilities and outcomes. The Committee 
have been informed that a high-power computing AI cloud is being developed effectively 
for all the three Services. In this regard, Indian Army had taken the initiative and Indian 
Army AI Incubation Centre was opened in collaboration with Bharat Electronics Ltd. and 
is in the process of signing an MoU with IIT, Madras for innovations. The Military College 
of Telecommunication Engineering has become a strategic partner in Indian AI Mission, 
Chips to Start-up Mission, and quantum key distribution projects. It has also come to the 
knowledge of the Committee that the Indian Army is also working in block chain 
technology with the collaboration of Ministry of Electronics and IT, deep technology 
projects and for secure, space based vehicle tracking and convoy management systems 
with an Indian constellation. The Committee understand that conventional wars were 
fought in only three modes i.e., land, air and water, but recently there is a paradigm shift 
in the technology used in fighting a war. There have been innovations and experiments in 
western countries, and the use of drones, including sea-drones, space, cyberspace, 
kinetic and non-kinetic format etc. has enveloped the sphere of war, which can be fought 
from very distant locations through a remote-controlled methodology. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee are confident that the technology related National 
Missions, National Quantum Mission and high-power computing AI cloud will definitely 
enable our Armed Forces to develop a robust digital infrastructure, besides improving the 
existing weaponry. While appreciating all these critical developments, the Committee, can 
here, only recommend that all the initiatives/programs must follow laid-down time lines of 
their technological delivery to enable the Forces to use and adapt themselves in a timely 
manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Modernisation of Indian Army is progressed as part of a deliberate and 
comprehensive ‘Integrated Capability Development Plan’ ensuring induction of modern 
military platforms as well as rapid embracement of new technologies to ensure 24x7 
operational readiness in defence of the country. Indian Army has identified 16 niche 
technology clusters, comprising 33 technologies for induction into Service. All these 

13 
 
technologies are being addressed by 14 Category ‘A’ establishments as Centers of 
Excellence. 
 
3.  As part of the modernisation efforts, latest equipment has been inducted. Several 
key schemes are at advanced stages of procurement to further enhance the combat edge 
of the Indian Army. Capability is also being enhanced through technological infusion and 
induction of New Generation Equipment (NGE) through multiple means of procurement. 
A total of 138 schemes worth approximate Rs. 16,920 Crores have been contracted 
under Emergency Procurement (EP) –IV. In addition, EP for operational capability 
enhancement of troops deployed in CI/CT operations is also under progress. A total of 16 
schemes worth approximate Rs. 2000 Crores are being progressed. 
 
 
Indigenization 
 
Recommendation No. 06: 
 
The Committee find from the replies submitted by the Ministry that during the last 
five financial years (2019-20 to 2023-24) and current Financial year 2024-25 (upto 
December, 2024), total 335 capital acquisition contracts have been signed for capital 
procurement of defence equipment for Army, out of which 280 contracts worth about 
89.10% of total contracts value, have been signed with Indian Vendors for capital 
procurement of defence equipment. 
 
Further, the Committee find that the Ministry of Defence is committed to 
Aatmanirbharta in Defence. The Ministry emphasized on self-reliance & Make in India, 
which is evident from the initiatives undertaken i.e. Highest priority to procurement under 
Buy (Indian IDDM) category, introduction of new category of Buy (Global Manufacture in 
India) to give push to ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government, increased Indigenous 
Content (IC) in various categories of procurement under DAP-2020, inclusion of provision 
for minimum 50% IC in the form of indigenous material/ components/ software in the 
equipment being acquired with an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce 
import dependency, notification of ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ on a periodic basis to 
promote Aatmanirbharta out of which five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 
platforms/equipment have been issued, Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with 
“No foreign sourcing”, foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of 
Defence Acquisition Council and earmarking of 75% of the total capital budget for 
domestic Capital procurement for FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25. 
 
The submissions made by the representative during oral evidence revealed that 
the mission statement for the Indian Army is to transform the Indian Army into an 
Atmanirbhar, future-ready force that stands as a key pillar of the national security 
apparatus that contributes meaningfully to nation building, while its edifice remains 
anchored in efficient and holistic human resource management. The Committee are 
happy to know that the Indian Army’s transformation is aligned with the year of reforms as 
spelt out by Hon. Raksha Mantri ji and the Indian Army has extended its ‘Year of 
Transformation’ initiatives in 2023 into a ‘Decade of Transformation’ from 2023 to 2032 
for comprehensive approach to reforms across five key pillars: jointness and integration, 
force restructuring, modernisation and technology infusion, systems and process, and 
human resource management by commitment to self-reliance in line with the national 
policy of Atmanirbharta. The Committee have also been informed that through strategic 

14 
 
financial reforms, digital innovation and a push for domestic production, the Indian Army 
aims to strengthen its operation readiness while focussing on Atmanirbharta. 
 
While appreciating the efforts, made by the Ministry towards indigenization, the 
Committee recommend that consistent and systematic efforts alongwith the meticulous 
planning should be in place to maintain this pace of Atmanirbhar and future ready force 
and the Ministry should extend all the support in this regard by imbibing the principle of 
‘one step ahead’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has notified a “Policy for indigenisation of components and spares 
used in Defence Platforms” in March 2019 with the objective to create an industry 
ecosystem which is able to indigenise the imported components (including alloys & 
special materials) and sub-assemblies for defence equipment and platform manufactured 
in India and to leverage the said capability to create components export market. 
 
(a) Pursuant to ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ announcement, the Department of Defence 
Production (DDP) under Ministry of Defence/ Government of India has developed a portal 
named ‘SRIJAN’ (srijandefence.gov.in) in Aug 2020. SRIJAN portal is a Common 
Indigenisation Portal for all Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) and the Armed 
Forces (SHQs). It gives access to the Indian Manufacturing Industry of the items which 
have been imported in the past or are likely to be imported in the future by DPSUs/SHQs. 
As on 31.03.2025, more than 39000 items are available for Public View on SRIJAN portal 
out of which more than 14000 items have been indigenised. Similarly, Five PILs 
comprising of 509 Defence systems/platforms/ equipment are also notified by Department 
of Military Affairs out of which 38 items have been indigenised. 
 
(b) Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (PILs) have been notified by Department of 
Defence Production (DDP), MoD with a timeline beyond which they will only be procured 
from the domestic industry. These five lists consist of total 5012 items. Till 31.03.2025, 
3053 items have been indigenised. The breakup of these items is as under-  
 
(i)  The 1 st PIL was notified on 27th December, 2021. It consists of 2851 major 
Line Replacement Units / Sub-systems/Components which are to be indigenised 
within the timelines of December, 2022 to December, 2024. For 2851 items to be 
indigenised, 2815 items have been indigenised and balance items are under 
process. 
 
(ii) The 2 nd PIL was notified on 28th March, 2022. It consists of 107 major Line 
Replacement Units / Sub-systems/Components which are to be indigenised within 
the timelines of December, 2022 to December, 2028. For 107 items to be 
indigenised, 38 items have been indigenised and balance items are under process.   
 
(iii) The 3 rd PIL was notified on 28th August, 2022. It consists of 780 strategically 
important Line Replacement Units (LRUs)/Sub-systems/Components with the 
indigenisation timelines of December, 2023 to December, 2028. For 780 items to be 
indigenised, 176 items have been indigenised and balance items are under process.   
 
(iv) The 4 th PIL was notified on 12th May, 2023. It consists of 928 strategically 
important Line Replacement Units(LRUs) / Sub-systems / Components with the 
indigenisation timelines of December, 2023 to December, 2029. For 928 items to be 
indigenised, 11 items have been indigenised and balance items are under process.   

15 
 
 
(iv) The 5 th PIL was notified on 25th June, 2024. It consists of 346 strategically 
important Line Replacement Units (LRUs) / Sub-systems / Assemblies / Spares & 
Components/ Raw materials with the indigenisation timelines of December, 2024 to 
December, 2029. For 346 items to be indigenised, 13 items have been indigenised 
and balance items are under process. 
 
 
Force level of Army 
Recommendation No. 07: 
 
The Committee are happy to note that acquisition of equipment is an ongoing 
process and equipment holdings (authorization and holdings of equipment etc) keep on 
changing based on obsolescence, de-induction and new inductions. The Committee have 
been apprised that a focused approach has been adopted to make up the deficiencies by 
way of urgent procurement of Weapons/equipment/ammunition items to meet the 
operational requirements through the delegated financial and Emergency Procurement 
powers of the Indian Army.  
 
The Committee have been informed that the Indian Army has successfully 
implemented significant reorganisations within its Cyber, Electronic Warfare and 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Units and also establishing new combat 
units and headquarters that prioritise emerging technologies including manned and 
unmanned teams. 
 
The Committee have also been informed that Indian Army is committed to meet 
the evolving requirements of theaterisation and greater integration with the other two 
Services with a view to Force structuring which is the requirements of contemporary and 
future battlefield. The Committee are also happy to note that all the three Services are 
working towards one common goal and enhancing their integration through pursuits in 
common operational planning process, communications, technology development, 
exchange of subject matter experts and centres of excellence, common digitised maps 
and georeferencing systems, unmanned aerial vehicle assets, harmonising intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance resources, joint standard operating procedures and 
integrated outsourcing. 
 
The Committee have further been informed about updated training content and 
methodology which reviewed regularly and cover the aspects of latest operational 
concepts and environmental realities including emerging domains of warfare to include 
kinetic & non-kinetic warfare, cyber, drone, hybrid warfare etc. The Committee note that 
training curriculum include Electronic Warfare, Advance Weapons Systems, Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Robotics, CBRN Defence, Unmanned Systems and Stealth are 
being imparted to officers/soldiers of Army in view of modern battlefield requirements. 
The Committee express their immense satisfaction over the continuous effort being made 
to further augment the capacity of the hitherto existing capable forces in the army. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Appreciation expressed by the Hon’ble Committee is humbly and thankfully 
acknowledged. 
 
 

16 
 
 
Women empowerment 
Recommendation No. 08 
 
The Committee are happy to learn that a number of steps have been taken to ensure 
induction of more women in Indian Army. The Committee have been informed that the 
Ministry of Defence has reserved 10% seats for girls in all Sainik Schools across India 
w.e.f. 2021-22 and the girl students have also been allowed to take RIMC and RMS 
entrance exams w.e.f. 2022-23 onwards. The Committee have also been informed that 
women officers are being inducted into 13 Arms & Services including Artillery, Army Air 
Defence, Engineers, Signals, Intelligence Corps, Army Aviation, Army Service Corps, 
Corps of Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, Army Ordnance Corps, Judge Advocate 
General, Corps of Military Police, Medical Services and Remount and Veterinary Corps. 
The Committee are confident that the new initiatives such as increase of women officers 
vacancies from 80 per year to 144 per year, induction of women officers at NDA, entry of 
women officers as pilots in army aviation, ample opportunities to women medical officers 
in various appointments including leadership positions in AMC and equal opportunities to 
all women medical officers for their career progression taken by the Army will certainly be 
a new chapter with respect to induction of women officers in the Army. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts made by the Indian Army for their commitment towards women 
empowerment. The Committee recommend that the efforts made by the army towards 
women empowerment will remain unabated in the years to come so that a level playing 
field for the women shall be created. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Observations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 
 
 
Role of Army during disaster 
 
Recommendation No. 09: 
 
Role of the Army in providing relief during natural disasters and calamities is yet 
another success story. The Indian Army is often the first responder in times of natural 
disaster and calamities by virtue of its inherent organizational structure and deployment 
Pan-India. Providing humanitarian assistance and speedy relief during calamities remains 
a priority for the Indian Army for which the Army trains and liaises with the civil 
administration and other stakeholders on a periodic basis. The Indian Army has also 
allocated budget to upgrade chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear Quick 
Reaction Teams and Quick Reaction Medical Teams. The Indian Army have established 
17 Equipment Bricks dedicated to Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief Missions, 
ensuring timely and effective responses during crisis. The Committee wish the Army all 
success in their endeavour, for which people of our country feel secure even during 
calamities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Observation of Hon’ble Committee are thankfully acknowledged. 
 
 
 

17 
 
AIR FORCE 
 
Budgetary Provisions 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
While examining Demand Nos. 19 & 20 in respect of the Air Force for the year 
2025-26, the Committee find that in Revenue Section, Air Force projected Rs. 66,530.27 
crore against which an allocation of Rs. 53,700.00 crore has been made. The allocation is 
deficient by Rs. 12,830.27 crore and approximately 19 per cent lower than the projection.  
 
As informed, the non-salary expenditure caters to the expenses on stores, ration, 
transportation, fuel, etc. which are essential for regular training and operational 
preparedness of the Air Force, therefore, 19 per cent cut in the allocation may hamper 
the training and operational preparedness of the Air Force. Therefore, to avoid any such 
contingency situation, the Committee hope that during Supplementary Grants and 
Revised Estimate stages, the Ministry will take into consideration this fact and make 
additional allocation as per the need of the force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds projected by Air Force, if any, at Supplementary/RE/MA stage under Revenue 
Head. Further, the allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards operational activities 
and if required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired to deal with any contingency situation. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee find that in Capital segment, the allocation has been same as that 
of the projected during 2025-26. It is a known fact that the Capital Budget of a department 
primarily provides for expenditure on modernisation, enhancement of force level, 
infrastructure development etc. and allocating as per projection shares determination on 
the part of the Government for potential development of the force. Moreover, during oral 
evidence, the representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that over the last five 
years, there has been an adequate allocation of funds both for capability enhancement 
and sustenance. The Capital Budget in the last five years has grown at an average grown 
rate of 8 per cent whereas the revenue budget has grown at a rate of 11 per cent. IAF’s 
budget today is at 24 per cent of the total Defence capital budget. The Committee was 
further informed that other than the salaries, most of the expenditure is towards 
operational requirements. The Indian Air Force has prepared short, medium and long 
term plans for the future. The Indian Air Force will induct many new aircraft and systems 
in the next two years with the allotted budget, so that the existing gaps will be covered. 
The Committee expect the Ministry to ensure that the allocated resources are fruitfully 
and judiciously utilized in full by Air Force so that modernisation trajectory of Air Force is 
not adversely affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee is assured that the allocated funds will be optimally and judiciously 
utilized for modernization of Air Force. And, if needed, all efforts will be made to obtain 

18 
 
additional funds projected by Air Force at Supplementary/RE/MA stage under Capital 
Head. 
 
 
Percentage Share of Air Force Budget  
 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
 
From the data supplied by the Ministry, the Committee note an evident increase in 
the percentage share of the revenue budget of the Air Force, out of Defence Services 
Estimates. The budget of the Air Force increased from 9.27 per cent of DSE in 2020-21 
to 10.25 per cent in 2025-26. The Committee find that although there is a marginal 
decrease in the capital budget share in FY 2025-26, the overall percentage has increased 
from 22.67 per cent in the year 2020-21 to 24.10 per cent in 2025-26. The Committee are 
of the considered view that overall percentage increase in the Air Force in the DSE 
budget will help galvanise the Indian Air Force. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Committee may be apprised that DSE (including both Revenue and Capital 
Grants) comprises funds allocated to the Services/ Departments based on their trend of 
expenditure, past absorption capacity, projections made, inter-Ministry priorities, 
Committed Liabilities to be fulfilled, critical requirements etc. Annual allocation for a 
financial year in respect of a particular service is made based on overall assessment 
considering above factors.  
 
2. Further, it may be highlighted that Air Force has been allocated 100% of its 
projected amount and if required, all possible efforts will be made to seek additional funds 
at RE/Supplementary/MA stage.  
 
 
 
Budget for Modernization 
Recommendation No. 13: 
 
 The Committee note that in the Financial Year 2024-25, an amount of Rs. 
54,569.91 crore was allocated at BE stage under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) 
Head against which expenditure of Rs. 26973.72 crore has been incurred in Financial 
Year 2024-25 till December, 2024. In BE 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 59646.83 crore has 
been allotted to under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head. Keeping in view the 
modernization of the Armed Forces especially during the current global scenario, the 
Committee recommend that the Air Force shall gainfully utilize the allocated fund for 
modernization and technological upgradation in armament and in the procurement of 
other vital platforms.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 IAF Capital Acquisition Budget (BE) for FY 2024-25 was Rs. 54569.91 Crore, the 
same was revised to Rs. 47,920.47 Crore at MA stage, which was fully utilised by IAF. 

19 
 
Capital Acquisition Budget of Rs. 59,646.83 Crore as per BE 2025-26 will be gainfully 
utilised for modernisation and technological upgradation of IAF. 
 
 
 
Planning and Procurement 
Recommendation No. 14: 
 
 The Committee note that major acquisitions/upgradations in different platform 
planned for FY 2025-26 include Low Level Radars, Electronic warfare Suite for 
helicopters, Light Combat Aircraft, Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light Utility Helicopter 
(LUH), Multi-role Helicopter, GSAT, CHAFF & flares, Jammers, Wet Lease of Flight 
Refuelling Aircraft, Inflatable Decoy, Indigenous upgrade of SU-30 aircraft, Wind Profiler, 
SIGINT & COMJAM Aircraft, Airborne Early Warning and Control Systems, Mountain 
Radars, Navigation Radars, Bird Detection and Monitoring Radar which are likely to be 
completed by March, 2026. The Committee further note that acquisitions/upgradations in 
different platforms such as Approach Radars, Missile Systems, Aircrafts, Full Mission 
Simulators, Trainer Aircraft, Technology Missiles, Counter Drone systems, Close-in 
Weapon System, High Power Radars, Aero engines, Avionics upgrades, Static Trans 
receivers etc. were done through indigenous sources during the FY 2019-24. The 
Committee recommend the Ministry of Defence to negotiate and finalise the acquisition 
plan in a time bound manner to help maintain the prescribed levels of equipment and 
aircrafts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Ministry of Defence has finalized the draft Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)      2025-
27 (Two year Roll on Plan), based on the capability development imperatives as well as 
Other Capital Procurement Procedure (OCPP) cases for sustenance and upgrade 
requirements. MoD is progressing the cases for accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) 
on Priority. The medium and long term perspective plans are continuously updated and 
also factored in during formulation of the two year Roll on Plan. This apart, Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC) in its meeting held on 20.03.2025 has approved certain steps 
to reduce timelines taken at different stages of Capital Acquisition process. 
 
 
 
Indigenization  
 
Recommendation No. 15: 
 
The Committee note that Air Force is vigorously pursuing indigenous production of 
fighters, transport, helicopters and trainer aircraft along with air to air weapons, air to 
ground weapons, surface to air guided weapons, unmanned aerial vehicles and radars. 
During deliberations also, a representative of the Air Force apprised the Committee that 
the capability of Su-30 is being upgraded though indigenous upgraded programme and 
will be executed by HAL, DRDO and private industry under the supervision of IAF. The 
Committee have 90 also been informed that Mark 1A would be a good example to 
showcase wherein IAF, DRDO and HAL have been able to build a contemporary all-
weather light combat aircraft, which is designed on modular concept. The Committee 
further note that Air Force has indigenized many components required for regular use 
through its Base Repair Depots. The Committee understand that 100 per cent 
indigenization is not possible and feasible in a short period of time, nevertheless, they 
recommend that constant endeavours be made to achieve their goals in a phased 
manner and eventually making the country self reliant in this field. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
 
 
Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI)  
 
Recommendation No. 16: 
 
 
 
 
During deliberation before the Committee, a representative of the Air Force 
submitted that under the IAF's Modernisation of Airfields Infrastructure Programme, all 52 
airfields are being equipped with the Modern Airfield System, out of which 6 are in North-
Eastern part of India. 39 of the airfields are operating as joint user airfield. It was also 
submitted that the project of Next Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelters is being 
implemented at the forward airfield for the protection of critical assets. The Committee 
find that the joint usage of the Air Force airfields along with some of the advanced landing 
ground help in enhancing regional connectivity as part of Government UDAN scheme. All 
this, in turn, leads to significant financial and carbon emission saving. It was also 
informed that the modernization of airfields under Project MAFI, will provide modern aids 
which will meet the near future requirement of the IAF. While appreciating the pace of 
work, the Committee emphasize that the endeavour made by the Indian Air Force 
towards achieving the targets should be accomplished within a given time-frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
Manpower  
Recommendation No. 17: 
 
 The Committee have been informed that as on 01 Oct 24, there were 11,916 
officers (except Med/Dental branch) against an establishment of 12,929 leading to a 
deficiency of 1,013. The induction plans have been revamped so as to gradually bring the 
strength at par with the sanctioned establishment. IAF selection process comprises of 
AFCAT, AFSB evaluation, Computerised Pilot Selection System (when applicable) and 
stringent medical criteria. The Committee note that while adequate candidates register for 
joining IAF in the officer cadre, total number of candidates who eventually get 
commissioned varies. The Committee have also been informed that efforts are in place to 
increase the induction of officers which include establishing a dedicated department 
named ‘DISHA’ Cell at Air HQ to ensure wide publicity of Indian Air Force. With `DISHA’ 
by Indian Air force as the tag line, a focused Digital Publicity campaign is being 
undertaken on all social media platforms.  
 
The Committee are also happy to note that the IAF has come up with a new 
concept of installing Facilitation cum Publicity Pavilion (FCPs) at prominent locations 
across the country. FCP is a technologically advanced platform to provide information 
about the IAF and its career opportunities in a trendy, logical and appealing manner. In 
addition, Air Force participates in various exhibitions and fairs. Publicity stalls at various 
forums including youth festivals, career conclaves, youth related exhibitions etc. that are 
set up from time to time for the benefit of the targetted youth. Two customized buses with 
information displayed about IAF and consisting of a flying simulator in each bus, visit 

21 
 
various educational institutes across the county to motivate students. The Committee find 
that these initiatives have borne positive results and there has been an steady increase in 
number of aspiring youth getting commissioned. While appreciating 92 the fact that 
recruitment in IAF is an ongoing process based on scheduled and unscheduled 
discharges, the Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure that there is no 
shortage of manpower essential for the operations of the Indian Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
 
NAVY 
 
 
Budget 
Recommendation No. 18: 
 
 The Committee understand that the Indian Navy has been playing a maritime 
leadership role in the Indian Ocean Region due to its multi-dimensional capabilities and 
active presence in the region. The environment in India’s maritime neighbourhood is 
dynamic, with increasing instabilities, deepening geopolitical and ethnic faultiness, 
growing military capabilities and wide range of security challenges. These pose a 
combination of conventional and sub-conventional threats emanating from the seas. In 
this regard, a representative of Navy, during the presentation before the Committee, 
stated that a major share in the Navy’s budget (i.e. Rs. 97149 crore) devoted towards the 
substantial increase in capital expenditure.  
 
 The Committee find that under Capital Head in BE 2025-26, allocation has been 
same as that of projected of Rs. 65352.82 crore. The allocation of BE 2025-26 is an 
increase of Rs. 2806.84 in compare to BE 2024-25. The Committee are of the considered 
view that increase in capital segment of the Navy budget will further help strengthen the 
Indian Navy. 
 
 In the revenue head, the Committee find that the allocation in 2025- 26 is, 
however, marginally higher than the previous years. Noticing a higher projection during 
2025-26, the Committee hope that the Ministry would provide additional grant during the 
supplementary/revised stage, if needed, to carry out their modernisation plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2025-26, Navy has been allocated Rs. 1,03,502.62 Crore (i.e. 97.59% of the 
projected amount of Rs. 1,06,060.04 Crore) under both Revenue and Capital Heads and 
Rs. 65,352.82 Crore (i.e. 100% of the projection made) under Capital Head. Further, the 
Committee is assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds, if needed, at 
Supplementary/RE/MA stage under both Revenue and Capital Heads. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
Budget for Modernization  
 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
 
The Committee understand that since 2021, there has been a continuous increase 
in the Navy's budget and Navy has been allocated Rs. 97,149.80 crores for FY 2025-26. 
The Committee have been informed that the every year expenditure has been getting 
higher than the allocation which are met through revised estimates. The Committee have 
also been informed that there has been a consistent increase in the allocation of the 
capital budget which reflects predominant focus on capability development of Navy. The 
Committee are happy to note that domestic to foreign capital expenditure ratio has also 
progressively improved since 2020 and the increase in domestic expenditure is attributed 
to the government's indigenization efforts. The Committee find that the Indian Navy has 
estimated expenditure for the modernization over the next ten years. The Committee are 
happy to know that considering the country's economic growth in the future, a budget 
growth of 10 percent has been projected and this estimated amount will prove sufficient 
for modernization plan of Indian Navy. The Committee are happy to note that the Navy 
has achieved a healthy capital to revenue ratio and it is being continuously improved 
resulting in capability-driven approach. Keeping in view the modernization of the Armed 
Forces in view of the current global scenario, the Committee recommend that the Navy 
shall gainfully utilized the allocated fund for modernization and technological upgradation 
in their platforms, infrastructure and armaments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and every possible effort 
will be made to optimally utilize the funds allocated to Navy towards modernization and 
technological upgradation in their platforms, infrastructure and armaments.  
 
 
Indigenisation 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
During the oral evidence, a representative of Navy informed the Committee that 
there are plans to increase the number of ships and submarines to 234 in the next few 
years. At present, there are a total of 61 ships under construction, which will be inducted 
into the Navy by the year 2030. The Navy submitted that out of this, 60 ships are being 
built in our Indian shipyards. The Committee have also been informed that apart from 
under-construction projects, the Navy has been given the Government's Acceptance of 
Necessity for these inductions of which construction will start in the next one to two years. 
The Committee have further been informed that the process of indigenization of Indian 
Navy started much before. The Committee have been apprised that as on date, 72 Naval 
Ships and Submarines are under construction in Indian Shipyards. Appreciating the 
efforts made by the Navy towards achieving indigenization, the Committee recommend 

23 
 
that concerted efforts be made to expedite completion of the ongoing projects so that the 
Navy attains greater degree of `Aatmanirbharta’ in near future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Indian Navy’s modernization programme is centered on Atmanirbharta. Currently, 
60 of the 61 warships under construction are being built in India, while contract 
conclusion in respect of 62 more ships and submarines, and 120 Fast Interceptor Craft, 
to be built in domestic shipyards, is also at advanced stage. Achieving higher indigenous 
content across weapons, sensors and equipment, that supports the growth of Indian 
shipbuilding sector, continues to be a key focus area. Ongoing shipbuilding projects are 
being actively pursued with concerned shipyards for timely fructification. To achieve 
timely completion of ongoing projects, the production directorate at NHQ are reviewing 
the progress of these ongoing projects through Warship Oversee Team (WOT) using a 
structured review mechanism.  
 
3. In the last 10 years, an average of 65% of the total expenditure has been focused 
towards indigenous procurement. During FY 2023-24, the ratio of 83.91:16.09 between 
Indian and foreign sources has been achieved. 
 
 
 
Operational Preparedness  
 
Recommendation No. 21 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that for the safety and security of 
India's national interest, it is important to maintain peace and security in the maritime 
space.  
 
The Committee have further been informed that besides attending to maritime 
territorial integrity, it is also the responsibility of the Indian Navy to act against piracy and 
other related crimes in sea. The Committee note that the Indian Navy has been 
continuously deployed in the Gulf of Aden and Adjourning Area since 2008 under anti-
piracy operations. During the year 2024, the Navy has conducted six successful 
operations and rescued around 120 people. The Committee further note that in a similar 
incident, when INS Kolkata was assisting a hijacked ship, Navy commandos were air-
dropped directly from an Indian Air Force C-17 aircraft about 1500 miles off the coast of 
India during operations. The Gulf of Guinea region in West Africa is also a major source 
of oil imports. In view of the increasing incidents of piracy, in that region, the Navy has in 
2022, started deploying ships at regular intervals in the Gulf of Guinea.  
 
Expressing their satisfaction over the role and preparedness of the Indian Navy, 
the Committee feel that keeping in view the drastic change in the modern warfare tactics, 
the Navy will continue to protect the maritime zone and prevent piracy and other maritime 
security threats. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Indian Navy is committed to safeguarding national interests in the maritime domain 
and strengthen the strategic narrative of ‘First Responder’ and ‘Preferred Security 
Partner’ in the region. 

24 
 
 
2. Maritime security challenges arise from both traditional and non-traditional threats. 
While, traditional threats include conventional and non-conventional warfare by potential 
adversaries, non-traditional threats include Piracy and Armed Robbery, Terrorism at sea/ 
from sea, Illegal Unreported and Unregulated fishing, drug smuggling, gun running and 
human trafficking.  
 
3. Indian Navy in close coordination with all elements of Higher Defence 
Organisation, sister Services and Ministries dealing with aspects of maritime security and 
coastal defence, constantly analyses the geopolitical developments, emerging threats/ 
challenges and reviews its operational preparedness to retain edge over potential 
adversaries during crisis or conflict at sea. Indian Navy maintains a near continuous 
surveillance in our maritime areas of interests, through consistent deployment of IN 
assets. Also, capability development by potential adversaries, as well as activities by both 
state and non-state actors, that threaten our national interests, are closely monitored. 
Further, coastal defence mechanism is periodically assessed towards necessary 
refinement. 
 
 
Manpower 
 
Recommendation No. 22 
 
During deliberations, a representative of the Navy informed the Committee that the 
Indian Navy has 10,045 officers, 59,828 sailors, 11,634 Agniveers and 32,171 defence 
civilians. The Committee have been informed that all personnel are fully trained for their 
work and are fully capable of maintaining combatability and operational preparedness of 
the Navy. The Committee have been informed that the Navy's manpower is quite limited, 
however, despite the small numbers, they are fully capable of fulfilling national 
responsibilities anywhere in the world. The Committee have also been informed that in 
promoting women's empowerment, the Indian Navy has taken several important steps. 
As of now, Navy have 642 women officers and 1718 women Agniveers. The Committee, 
while appreciating the measures taken by the Navy for enriching Human Resources 
Management, recommend that the state-of-art training be imparted both in logistics 
management and technology management so that our personnel can keep pace with the 
developments of modern warfare system.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The 
salient aspects relevant in this regard are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs.   
 
2. The training in Indian Navy is regularly reviewed and updated as per requirements. 
There is a robust mechanism in place, with details as follows: - 
 
(a) Comprehensive Assessment/ Review of Training.   The training in Indian Navy 
has been tailored to meet the emerging requirements based on feedback/ training 
gaps, as received from Commands / Units, and newly inducted equipment and 
systems. A mechanism termed as New Induction Training Committee (NITC) to 
facilitate early induction of training aids pertaining to equipment/ system inducted/ 
planned to be inducted, has been setup in the Indian Navy.  
 

25 
 
(b) Revision of Syllabi and Upskilling of Indian Navy Personnel. The rapidly 
emerging technologies and threats necessitate Indian Navy to regularly upskill 
their personnel in niche technology domains such as Cyber Security, Artificial 
Intelligence, Big Data Analysis etc. in association with reputed civilian institutes. 
Accordingly, periodic review of syllabi for various courses being conducted at the 
training schools of Indian Navy is conducted through policies promulgated by 
Naval Headquarters/ training directives promulgated by Headquarters, Southern 
Naval Command.  
 
(c) In addition to the basic and advanced training, Indian Navy also has been 
imparting training on future technologies. The following are relevant in this regard:-   
 
(i) Training on Niche Technologies. Training on future technologies such as 
Electric Propulsion and Medium Voltage (MV), Artificial Intelligence and Big 
Data Analytics, are also being given due impetus. IITs and other reputed 
institutes are being engaged for specialised training to equip IN personnel 
with skills and expertise in military decision making with regard to allocation 
of scarce resources, selection of new equipment and processes, and 
optimal deployment of given resources to achieve required missions. 
 
(ii) Training on New Induction Equipment. For newly inducted equipment, 
reference systems for training establishments are being included as part of 
the contracts.   
 
(d) Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with industry/ academia towards 
strengthening industry academia relation, research collaboration, technology 
development and technical solution, have been concluded with IITs (Kharagpur, 
Kanpur and Bombay), IISc Bangalore and Indian Maritime University. 
 
 
 
JOINT STAFF 
 
Budget 
Recommendation No.23 
 
 The Committee note that in the Budget Estimates for 2025-26, Joint Staff has 
made a projection of Rs. 6888.23 crore against which an allocation of Rs. 6352.82 crore 
has been provided resulting into a shortfall of Rs. 535.41 crore. The Committee 
understand that Joint Staff act as single point organization for jointmanship in Ministry of 
Defence which integrates policy, doctrine, war-fighting and procurement and find that 
during the years role of Joint Staff has risen many folds. Presently, it supports financial 
aspects and capability building of more than 120 units. The Committee note that ‘Joint 
Staff’ and ‘Integrated Defence Staff’ are two broad means of creating jointness amongst 
the Services at the HQ level. In ‘Joint Staff’, each Service provides inputs for Planning, 
Operations, Intelligence, Training, Procurement, etc., which are collated and thereafter 
fused at the apex level. The Committee have further been informed that in an ‘Integrated 
Staff’, the staff from the three Services is mixed in every constituent vertical function of 
Planning, Operations, Intelligence, Training, Procurement, etc., thereby lending greater 
inter-service collaboration from the ground up.  
 
 The Committee, while appreciating the role and responsibilities of HQ Integrated 
Defence staff/Joint Staff express their hope that the Ministry would provide additional 

26 
 
grant, it required, at the supplementary/revised stage in order to strengthen the Joint 
Staff. 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Defence welcomes Committee’s appreciation towards the role and 
responsibilities of HQ IDS (Joint Staff) and assures the Committee that, if need be, this 
Ministry will seek additional funds at Supplementary, RE or MA stage in order to 
strengthen the Joint Staff. 
 
 
 
Operationalization of theatre commands  
 
Recommendation No. 24 
 
The Committee note that in pursuance of the Government’s directive, the Indian 
Armed Forces are moving towards creating and operationalizing ‘Theatre Commands’. 
The Committee find that this integrated structural framework shall ensure unity of 
resources, 97 planning process and execution of the operations in a given theatre, and in 
so doing, create seamless synergy between the constituent Services. The Committee 
have been informed that the Theatre Commands will have integral resources from all the 
Services to discharge their operational mandate. Accordingly, the staff required to tenet 
the billets in the Theatre Commands shall be drawn from all the three Services, to 
perform the staff functions associated with the ‘Integrated Processes’ in the fields of 
operations, intelligence gathering, planning, logistics, administration, HR management, 
etc. The Committee would like to be informed of the developments in this regard at the 
time of furnishing the Action Take replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
-Classified- 
 
 
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME (ECHS) 
 
 
Budget 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
The Committee note that close to 59 lakh beneficiaries including ESM and their 
dependents are presently availing ECHS benefits. In the financial year 2024-25, the 
projection of ECHS was Rs. 9683.72 crore, however, there was a deduction of Rs. 
2715.72 crore in allocation i.e. Rs. 6968 crore. The expenditure during FY 2024-25 was 
Rs. 6983.50 crore till 13 January, 2025. The Committee have also been informed that 
ECHS was also provided additional allocation of Rs. 2461.00 crore against allocated 
amount of Rs. 6968 crore at Supplementary stage. During the FY 2025-26 the Projection 
was Rs. 12193.60 crore, however, allocation was Rs. 8317 crore. During oral evidence, 
the representatives of ECHS informed the Committee that in the year 2023- 24, 
approximately Rs. 9800 crore rupees were spent on the scheme. The Committee have 
been informed that 85 percent of this money was spent on empanelled hospitals and 

27 
 
diagnostic centres, medicines amounting around Rs. 1200 crore were directly provided to 
polyclinics through DGAFMS and the expense for the contractual staff who deliver 
services in polyclinics, is less than three percent. The Committee at this stage can only 
recommend that the budget allocated at BE or RE stage may be fully utilized as such 
expenditure is for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen of our country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  This Ministry acknowledges the recommendation and assures the Committee that 
every possible effort will be made to ensure 100% utilization of the allocated budget by 
ECHS. 
 
 
Vacancies in ECHS Polyclinics 
 
Recommendation No. 26 
 
The Committee find that there is a marginal gap between authorized and actual 
manpower at ECHS Polyclinics in some posts even after sanctioning of additional posts 
in the year 2024. The Committee have also been apprised that Government has 
sanctioned 23 New PCs, upgradation of 50 PCs and an additional 1357 contractual 
manpower in the year 2024. The Committee note that remedial measures have been 
taken by the Ministry to overcome unutilized vacancies in ECHS polyclinics. Since 
vacancies in hospitals/polyclinics affect the healthcare facilities being provided to the Ex-
servicemen, the Committee recommend that such vacancies be fill-up in a time-bound 
manner to provide adequate healthcare facilities to our ex-soldiers so that they do not feel 
neglected after exiting the service. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All possible efforts are being made by ECHS for filling up of vacant posts and to 
ensure quality healthcare to the veterans.  Part time employment of doctors is also being 
carried out where specialist doctors are not available.  The additional vacancies 
sanctioned by the MoD (1357) have already been allocated to the up-graded and newly 
sanctioned polyclinics and employment of contractual staff as per revised authorization 
has already been carried out w.e.f. 01 Apr 2025 by respective station Headquarters 
across the country. 
 
 
Telemedicine 
 
Recommendation No. 27 
 
Telemedicine is yet another medical field which has come to the notice of the 
Committee. The Committee have been informed that ECHS have tried to create a 
telemedicine software through the C-DAC organization, which is a government IT 
company. The Committee have further been informed that it is currently in the pilot stage 
and once the software is developed, it will run not only in hospitals but also on the 
computers of all the doctors in approximately 427 polyclinics, so that ex-servicemen do 
not need to come to polyclinics and can operate from their homes for all kinds of 
medicines consultations. The Committee would like to be apprised of the final 
development of the telemedicine software and its implementation in polyclinics. 
 

28 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Pilot project on Tele-medicine has been completed and gaps in the software 
were identified and resolved. Thereafter, testing of the project was conducted at all 
Polyclinics in Delhi.  Pan India roll-out is being carried out in a gradual manner. 
  
 
 
Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empanelled private hospitals 
 
Recommendation No. 28 
 
From the reply submitted by the Ministry to resolve perennial problem of unsettled 
ECHS medical bills of the private recognized hospitals, the Committee note that the 
Ministry is continuously monitoring Turn Around Time (TAT) with Bill Processing Agencies 
(BPA), monitoring response to ‘Need More Information (NMI)’ cases with empanelled 
hospitals for early processing, assignment of more doctors to Regional Centres (RCs) 
under heavy bill processing workloads to accelerate approvals, establishment of 
centralized dashboard to track the status of all submitted, approved and pending bills and 
ensuring better transparency and faster processing. Currently, inflated bills from 
empanelled hospitals are leading to multiple review cycles, increasing approval times. 
The Committee wish and hope that such regular allotments are being provided by the 
Ministry to the ECHS, so the inconvenience being faced by the ESM would be resolved, 
and the private hospital would not reject ESM for admission and treatment. 
 
 While lauding the efforts taken by the Ministry in clearing the pending bills, the 
Committee express their concern that the issue of pendency surfaces before the 
Committee during the examination of DFGs every year. In this regard before commenting 
anything substantial, the Committee would like to be apprised on the following sets of 
information:  
 
(i) The numbers of ESM/Dependents who approached all the polyclinics combined 
during the last three years; 
(ii) The number of ESM who approached all defence hospitals combined for treatment 
of themselves and the dependent during the last three years; and 
(iii) The number of ex-serviceman/dependent who were referred for super specialty 
treatment in private hospitals. 
 
The idea to gather such statistics is to come to a conclusion as to arrive at a 
comparable figure whether more referrals were done or they were treated in 
polyclinics/defence hospitals. These figures may be supplied while furnishing the Action 
Taken Notes to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Details with respect to Payment of pending bills by ECHS to empaneled private 
hospitals given at Para 2 are as follows: - 
 

29 
 
(i) The numbers of ESM/dependents who visited to the polyclinics combined during 
the last three years: - 
  
Sr 
No. 
Year Number of footfalls of ESM/Dependents visits 
to the Polyclinics 
(a) 2022 1,53,43,077 
(b) 2023 1,68,08,722 
(c) 2024 1,81,48,376 
Total 5,03,00,175 
 
(ii) The number of ESM/dependents who were treated at the polyclinics combined 
during the last three years: -  
  
Sr 
No. 
Year Number of footfalls of ESM/Dependents visits 
to the Polyclinics 
(a) 2022 1,27,68,378 
(b) 2023 1,26,04,265 
(c) 2024 1,50,50,274 
Total 4,04,22,917 
 
(iii) The number of ESM who approached all Defence Hospitals combined for 
treatment of themselves and the dependents during the last three years: - 
 
Sr 
No. 
Year Number of ESM approached to Defence 
Hospitals for treatment of themselves and 
dependent 
(a) 2022 2,84,600 
(b) 2023 7,97,397 
(c) 2024 3,29,105 
Total 14,11,102 
 
(iv) The number of Ex-Servicemen/dependent who were referred for super specialty 
treatment in Private Hospitals: - 
 
Sr 
No. 
Year Number of ESM/Dependents referred for Super 
Specialty Treatment in Private Hospitals 
(a) 2022 22,90,099 
(b) 2023 34,07,060 
(c) 2024 27,68,997 
Total 84,66,156 
 
 
ECHS in far-flung areas 
 
Recommendation No. 29 
 
The Committee note that in order to increase the outreach of ECHS in far-flung 
areas, the Ministry have sanctioned 17 Mobile Polyclinics in the State of Uttarakhand, 
Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal. These Mobile Polyclinics offer Medical Services to 
all beneficiaries including women & children also. Besides this, the Performance Bank 

30 
 
Guarantee (PBG) rates were reduced in non-CGHS areas/cities to facilitate more 
hospitals to empanel with the ECHS. In addition to that, a Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) 
has been granted to all ECHS beneficiaries who are residing in far-flung areas where 
Polyclinics are not available. Further, the requirement of new Polyclinics as also 
dependency of ESM on Polyclinics is reviewed from time to time with an objective to open 
new Polyclinics as also for upgrading/downgrading the existing ones.  
 
The Committee express their satisfaction that over the years, with the increase in 
ESM, the organization is growing and devising new methods to help ESM. The 
Committee hope that with these new proposed arrangements to be put in place in the 
coming years, medical related problems of ESM would be minimized and ex-soldiers will 
not be facing any healthcare problems. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the year 2024, a total of 23 New Polyclinics have been sanctioned along 
with upgradation of 50 Polyclinics. An additional contractual manpower of 1357 personnel 
has also been sanctioned. 
 
  
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL ARMED FORCE MEDICAL SERVICES (DGAFMS) 
 
Recommendation No. 30 
 
The Committee note that the medical services of the Army, Navy and the Air Force 
are basically looked after by the Directors General of the Medical services of the Army, 
Navy, and Air Force (DGAFMS). The Committee have been informed that the DGMS 
Army has 113 military hospitals and 99 field hospitals, Navy has 10 naval hospitals and 
the DGMS Air has 2 Air Force hospitals and of course the DCIDS is another officer of the 
rank of Lieutenant General who is the advisor to the Chief of Defence Staff on certain 
aspects of the AFMS such as CBRN, IT and Defence Cooperation. It has also been 
noticed that there has been an increase in the fund allocations both in Capital and 
Revenue heads to AFMS. While appreciating the role and responsibilities of DGAFMS in 
medical services, the Committee recommend the Ministry to provide adequate grant in 
case of new hospitals/medical facilities which are required to be set up for serving 
personnel of the Armed Forces. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Defence welcomes Committee’s appreciation towards the role and 
responsibilities of DGAFMS and assures the Committee that this Ministry will make every 
possible effort to provide adequate grant, or more if required, in case of new 
hospitals/medical facilities which are required to be set up for serving personnel of the 
Armed Forces. 
 
 
 
Role of AFMS in War, Peace and HADR duties 
 
Recommendation No. 31 

31 
 
 
 The Committee note that medical care in war and peace for a large number of 
personnel is provided through 135 AFMS hospitals, including 99 field hospitals, 77 station 
Medicare centres, and 67 sick bays. The Committee find that this care is delivered in 
high-altitude deserts, jungles, on board ships and aircraft, and during humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief operations, as well as aid to civil authorities in remote parts 
of the country and abroad. The Committee wish the AFMS all success in their endeavour, 
for which armed force personal feel secure during war and peace time. They also 
recommend AFMS to explore new avenues for providing medical related services during 
pandemic like situation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 As per the recommendations of the Committee regarding Armed Forces Medical 
Services to explore new avenues for providing medical related services during pandemic-
like situations, the following is submitted:- 
 
a) The Directorate General of Medical Services (Army) continuously strives to 
modernize the Indian Army hospitals in providing best quality of care to its 
patients. As part of this, a five-year Roll-on plan for modernization & upgradation of 
hospital infrastructure was formulated, whereby hospitals are being undertaken for 
modernization in phase wise manner. 
 
b) The Indian Navy’s Medical Services have been diligently working to enhance their 
preparedness to provide comprehensive Medical care, including the response to 
pandemic-like situations, ensuring the well-being of its personnel while also 
supporting the nation’s broader healthcare initiatives. In this regard, following is 
submitted:- 
 
 
(i) Key Naval hospitals, such as INHS Kalyani (being upgraded from 206 beds to 
604 beds Command Hospital), INHS Sanjivani (being upgraded from 275 beds 
to 439 beds Super-Speciality Hospital) and INHS Patanjali (being upgraded 
from 141 beds to 409 beds hospital), are undergoing significant upgrades, 
including infrastructure expansion, increased bed capacity and the 
augmentation of human resources to meet the rising demands including those 
during health crisis. 
(ii) The Indian Navy has also acquired a Portable Containerised Medical Facility 
(PCMF), a versatile and mobile Medical unit designed to provide 
comprehensive Medical care both at sea and on land. The PCMF includes an 
Operating Theater, ICU, Isolation ward, Laboratory, Dental and X-ray facilities 
is designed for rapid deployment in Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster 
Relief (HADR) operations. This facility is envisaged to provide timely healthcare 
support during pandemic-like emergencies. 
(iii) To enhance diagnostic capabilities, state-of-the-art microbiological 
technologies have been introduced including molecular techniques such as 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)/RT-PCR, which enable rapid and precise 
molecular diagnosis. Additionally, advanced point of care diagnostic tools like 
TrueNat and Biofire assays further strengthen early disease detection, while 
the adoption of Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization – Time of Flight 
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry has revolutionized microbial identification, 
reducing turnaround times to mere minutes. 

32 
 
 
(c)  Indian Air Force Hospitals have been encouraged to enter into Memorandum of 
Understandings (MoUs) with nearest co-located Govt Hospitals/ AIIMS/ Govt Medical 
Colleges for mutual assistance in providing quality care to clientele during 
Operations/pandemic like situation when such facilities are not available at Indian Air 
Force Hospitals. 
 
(d) Apart from this, Armed Forces Central Epidemiological Cell (AFCEC)has been 
established in Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC), Pune. The central 
epidemiological team in AFMC, Pune can move at short notice to investigate the 
outbreak. 
 
(e)  To increase diagnostic capability during pandemic: - 
 
(i) Whole genome sequencing laboratory has been established at Army 
Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi & AFMC, Pune. 
(ii) Establishment of 10 Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDL) as 
part of the Armed Forces laboratory network under Department of Health 
Research. 
 
(f) Armed Forces Hospitals & units can move at short notice to establish medical care 
set-up to provide emergency services. During the COVID-19, the AFMS 
established 50 dedicated & mixed COVID hospitals to provide medical related 
services. 
 
 
 
Training and Medical Research in AFMS 
 
Recommendation No. 32 
 
 The Committee note that AFMS is the apex premier medical institution which 
provides undergraduate, postgraduate, and super specialization training, as well as 
paramedical training. The Committee have been informed that command hospitals, the 
Army Hospital, the Institute of Aerospace Medicine, INHS Asvini, and base hospital Delhi 
also provide postgraduate and paramedical training. The Committee have further been 
informed that the AFMS has a nursing college and a dental wing. The Military Nursing is 
an all-women service providing training in several hospitals, with an intake of 220 per 
year and various postgraduate specialty nursing courses. The Committee have also been 
apprised that the AFMS collaborates with several national bodies, including the AIIMS, 
Department of Biotechnology, IITs, ICMR, DoPT Government of India, and MoHFW for 
research and training. Expressing their satisfaction over the training and research 
programme provided to medical personnel by AFMS, the Committee recommend that the 
AFMS should keep its training and research curriculum up to date with the aim of 
providing medical facilities armed force personnel at the time of traditional as well as 
modern warfare. It may be emphasised here that AFMS should keep abreast with the 
new and modern courses not only from the viewpoint of diagnostic doctors but also in the 
field of pharmacy related developments which are essential for modern medical care. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  AFMS has signed an MoU with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for 
collaborative research and training. Under the aegis of this MoU, AFMS officers have 

33 
 
registered for Indian Council of Medical Research- Department of Health Research 
(ICMR-DHR) Young Medical Faculty, PhD program. 
2. Two Centres of Advanced Research (CAR), namely, Space Psychology at Institute 
of Aerospace Medicine and AFMS Biomedical Innovations Validation and Integration 
Centre at Armed Forces Medical College, have been established under the aegis of 
ICMR. Regional centre for Health Technology Assessment (HTA) has also been opened 
in AFMS with ICMR support. ICMR has supported AFMS to be at the forefront of 
diagnostics and research with establishment of multiple Virus Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratory (VRDL) in AFMS institutions. 
 
3.  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has also been signed between AFMS and 
National Institutes of repute like Department of Biotechnology, NIMHANS and IITs etc. 
These MoUs have helped by making it possible for AFMS researchers to utilize the 
expertise of these institutes for research in AFMS. 
 
 
Achievement of AFMS 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
 
 The achievements of the AFMS is yet another success story which need special 
mention. The Committee are happy to note that the achievements of the AFMS include 
the establishment of the Artificial Limb Centre in Pune, a state-of-the-art institution 
providing prosthetics for amputee soldiers who won seven medals during the Para Asian 
Games 2023 held in China. The Committee have been informed that the Armed Forces 
Central for Computational Medicine, inaugurated by the Hon. President of India on 1st 
December, 2023, focuses on research in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and data 
sciences. The Committee have also been informed that the Tele MANAS has been 
established for mental health assistance across States for the armed forces, in 
collaboration with NIMHANS Bangalore and IIIT Bangalore. The Committee further note 
that Genetic research in the AFMS has advanced, with next-generation genetic 
sequencing established at the Army Hospital Research and Referral and the Armed 
Forces Medical College. The nation's only licensed facility for frozen RBCs is located at 
the Armed Forces Transfusion Centre in Delhi, which can provide blood with a shelf life of 
up to five years. The Committee feel that such facilities will go a long way in catering to 
the needs of the Armed Forces personnel. 
 
 The Committee are also happy to note that the AFMS has also provided 
humanitarian aid and assistance during the recent disasters, such as the Wayanad 
floods. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by DGAFMS towards their remarkable 
achievements and expect that their innovations in medical science would continue 
unabated in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To continue the innovations pertaining to Medical care for the Armed Forces, 
AFMS has entered into MoU with Innovation for Defence Excellence- Defence Innovation 
Organization (iDEX-DIO). The Defence India Startup Challenge Edition-Medical 
Innovations and Research Advancement (DISC-MIRA) Challenge has been launched by 
iDEX-DIO. Problem statements submitted by AFMS for innovative solutions in the field of 
medicine for service personnel have also been launched in the ibid challenge. AFMS is 
also collaborating with ISRO for innovative solutions pertaining to combat medicine. 

34 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 

35 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 December, 2025 Chairperson 
13 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th December, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
3 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
4 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
5 Ms. S. Jothimani 
6 Shri Shashank Mani 
7 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
8 Shri Virendra Singh 
9 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
10 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
11 Shri Naresh Bansal  
12 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
13 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
14 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
15 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
16 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
17 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  

38 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the draft 
Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 7th , 8th , 
9th  and 10th  Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year  
2025-26. 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme and Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services (Demand 
Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services)– New DPSUs, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance and 
National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 

39 
 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE 
YEAR 2025-26 ON ‘ARMY, AIR FORCE, NAVY, JOINT STAFF, EX-
SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME AND DIRECTORATE 
GENERAL OF ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES (DEMAND NOS. 20 AND 
21)’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations            33 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
 
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16, 
17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32 and 33. 
        
   Total  : 33 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter 
III): 
 
 Recommendation Para Nos. -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
-Nil- 
  
Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V)  
 
 -Nil- 
                            
   Total : 00 
Percentage:00% 
 