i 
 
17 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence 
Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence 
Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  09.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  11 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 24 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 25 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  26 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  27 
 (2025-26) held on 4th December, 2025 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2025-26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence 
Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand 
No. 21 and 22)’. 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri   Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
27 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
28 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
29 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
30 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director  
3.  Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vikas Kumar  - Under Secretary   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of Standing Committee 
on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2025-26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Pensions’. (Demand No. 21 and 22)’.  
2.  The Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17th March, 2025. The Report contained 15 Observations/ Recommendations. 
The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in June, 2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th December, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
04 December, 2025 Chairperson 
13  Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 

vii 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 
2025-26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Pensions’. (Demand No. 21 and 22)’, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2025. 
 2.        The 9th  Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 15 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 Para No. Subject 
1 Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2025-26: An 
Overview 
2 Capital Outlay on Defence Services: BE 2025-26 and BE 2024.25 
3 Utilisation of Capital budget 
4 Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services 
5 Modernization of Defence Forces 
6-7 Defence Procurement Policy 
8 Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement 
9 Ensuring Level Playing Field for Private Defence Industry 
10 Dependence on Foreign Suppliers 
11 Self Reliance and Make in India Initiatives 
12 Offset Clause 
13 Foreign Direct Investment 
14 Defence Planning 
15 Defence Pensions 
   
3.        The complete Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 15 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on              
04 June, 2025. Replies to rest of the recommendations have been examined and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Para Nos.   1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15 
  
              (Total - 15) 
 
 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
Para Nos. –Nil- 
(Total - 00)  

2 
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
            Para Nos.    –Nil- 
(Total - 00) 
(iv)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                   (Total - 00) 
  
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  
 
 
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the observations/recommendations made in the Ninth Report of the Committee in the 
succeeding Paragraphs.  
 
 
A. Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection 
with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2025-26, the Committee note that 
as per data pertaining to the last five financial years i.e. 2020-21 onwards, the 
'Revenue' component of the total outlay for the three Services overshadows the 'Capital’ 
component significantly. The overall ‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary 
allocation for the Services stands at, 61:39, 64:36, 65:35, 66:34 67:33 and 63:37 for 
2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 respectively. For 2025-26, the 
Revenue to Capital ratio stands at 65:35. The Committee are given to understand that 
Revenue expenditure (Demand No. 20) includes expenditure on pay & allowances, 
transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, rations, petrol, oil and lubricants, 
spares, maintenance of various platforms/equipment etc.), revenue works (which 
include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and taxes, 
etc) and other miscellaneous expenditure; Capital expenditure includes expenditure on 
land, construction works, plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, 
Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. In the considered view of the 
Committee, both Revenue and Capital expenditure play significant roles in operational 
preparedness of our Forces. Therefore, the Committee hope that allocations under 
Capital head need to be suitably matched to balance the ratio of Revenue and Capital 
outlay for the Services. 
 
 
 

3 
 
7. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 It may be mentioned that Capital Budget of the Armed Forces has been 
consistently increasing in absolute terms and in BE 2025-26, an amount of 
Rs.1,80,000.00 Crore has been allocated to Ministry of Defence under Capital Head 
which is an increase of Rs. 8000 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocations. 
 
2.  Further, the Committee may be informed that this Ministry submits the 
requirements projected by the Services (both Revenue and Capital Heads) to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance 
analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current 
financial year, overall resource envelope available with MoF etc. Based on the overall 
ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the 
Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, 
pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc. Therefore, it may be stated that 
allocations under the Revenue and Capital Heads depend upon several factors 
including requirements of the Services/ Departments and increasing allocation under 
Capital Head, just to balance the ratio, may not be feasible. 
 
  
8. During examination of Demands for Grants for the year, 2025-26, the 
Committee had noticed the allocation of higher proportion towards Revenue 
Component of Defence Budget vis-à-vis the Capital Component. While 
acknowledging the significant role of both Revenue and Capital component in 
operational preparedness of the forces, the Committee in their original Report 
had hoped for suitable enhancement in the ratio of Capital Component to balance 
the Revenue and Capital ratio. The Committee are happy to note that in BE for the 
year 2025-26, an amount allocation of Rs. 1,80,000.00 crore has been allocated to 
Ministry of Defence under Capital head which is an increase of allocation of Rs. 
8000 crore over BE for the year 2024-25.  The Ministry has further informed that 
allocation of funds within the Ministry is done on the basis of inter-services 
priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  Thus, 
increasing allocation under Capital Head, just to balance the ratio, may not be 
feasible.  The Committee agree with the reply of the Ministry of Defence, however, 
they expect an upward trajectory of funds allocation towards Revenue and 
Capital Heads in general and Capital Heads in particular in future.  
B. Modernization of Defence Forces 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
9.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee after gleaning through the available facts, learn that the 
Modernisation of Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the Defence 
budget. Modernisation involves the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, 
technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment defence capabilities. They 

4 
 
feel that it is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational challenges 
and technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet 
the entire spectrum of security challenges. The equipment requirements of the Armed 
Forces are planned and progressed through a detailed process which includes 15 Year 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a 5-year Service-wise Capability 
Acquisition Plan, a 2-year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by the 
Defence Acquisition Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee note that in 
2025-26, out of the amount of ₹ 1,80,000 crore allocated for Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services for the Services/Organisations covered under Defence Services Estimates, ₹ 
1,48,722.80 crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition /Modernisation Head of the three 
Services viz. Army, Navy (including Joint Staff) and Air Force. The Committee also find 
that the allocation for Modernisation Head of the Services has seen an increase of ₹ 
8,000 crores from BE 2024-25. Keeping in view the need for maintaining credible war 
deterrence at all times, the Committee recommend that enhanced budgetary allocation, 
if sought, under Capital Head for modernization purpose at Revised Estimates 2025- 26 
may be given to ensure state-of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for 
the Armed Forces. 
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 It may be highlighted that an amount of Rs. 1,80,000.00 Crore has been 
allocated to Ministry of Defence under Capital Head in BE 2025-26 which is an increase 
of Rs. 8000 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocations. Further, the Committee may be 
assured that this if required, Ministry will seek additional funds at Supplementary stages 
to ensure state-of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for the Armed 
Forces.  
11. During the examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2025-26 and 
through the reply furnished by the Ministry of Defence in response to 
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry has informed that an amount of 
Rs. 1,80,000.00 crore has been allocated to the Ministry under Capital Head in BE 
for the year 2025-26 which is an increase of Rs. 8000 crore over 2024-25 
allocations.  The Ministry in their reply has further assured that additional funds 
at supplementary stages would be sought to ensure state-of-the-art 
weapons/equipment and logistical support for the Armed Forces.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised regarding the amount sought at the supplementary 
stage, if any, along with the allocation made and expenditure incurred therein.  
 
C. Defence Procurement Policy  
 
Recommendation No. 06: 
12.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 

5 
 
The Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the 
Armed Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting the 
security and operational needs. The thrust remains to buy contemporary armaments in 
a time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make India self-reliant in 
defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to develop India as a global 
defence manufacturing hub. The policy is implemented through the mechanism of 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find that the Defence 
Procurement Procedure, which has been now revised as Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP) 2020, which is driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced 
as part of Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In order to promote indigenous design and 
development of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian - IDDM (Indigenously Designed, 
Developed and Manufactured)}’ category which was introduced in 2016 and was 
accorded top most priority for procurement of capital equipment, has been retained in 
DAP 2020. The Committee were also informed that Ministry of Defence has notified five 
positive indigenization lists, which contain a total of 509 items, which also include highly 
complex systems, sensors, weapons and ammunition which have been included and 
these will be manufactured and developed in India and procured for indigenous 
sources. In addition, the D/o Defence Production has also notified 5,012 items which 
includes assemblies, sub-assemblies, spares and components that will only be 
procured from Indian industries by the DPSUs. The Ministry in its presentation has 
stated that DPP, 2002 has been revised nine times and due to diversity of our 
geographical terrain the procurement manual has to address all eventualities. Though 
the Committee take cognizance of the fact that the requirements of each of the armed 
forces are very complex yet the Committee recommend that time bound and 
determined efforts must be made by all the stakeholders involved in the process of 
procurement such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces and private sector as this 
is vital for realization of the goal of self-reliance in Defence Sector. 
 
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 The Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces 
are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. Capital Acquisition for 
the Indian Armed Forces is made as per guidelines under the Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP), 2020 which is a flexible document continuously evolving on the basis 
of operational experience, changing threat perceptions and technological 
advancements. Continuous review of DAP ensures that hurdles in speedier acquisitions 
are identified and removed swiftly which ultimately reduces the acquisition cycle. DAP-
2020 has been kept updated via Business Processing Reengineering (BPR) wherein 
103 amendments have been carried out to align the same towards more efficient and 
effective processes. For promoting indigenous defence industry, following amendments 
were made to DAP-2020: - 
 

6 
 
a) Increased Indigenous Content (IC) in various categories of procurement 
under DAP-2020. Inclusion of provision for minimum 50% IC in the form of 
indigenous material/components/software in the equipment being acquired 
with an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce import 
dependency. 
b) Notification of ‘Positive Indigenisation Lists’ on a periodic basis to promote 
Atmanirbharta. Five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 
platforms/equipment have been issued. 
c) Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with “No foreign sourcing” 
Foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council. 
 
A comprehensive review of DAP-2020 is due in the current year to ensure timely 
acquisitions in transparent manner. 
 
Further, 64.09% of the total capital budget has been earmarked for domestic Capital 
procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% for FY 2022-23 and 75% for 
FY 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
 
 
 
14. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that various initiatives 
are being taken under the Defence Procurement Policy to develop the capability 
of the Armed Forces, along with fulfilling security and operational needs.  The 
Committee take positive note with regard to the highest priority accorded by the 
Government towards ensuring and fulfilling all operational requirements of 
armed forces by sufficiently reinforcing the indigenous production and 
procurement processes through various programmes and projects.   
 
The Committee appreciate the Ministry’s view that continuous review of 
DAP ensures that hurdles/bottlenecks in speedier acquisitions are identified and 
removed swiftly thereby reducing the acquisition cycle. Further, the Committee 
applaud the Ministry of Defence for undertaking initiatives to boost self-reliance 
in Indian Defence eco system.  viz (i) increased Indigenous Content (IC) in 
various categories of procurement under DAP 2020, (ii) notification of Positive 
Indigensiation List on a periodic basis to promote Atmanirbharata and issuance 
of 509 platforms/equipment in Five Positive Indigenisation Lists (iii) inclusion of 
the provision like “No foreign sourcing” and go for Foreign procurement only as 
an  exception with prior approval of Defence Acquisition Council  etc. The 
Committee are happy to note that the gradual increase in earmarking of domestic 
capital procurement from 64.09 percent in the financial year 2021-22 to 68 percent 
in the financial year 2022-23 and 75 percent in the years 2023-24, 2024-25 and 
2025-26 also testifies the seriousness of the Ministry of Defence to boost Self-
reliance in Indian Defence eco system. The Committee also note that a 

7 
 
comprehensive review of DAP 2020 is due in the current year to ensue timely 
acquisitions in transparent manner. The Committee hope that the Ministry of 
Defence would complete this review in a time bound manner and revise Defence 
procurement manual accordingly. The Committee further desire the Ministry to 
ensure collaborative participation of all the stakeholders like the Ministry of 
Defence, DPSUs, the Armed Forces and the Private Sectors in the review process 
for further augmentation of Atmanirbharata. The action taken in this regard may 
be apprised to this Committee. 
 
Recommendation No. 07: 
15.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee also note from the detailed information furnished by the Ministry 
regarding priorities of procurement with the Atmanirbhar Bharat in focus where 
indigenous design and development has been prioritized to reverse the imbalance 
between import and indigenous manufacture which has been further categorized into 
five categories. The Ministry has further illustrated the Acquisition Process as well 
where different stages of trials and approvals before finalizing any procurement 
contracts has been mentioned. The Ministry, while giving said information have 
mentioned that all procurements procedures are finished in a time bound manner, 
however a fixed timeline has not been mentioned. The Committee is of the view that 
with high level of dynamism in the field of technology such a procedure without a fix 
timeline can result in technology becoming obsolete and redundant thereby having 
adverse impact on the security of the country. Furthermore, the dynamism of 
international geopolitics can also threaten the smooth acquisition due to several 
unpredictable factors. Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in terms of 
technological development and global relations, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should try to identify ways in which the defence acquisition can be accelerated 
in a fix time line without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the 
process. This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as 
deterrent for the hostile countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard. 
 
 
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
  The Government is maintaining the highest standards of transparency, probity, 
public accountability and a balance between competing requirements such as 
expeditious procurement, high quality standards and appropriate costs in capital 
acquisition process. Ministry of Defence has aligned its acquisition process with 
Atmanirbhar Bharat clarion and it is focused towards enhancing self-reliance in defence 
production and Indigenisation of spares. 
 Some of the measures being undertaken to accelerate defence equipment 
acquisition are simplification of trials based on certification, compression of timelines for 

8 
 
capital acquisitions and revision of Defence Acquisition Procedure  
(DAP)-2020 in the current year. 
 
 
17. The Committee in their original report had recommended the Ministry to 
identify ways and means to accelerate the defence acquisition process without 
compromising on the transparency and accountability of the process. The 
Ministry in their action taken replies has stated that the Government is 
maintaining the highest standard of transparency, probity, public accountability 
and balance between competing requirements such as expeditious procurement, 
high quality standards and appropriate costs in capital acquisition process. The 
Committee are pleased to note the visible steps taken by the Ministry towards 
“Aatmnirbhar Bharat” in defence production and indigenisation of spares. The 
Committee also note that the Ministry has taken steps to accelerate defence 
equipment acquisition by simplification of trials based on certification, 
compression of timeline in capital acquisitions and revision of Defence 
Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 in the current year. The Committee may be 
apprised of the effects/impacts of all such measures undertaken to accelerate 
acquisition. 
E. Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement  
 
Recommendation No. 08 
 
18.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in 
Defence Procurement cases, the Ministry has taken various measures like interactive 
policy reviews with Indian defence industry, use of certification, simulation, visibility of 
Capability Development Plan to Indian Defence Ecosystem, hosting of policy changes, 
AoNs, RFI, etc on MoD website, etc. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the 
Ministry for ensuring accountability and transparency in the Defence Sector but would 
also recommend the need to warrant that all the measures/steps taken are 
implemented stringently at all levels and a robust monitoring mechanism must be 
formulated for ensuring fair and timely procurement of weapon systems. 
 
19. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence to promote probity, public 
accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards ensuring 
accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit. Any 
discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for the same. 
 
 
20. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry for ensuring 
accountability and transparency in Defence Procurement cases, the Committee in 

9 
 
the original Report had recommended to ensure stringent implementation of 
those measures at all levels and a robust monitoring mechanism to put into place 
to oversee and ensure fair and timely procurement of weapon systems. The 
Ministry in the action taken replies has mentioned that all measures instituted by 
the Ministry to promote probity, public accountability and transparency in 
procurement are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit and any 
discrepancies /violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for 
the same. The Committee may be apprised of the number of such cases related to 
violations, if any.  
 
Recommendation No. 15: 
F. Defence Pensions 
 
21.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee observe that Defence Pensions, under the Ministry of Defence 
provides for pensionary charges in respect of retired defence personnel (including 
defence civilian employees) of the three services and employees of erstwhile ordnance 
factories etc. The Committee have been informed that the total number of defence 
personnel in the country is 32,94,181 including 6,40,536 defence civilian pensioners 
and 26,79,645 armed force pensioners. The Committee note that the System for 
Pension Administration (Raksha) (SPARSH) is being implemented for making the 
pension sanction and disbursement for the armed forces. They are happy to note that a 
total of 28.24 lakh defence pensioners have been migrated to SPARSH and a total of 
Rs. 67,388.45 crores have been disbursed through SPARSH in FY 2024-25 till August 
2024. While appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry in migrating a large number 
into SPARSH, the Committee, in this regard, recommend that migration of the 
remaining pensioners be expedited at an early date. 
 
 
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 In this context, it is stated that the experience gained from data updation & 
conversion of AS-IS cases (migrated in the year 2023) to normal, Ministry of Defence 
has various constructive measures on hand for updation and conversion of data to 
ensure hassle free migration and avoid errors in pensioner’s data post migration. 
Accordingly, the migration of balance legacy cases will be taken after data purification 
and updation. 
 
 
 
23. During the course of examination of DFG (2025-26), the Committee was 
given to understand that System for Pension Administration (Raksha) (SPARSH) 
has been made operational and a total of 28.24 lakh defence pensioners have 
already been migrated to SPARSH.  Further, Ministry of Defence in their action 

10 
 
taken reply have informed that from the experience gained from data updation 
and conversion of AS-IS cases to normal, various constructive measures have 
been initiated on hand for updation and conversion of data to ensure smooth 
migration and avoid errors in data post migration.  The migration of balance 
legacy cases will be taken after data purification and updation.  The Committee 
take a positive note of the efforts undertaken by the Ministry, and they are 
hopeful that the remaining data would be transferred/updated expeditiously for 
seamless disbursement of pensions.  The Committee would also like to know the 
time by when transfer of said data is likely to be completed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the Defence Budget is 
categorised/grouped under four Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of 
Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – 
Capital Outlay on Defence Service and Demand No. 22 – Defence Pensions. Demand 
Nos. 19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension Estimates and Demand Nos. 20 and 21 
constitute Defence Services Estimates. Grant Number 20 caters to revenue expenditure 
which includes expenditure on pay & allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like 
ordnance stores, ration, petrol, oil and lubricants, spares, maintenance of various 
platforms / equipment etc), revenue works (which include maintenance of buildings, 
water and electricity charges, rents, rates and taxes, etc) and other miscellaneous 
expenditure.  
Grant Number 21 caters to Capital expenditure which includes expenditure on land, 
construction works, plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, 
Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. During the examination of the 
subject, the Committee find that re-structuring of Capital budget has been done with 
effect from FY 2024-25 wherein budgetary allocation of the three Services under 
common minor heads has been clubbed under the newly 
introduced Sub Major Head 09 i.e. Defence services. Allocation under other minor 
heads which are not common to the Services remain unchanged. During the 
examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2025-26, the 
Committee learn that the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for Financial 
Year 2025-26 is ₹ 6,81,210.27 crore. Out of this amount, the largest share of 72.19%, 
i.e. ₹ 4,91,732.30 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant 
Number 20 and 21). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 21) has 
been allocated an amount of ₹ 1,80,000.00 crore. An amount of ₹ 3,11,732.30 crore has 
been allocated to Defence Services Revenue (Grant Number 20).  
 
Reply of the Government 
This is factual information, hence no comments are offered. 
 
 
 

12 
 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services: BE 2025-26 and BE 2024.25 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee note that the capital budget of defence services is bifurcated into 
capital acquisition and other than capital acquisition with outlays of ₹1,48,722.80 crore 
and ₹ 31,277.20 crore respectively in BE 2025-26. The Committee take note of this fact 
with satisfaction that the total capital outlay of Defence services has registered an 
increase of 4.65 percent as compared to BE 2024-25. The capital acquisition 
expenditure which is also known as the modernisation budget of the Defence Services – 
Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff – reflects an increase of 11.97 percent in 
comparison with RE 2024-25. Other than the Capital Acquisition segment, which 
consists of the land and works expenditure of the Armed Forces and the capital budget 
of DRDO, DGQA and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & Services), has seen an 
increase of 9.42 percent when compared to RE 2024-25. At this stage, the Committee 
desire that the such increase in allocations be maintained in future also so as to 
maintain upward trajectory of Capital budget allocation for the Defence Services. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Defence takes Committee’s recommendation into consideration and 
assures the Committee that all efforts will be made to maintain an upward trajectory of 
Capital Budget allocation for the Defence Services. 
 
Utilisation of Capital budget 
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee learn that the total allocation under Capital Head at Revised Estimates 
2024-25 to Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & 
Services) and R&D stood at ₹ 34,226.95 crore, ₹ 59,728.00 crore, ₹ 47,766.14 crore, ₹ 
2,464.98 crore, ₹ 1,637.00 crore and ₹ 13,666 crore, respectively. The Committee, on 
examination of the budgetary documents in connection with DFG 2025-26, find that 
barring as per expenditure upto December, 2024 Army and Joint staff, the other 
Services and Organizations have not been able to fully utilize the funds allocated at RE 
2024-25 for Capital Budget. While noting that about 66.4 percent of the grants could be 
utilized till the completion of the third quarter of the Financial Year, the Committee would 
like to be apprised as to what are the plans/schemes/channels/trajectory in place for 
utilizing the remaining 33.6 percent until the time this Financial Year draws to a close. 
The Committee, at this stage, hope that the Ministry would undertake a pragmatic 
approach while seeking further allocations at RE stage for making a realistic 
assessment of the allocations sought. 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Addressing the utilization of Capital Budget, the Committee is apprised that the 
Expenditure under Grant No. 21 (Capital Outlay on Defence Services) as on 31st March, 
2025 (March Supplementary – I) is Rs. 1,59,847.49 Crore which marks complete 
utilization of RE 2024-25, i.e., Rs. 1,59,500.00 Crore. 
  
Ratio of Capital and Revenue Outlay for the Services  
Recommendation No. 4 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection 
with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2025-26, the Committee note that 
as per data pertaining to the last five financial years i.e. 2020-21 onwards, the 
'Revenue' component of the total outlay for the three Services overshadows the 'Capital’ 
component significantly. The overall ‘Revenue’ to ‘Capital Ratio’ of the budgetary 
allocation for the Services stands at, 61:39, 64:36, 65:35, 66:34 67:33 and 63:37 for 
2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25 respectively. For 2025-26, the 
Revenue to Capital ratio stands at 65:35. The Committee are given to understand that 
Revenue expenditure (Demand No. 20) includes expenditure on pay & allowances, 
transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, rations, petrol, oil and lubricants, 
spares, maintenance of various platforms/equipment etc.), revenue works (which 
include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and taxes, 
etc) and other miscellaneous expenditure; Capital expenditure includes expenditure on 
land, construction works, plant and machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, 
Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. In the considered view of the 
Committee, both Revenue and Capital expenditure play significant roles in operational 
preparedness of our Forces. Therefore, the Committee hope that allocations under 
Capital head need to be suitably matched to balance the ratio of Revenue and Capital 
outlay for the Services. 
Reply of the Government 
 It may be mentioned that Capital Budget of the Armed Forces has been 
consistently increasing in absolute terms and in BE 2025-26, an amount of 
Rs.1,80,000.00 Crore has been allocated to Ministry of Defence under Capital Head 
which is an increase of Rs. 8000 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocations. 
2.  Further, the Committee may be informed that this Ministry submits the 
requirements projected by the Services (both Revenue and Capital Heads) to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration. While allocating funds, Ministry of Finance 
analyses past absorption capacity of the Services, pace of expenditure in the current 
financial year, overall resource envelope available with MoF etc. Based on the overall 
ceilings conveyed by M/o Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds among the 

14 
 
Services and Organisations under MoD, taking into account Inter-Services priorities, 
pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc. Therefore, it may be stated that 
allocations under the Revenue and Capital Heads depend upon several factors 
including requirements of the Services/ Departments and increasing allocation under 
Capital Head, just to balance the ratio, may not be feasible. 
Modernization of Defence Forces 
Recommendation No.5 
 The Committee after gleaning through the available facts, learn that the 
Modernisation of Defence Forces is funded through Capital segment of the Defence 
budget. Modernisation involves the acquisition of new state-of-the-art platforms, 
technologies and weapon systems to upgrade and augment defence capabilities. They 
feel that it is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational challenges 
and technological changes to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness to meet the 
entire spectrum of security challenges. The equipment requirements of the Armed 
Forces are planned and progressed through a detailed process which includes 15 Year 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), a 5-year Service-wise Capability 
Acquisition Plan, a 2-year roll-on Annual Acquisition Plan and deliberations by the 
Defence Acquisition Council chaired by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee note that in 
2025-26, out of the amount of ₹ 1,80,000 crore allocated for Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services for the Services/Organisations covered under Defence Services Estimates, ₹ 
1,48,722.80 crore is allocated for Capital Acquisition /Modernisation Head of the three 
Services viz. Army, Navy (including Joint Staff) and Air Force. The Committee also find 
that the allocation for Modernisation Head of the Services has seen an increase of ₹ 
8,000 crores from BE 2024-25. Keeping in view the need for maintaining credible war 
deterrence at all times, the Committee recommend that enhanced budgetary allocation, 
if sought, under Capital Head for modernization purpose at Revised Estimates 2025- 26 
may be given to ensure state-of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for 
the Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It may be highlighted that an amount of Rs. 1,80,000.00 Crore has been 
allocated to Ministry of Defence under Capital Head in BE 2025-26 which is an increase 
of Rs. 8000 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocations. Further, the Committee may be assured 
that this if required, Ministry will seek additional funds at Supplementary stages to 
ensure state-of-the-art weapons/equipment and logistical support for the Armed Forces.  
 
 
Defence Procurement Policy  

15 
 
Recommendation No. 06: 
The Committee find that policy for procurement of defence equipment for the 
Armed Forces aims to develop the capability of the armed forces and by meeting the 
security and operational needs. The thrust remains to buy contemporary armaments in 
a time bound manner. Simultaneously, it also envisages to make India self-reliant in 
defence equipment production with the ultimate aim to develop India as a global 
defence manufacturing hub. The policy is implemented through the mechanism of 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The Committee also find that the Defence 
Procurement Procedure, which has been now revised as Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP) 2020, which is driven by the tenets of Defence Reforms announced as 
part of Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. In order to promote indigenous design and 
development of defence equipment ‘Buy {Indian - IDDM (Indigenously Designed, 
Developed and Manufactured)}’ category which was introduced in 2016 and was 
accorded top most priority for procurement of capital equipment, has been retained in 
DAP 2020. The Committee were also informed that Ministry of Defence has notified five 
positive indigenization lists, which contain a total of 509 items, which also include highly 
complex systems, sensors, weapons and ammunition which have been included and 
these will be manufactured and developed in India and procured for indigenous 
sources. In addition, the D/o Defence Production has also notified 5,012 items which 
includes assemblies, sub-assemblies, spares and components that will only be 
procured from Indian industries by the DPSUs. The Ministry in its presentation has 
stated that DPP, 2002 has been revised nine times and due to diversity of our 
geographical terrain the procurement manual has to address all eventualities. Though 
the Committee take cognizance of the fact that the requirements of each of the armed 
forces are very complex yet the Committee recommend that time bound and determined 
efforts must be made by all the stakeholders involved in the process of procurement 
such as the Ministry, DPSUs the Armed Forces and private sector as this is vital for 
realization of the goal of self-reliance in Defence Sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces 
are sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. Capital Acquisition for 
the Indian Armed Forces is made as per guidelines under the Defence Acquisition 
Procedure (DAP), 2020 which is a flexible document continuously evolving on the basis 
of operational experience, changing threat perceptions and technological 
advancements. Continuous review of DAP ensures that hurdles in speedier acquisitions 
are identified and removed swiftly which ultimately reduces the acquisition cycle. DAP-
2020 has been kept updated via Business Processing Reengineering (BPR) wherein 
103 amendments have been carried out to align the same towards more efficient and 
effective processes. For promoting indigenous defence industry, following amendments 
were made to DAP-2020: - 

16 
 
d) Increased Indigenous Content (IC) in various categories of procurement 
under DAP-2020. Inclusion of provision for minimum 50% IC in the form of 
indigenous material/components/software in the equipment being acquired 
with an aim at boosting indigenous production and reduce import 
dependency. 
e) Notification of ‘Positive Indigenisation Lists’ on a periodic basis to promote 
Atmanirbharta. Five Positive Indigenization Lists comprising of 509 
platforms/equipment have been issued. 
f) Self-Reliance in Indian Defence eco system with “No foreign sourcing” 
Foreign procurements only as exceptions with prior approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council. 
A comprehensive review of DAP-2020 is due in the current year to ensure timely 
acquisitions in transparent manner. 
Further, 64.09% of the total capital budget has been earmarked for domestic Capital 
procurement in 2021-22, which has been increased to 68% for FY 2022-23 and 75% for 
FY 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
Recommendation No. 07: 
The Committee also note from the detail information furnished by the Ministry 
regarding priorities of procurement with the Atmanirbhar Bharat in focus where 
indigenous design and development has been prioritized to reverse the imbalance 
between import and indigenous manufacture which has been further categorized into 
five categories. The Ministry has further illustrated the Acquisition Process as well 
where different stages of trials and approvals before finalizing any procurement 
contracts has been mentioned. The Ministry, while giving said information have 
mentioned that all procurements procedures are finished in a time bound manner, 
however a fixed timeline has not been mentioned. The Committee is of the view that 
with high level of dynamism in the field of technology such a procedure without a fix 
timeline can result in technology becoming obsolete and redundant thereby having 
adverse impact on the security of the country. Furthermore, the dynamism of 
international geopolitics can also threaten the smooth acquisition due to several 
unpredictable factors. Therefore, in the wake of dynamism exhibited in terms of 
technological development and global relations, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry should try to identify ways in which the defence acquisition can be accelerated 
in a fix time line without compromising on the transparency and accountability of the 
process. This would not only help in empowering our forces but will also act as deterrent 
for the hostile countries. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 

17 
 
  The Government is maintaining the highest standards of transparency, probity, 
public accountability and a balance between competing requirements such as 
expeditious procurement, high quality standards and appropriate costs in capital 
acquisition process. Ministry of Defence has aligned its acquisition process with 
Atmanirbhar Bharat clarion and it is focused towards enhancing self-reliance in defence 
production and Indigenisation of spares. 
 Some of the measures being undertaken to accelerate defence equipment 
acquisition are simplification of trials based on certification, compression of timelines for 
capital acquisitions and revision of Defence Acquisition Procedure  
(DAP)-2020 in the current year. 
Accountability and Transparency in Defence Procurement  
Recommendation No. 08 
The Committee note that for ensuring accountability and transparency in Defence 
Procurement cases, the Ministry has taken various measures like interactive policy 
reviews with Indian defence industry, use of certification, simulation, visibility of 
Capability Development Plan to Indian Defence Ecosystem, hosting of policy changes, 
AoNs, RFI, etc on MoD website, etc. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the 
Ministry for ensuring accountability and transparency in the Defence Sector but would 
also recommend the need to warrant that all the measures/steps taken are implemented 
stringently at all levels and a robust monitoring mechanism must be formulated for 
ensuring fair and timely procurement of weapon systems. 
Reply of the Government 
All measures instituted by the GoI/Ministry of Defence to promote probity, public 
accountability and transparency in Defence Capital procurements towards ensuring 
accountability and transparency are being adhered to diligently in letter and spirit. Any 
discrepancies/violations, if noticed, are handled as per existing provisions for the same. 
Ensuring Level Playing Field for Private Defence Industry 
Recommendation No. 09: 
The Committee also note that in order to ensure level-playing field for private 
defence industry vis-à-vis the DPSUs, various measures like enhanced opportunities 
through DND categories which have been given to the private industry since the 
Ordinance Factory Board (OFB) has been corporatized, there are seven DPSUs which 
have been added, and there has been a parity in securities and payment terms between 
the DPSUs and bank guarantees which were earlier five to ten per cent were reduced to 
three per cent and they remain at three per cent as on today. The Committee applaud 
the initiatives taken to attract the private enterprisers in the defence sector but there is 
still a lot more to be done in this direction. For the private players in defence sector, the 
Committee would like to recommend that the Ministry should try to encourage 

18 
 
indigenous private enterprises instead of foreign conglomerates. Considering long and 
arduous gestation period in defence manufacturing sector, the Committee would 
recommend the Ministry to enhance capital procurement and augment design and 
research assistance for indigenous players in order to create vibrant indigenous 
privatise defence manufacturing hub which is also the essence of the Atmanirbhar 
Bharat program. The Committee would also like to point that existence of flourishing 
private defence sector would necessitate the need for articulated design and patent 
laws synchronised with the unique needs of defence manufacturing sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has launched various schemes to encourage indigenous private 
enterprises instead of foreign conglomerates like the launch of Innovations for Defence 
Excellence (iDEX), Make Schemes (Make I, Make II & Make III) & Technology 
Development Fund (TDF). 
2.  The Ministry encourages participation in R&D by Indian Industries. Buy (Indian-
IDDM) has been given the highest priority for capital acquisition of Defence Equipment, 
as per DAP-2020. 
3.  Patents obtained by DRDO are available on DRDO website for use by industries, 
which are available free of cost to the industry. Ownership of IPR generated in iDEX 
and Make cases is also provided to the Industry. Ministry monitors the IPRs filed and 
granted in case of Indian designs developed by DPSUs and Industry under “Mission 
Raksha Gyan Shakti”. A dedicated IP cell has been created in the MoD. 
Dependence on Foreign Suppliers  
Recommendation No. 10 
The Capital procurement of Defence equipment from Indian and foreign vendors 
is carried out as per the provisions of the extant Defence Procurement Procedure. 
Various military equipment is being imported from various countries as per the 
operational requirements of our Armed Forces. The Committee have been informed that 
during the last financial year (2023-24) and current Financial year 2024-25 (upto 
December, 2024), total 337 capital acquisition contracts have been signed for capital 
procurement of defence equipment for Armed forces, out of which 12 contracts have 
been signed with vendors from foreign countries (Russia, USA and France) for capital 
procurement of defence equipment and the major defence equipment imported includes 
Assault Rifles, Missiles, etc. The Committee also note that the value of foreign capital 
procurement is also going down during the last three years and current year. All these 
data show that dependence on foreign suppliers is decreasing substantially thus 
Committee is hopeful that India would soon become self-reliant in defence sector. 
Reply of the Government 

19 
 
This is a factual statement by Hon’ble Committee. Ministry of Defence as a whole 
is committed to Atmanirbharta in Defence. 
Self-Reliance and Make in India Initiatives  
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note that the ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government is 
devised to transform India into a global design and manufacturing hub. ‘Make in India’ in 
defence sector is primarily driven by providing preference to procurement from Indian 
vendors under the Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP), promoting indigenous design, 
development and manufacture of defence equipment, and other policy measures such 
as launch of iDEX and ADITI, simplification of Make procedure, introduction of simplified 
procedure for Make II sub-category, liberalization of the licensing regime and FDI policy 
by raising the cap on FDI in the defence sector, simplification of export procedure, 
streamlining of defence offset guidelines, creation of level playing field between public 
and private sector, formulation of outsourcing and vendor development guidelines, 
setting up of ‘Technology Development Fund’ for R&D with increased participation of 
public and private sector industry especially Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises 
(MSME) etc. The proposals for capital acquisition in Defence Procurement Procedure 
(DPP) are categorized as ‘Buy (Indian-IDDM)’, ‘Buy (Indian)’, ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ & 
‘Buy and Make’ with preference over ‘Buy (Global)’ category, to make the country self-
reliant in defence production after deliberations in various committees such as SPB/ 
DPB/ DAC. The Ministry has also made allocation of 75% of Modernisation Defence 
budget for Domestic Procurement in FY 2025-26. Similarly, for promoting ‘Make in India’ 
several policy measures have been taken by way of revising FDI policy, enhancing 
indigenous/local contents to minimum 50%, creation of Defence Industrial Corridors in 
Uttar Pradesh and Tamilnadu and delivery of offsets through Indian partners with higher 
multipliers etc. The Committee are happy with the progress being made towards 
promotion of Make in India and making India Atmanirbhar in defence sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry is thankful to the Committee for recognizing and appreciating efforts of 
Deptt. / Ministry for promoting “Make in India” & Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
 
Offset Clause 
Recommendation No.12 
The Committee note that the Offsets under Defence Capital Acquisition were 
introduced in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in 2005 based on the 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee. The Offset guidelines in DPP have been 
amended 6 times thereafter. As per Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP 2020) offset 
provisions are applicable only on “Buy Global” categories of capital acquisitions. They 

20 
 
apply in capital acquisition contracts which are more than Rs. 2,000 crores. However, 
the offsets are not applicable to procurements under “Fast Track Procedure” and in 
“Option Clause” cases if the same was not envisaged in the original contract. Further no 
offsets will be applicable in all ab-initio Single Vendor Cases including procurements 
based on Inter Governmental Agreements/Foreign Military Sales (IGA/FMS) and the 
offset applicability on Indian companies under ‘Buy Global’ cases do not arise in case 
the indigenization component is 30% or more. The Committee also note that offset 
contracts are co-terminus with the main procurement contract and signed along with the 
main procurement contract after approval of Competent Financial Authority (CFA) and 
the period of offset discharge can be extended on exceptional ground by a maximum 
period of two years. Further the DAP stipulates eligible products/services for discharge 
of offset obligations which covers defence products and Maintenance, Repair and 
Operations (MRO) related to helicopters and aircrafts. Though the responsibility for 
fulfilment of offsets obligations lies with the main vendor, however, the vendor is 
permitted to discharge his obligations through Tier 1 sub-vendors based on their work 
share. In case of investment and/or transfer of technology the offset discharge can be 
permitted by entities other than vendor/Tier-I Sub-vendor on case to case basis and the 
vendors are free to select their Indian Offset Partners (IOP) from 
DPSU/OFB/DRDO/Private Industry. The Offset Policy further allows vendors to submit 
offset details at later stage after signing of the contract i.e. either at the time of seeking 
offset credits or one year prior to discharge of offset obligations.    
The Committee are given to understand that the vendors have been expressing 
difficulties in providing the details of Indian offset partners, products and work share 
along with supporting documents in the technical offset proposal as per offset guidelines 
at Technical Offset Evaluation Committee (TOEC) stage, sighting that these activities 
would be undertaken number of years later which would then cause seeking changes to 
the contract. Another major challenge towards post contract management had been 
timely and meaningful disposal of contract amendment requests received from the 
vendors for change of IOP/Product etc. The resolution of these issues have been 
catered for by introducing an amendment to the offset guidelines with the approval of 
Defence Acquisition Council, whereby vendors have been given an option to provide 
details of IOPs and products even after signing of contracts, thereby making it more 
realistic. Although the Committee appreciate the fact that the process for contract 
amendment has been made flexible by allowing change of Indian Offset Partners (IOPs) 
and offset components, for the signed contracts yet there is scope for the Ministry to 
strive further towards effective implementation of offset guidelines based on the 
feedback received from the vendors at the grass-root level. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that Ministry of Defence play more proactive role in selection of offset 
partners since the inception of such agreement in order to avert any kind of breach of 
offset agreement at any level. Furthermore, the Committee is in total concurrence that 
the success of indigenization of defence sector is adhered to fulfilment of offset 
agreement in toto. Additionally, therefore the Committee recommend that Ministry 
should work out a mechanism to ensure that all the offset agreements are implemented 

21 
 
thoroughly at all level to give momentum to indigenization programmes. The violators of 
offset agreement may be penalized appropriately keeping the security perception in 
mind. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
  As per the Defence Offset Guidelines under extant DPP/DAP, the              
Vendor/Tier-1 sub vendor will be free to select the Indian Offset Partner (IOP) for 
implementing the offset obligation. The function of Defence Offset Management Wing 
(DOMW) in the Ministry includes assisting vendors in interfacing with Indian Industry. 
Ministry is organizing Conclaves/Webinars/Seminars/Interactive Sessions primarily 
through Industry Associations to facilitate interface of vendors with Indian defence 
companies. 
2.  Ministry has streamlined the process of management of offset contracts through 
digitisation of the offset claim submission, audit, verification and calculation of shortfalls. 
This has enhanced transparency, accountability and efficiency in offset management. 
3.  For unfulfilled offset obligations, the vendors are penalised as per the terms and 
conditions of the offset contracts governed by the applicable Defence Procurement 
Procedure. 
Foreign Direct Investment  
Recommendation No. 13: 
 The Committee note that the Government has reviewed the Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) policy in Defence Sector in September 2020 thereby allowing FDI 
under Automatic Route up to 74% and beyond 74% through Government Route 
wherever it is likely to result in access to Modern technology or for other reasons to be 
recorded. The Committee note that this FDI limit was increased from 49% to 74% to 
ensure that it will come along with the technology also and the FDI limit has also been 
made attractive enough as it facilitate up to 100% through Government Route. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry should ensure that despite 
raising the limits of FDI to as high as 74%, the purpose of self-reliance should not be 
hampered. Furthermore, the Committee note that current FDI policy facilitate up to 100 
per cent by Government route wherever, it is likely to result in access to modern 
technology or for other reasons to be recorded. The Ministry also submitted that 
consequently increasing FDI through automatic route to 100 per cent will nullify the 
ownership of domestic partner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition 
to the measures taken for making FDI more attractive, focused efforts may be 
undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen indigenous R&D base of the country and 
increase coordination between the public and private sector within the country, so that 
the indigenous defence sector is encouraged to develop and manufacture 
technologies/systems/accessories independently which are presently being acquired 
through the FDI route. 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to boost Research & Development infrastructure in the country, Ministry 
of Defence has taken various measures so that the indigenous defence sector is 
encouraged to develop & manufacture technologies/systems/accessories. The 
initiatives inter-alia include Buy(Indian-IDDM) has been accorded top priority for 
procurement of capital equipment; Simplification of Make Procedure; Launch of 
Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme involving startups & Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs); Reforms in Offset policy with thrust on attracting 
investment and Transfer of Technology for Defence manufacturing by assigning higher 
multipliers; Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, 
startups and academia with 25 percent of defence R&D budget; implementation of New 
Transfer of Technology Policy; Launch of Dare to Dream Innovation: Contest to Support 
Start Ups & Innovators; Exclusive Technologies/Systems for industry to develop: 108 
System identified, DRDO to provide scientific/technologic & testing support; Provisional 
access to own industry to world class test facilities of DRDO; Free access to Indian 
Industry to DRDO Patents, MoU with Defence Industrial Corridor to impact skill training, 
hand holding & guidance; To augment the knowledge potential, Introduction of Defence 
Courses, Collaborative Ph. D Programmes/Certified Courses on AI & Cyber 
Technologies. Further DRDO is providing Apprenticeship scheme & Internship training 
to students. 
Defence Planning  
Recommendation No. 14: 
 The Committee have been informed that the Defence Planning process caters to 
the need of the current and future modernization need of the Armed Forces. The 
Committee understand that since this is an exhaustive process involving lot of internal 
and external variables of dynamic nature, it needs to be dynamic and adaptive. The 
Committee have been informed that keeping in mind the diverse need of all the three 
services, Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) had been made as a single 
point contact to ensure a joint planning for all the three services. The Committee are 
happy to note that HQ IDS has developed Integrated Capability Development 
System(ICDS) which carries out the defence planning through an interactive process. 
The Committee have been informed that Integrated Capability Development Plan will be 
prepared which will comprise Five Year Defence Acquisition plan and Two-Year Annual 
Acquisition Plan which will factor in budgetary projections. The Committee believe that 
planning under ICDP should be in tandem with changing nature of modern warfare 
which demands more focus on automation, velocity and application of Artificial 
Intelligence(AI). 
 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
  As highlighted by the Committee, the outcome of a framework bound process will 
lead to an Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP) which caters for 
identification/acquisition of niche technologies (including AI and automation) to meet 
future threats and challenges. It will significantly enhance Tri-Services prioritisation and 
optimisation of the Capital Budget. Furthermore, to cater for longer horizon period upto 
and beyond 10 years, a ‘Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR)’ is 
prepared, which enunciates to the Industry specific demands of technologies and exact 
nature of requirements with specific quantities required by the Services. 
Defence Pensions 
Recommendation No. 15: 
 The Committee observe that Defence Pensions, under the Ministry of Defence 
provides for pensionary charges in respect of retired defence personnel (including 
defence civilian employees) of the three services and employees of erstwhile ordnance 
factories etc. The Committee have been informed that the total number of defence 
personnel in the country is 32,94,181 including 6,40,536 defence civilian pensioners 
and 26,79,645 armed force pensioners. The Committee note that the System for 
Pension Administration (Raksha) (SPARSH) is being implemented for making the 
pension sanction and disbursement for the armed forces. They are happy to note that a 
total of 28.24 lakh defence pensioners have been migrated to SPARSH and a total of 
Rs. 67,388.45 crores have been disbursed through SPARSH in FY 2024-25 till August 
2024. While appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry in migrating a large number 
into SPARSH, the Committee, in this regard, recommend that migration of the 
remaining pensioners be expedited at an early date. 
Reply of the Government 
 In this context, it is stated that the experience gained from data updation & 
conversion of AS-IS cases (migrated in the year 2023) to normal, Ministry of Defence 
has various constructive measures on hand for updation and conversion of data to 
ensure hassle free migration and avoid errors in pensioner’s data post migration. 
Accordingly, the migration of balance legacy cases will be taken after data purification 
and updation. 

24 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
-Nil- 

25 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 December, 2025 Chairperson 
13 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th December, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
3 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
4 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
5 Ms. S. Jothimani 
6 Shri Shashank Mani 
7 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
8 Shri Virendra Singh 
9 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
10 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
11 Shri Naresh Bansal  
12 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
13 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
14 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
15 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
16 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
17 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

28 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the 
draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
7th , 8th , 9th  and 10th  Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year  2025-26. 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 

29 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services)– New DPSUs, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance and 
National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT (18TH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2025-26 ON ‘CAPITAL 
OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES, DEFENCE PLANNING, PROCUREMENT 
POLICY AND DEFENCE PENSIONS’. (DEMAND NO. 21 AND 22). 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             15 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15         
   Total  : 15 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 Recommendation Para Nos. Nil Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 