 
i 
 
23 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
“REVIEW OF SAINIK SCHOOLS, RASHTRIYA INDIAN MILITARY COLLEGE 
(RIMC) AND RASHTRIYA MILITARY SCHOOLS” 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026 / Phalguna 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
ii 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
“REVIEW OF SAINIK SCHOOLS, RASHTRIYA INDIAN MILITARY COLLEGE 
(RIMC) AND RASHTRIYA MILITARY SCHOOLS” 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  18.03.2026. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.03.2026. 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026 / Phalguna 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
iii 
 
CONTENTS 
           Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26).………………………… .   iv 
INTRODUCTION..……………………………………………………. …………   viii 
PART-I 
Chapter I Introductory 
 
Sainik Schools 
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
Rashtriya Military Schools 
1   
     
Chapter II Sainik Schools  
 
A. Sainik Schools Under Erstwhile Pattern 
    (i) Overview and Objectives 
    (ii) Budgetary Allocation 
    (iii) Role of the Central and State Governments 
(a) Role of State Government 
(b) Role of Central Government (MoD) 
(c) Scholarships/ Grant-in-aids/incentives and Central 
assistance 
(d) Infrastructure/maintenance 
     (iv) Induction of Girl Students in Sainik Schools 
     (v) Review/monitoring 
 
B. Sainik Schools Under PPP Mode 
     (i) Overview and objectives 
     (ii) Criteria for approval of New Sainik Schools and progress 
     (iii) Induction of Girl Students in New Sainik Schools  
     (iv) Review/Monitoring 
 
C. Challenges, constraints and issues relating to Sainik Schools 
 
3   
Chapter III Rashtriya Indian Military College and Rashtriya Military  
Schools 
 
  (i) Rashtriya Indian Military College  
  (ii) Rashtriya Military Schools 
  (iii) Management and Governance of RMS and RIMC 
32   
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations …………………………………….                                     40 
Annexures……………………………………………………………….                                     61 
APPENDICES 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held ………………………                                      66 
on 06.02.2024, 25.10.2024 and 16.03.2026.  

 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24)  
SHRI JUAL ORAM  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 * Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy ceased to be member of w.e.f. 8th December, 2023 vide Lok Sabha 
Secretariat notification no 21/1(3)/2023/T(B) dated 8th December, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
6 Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
7 Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
8 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10 Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
11 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
12 Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
13 Vacant* 
14 Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
15 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17 Shri Prathap Simha  
18 Dr. Amar Singh 
19 Shri Brijendra Singh  
20 Shri Mahabali Singh  
21 Shri Durga Das Uikey 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23 Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
25 Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
26 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
27 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
28 Smt. P.T. Usha 
29 Shri G.K. Vasan 
30 Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
31 Shri K.C. Venugopal 

 
v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH – CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 Nominated to the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25) by the Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  6 August, 2025 
vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 65693 dated 6 August, 2025 
*Shri N. Chandrasegharan ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25) w.e.f. 25 July, 2025 
consequent upon cessation of his Membership of Rajya Sabha  on 24 July, 2025 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26)  
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Naveen Jain 
26 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27 Shri Praful Patel 
28 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
29 Shri Sanjay Singh 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31 Shri Ujjwal Deorao Nikam# 
 

 
vi 
 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri   Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
27 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
28 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
29 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
30 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 

 
vii 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha           - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Amrish Kumar        - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anjorem Kerketta   - Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
viii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having 
been authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty-Third Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence on the subject “Review of Sainik 
Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools.”  
2. The subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’ was selected for the examination during the 
year 2023-24. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on     6th February, 2024. The subject was carried forward for examination 
by the successor Committee during 2024-25. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 25th October, 2024. The draft Report 
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 16th March, 
2026. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report.   
3. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part II of the Report.  
4.  The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Defence for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and 
information which the Committee desired in connection with examination of the 
subject.  
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them by the Committee Secretariat.  
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
16 March, 2026 Chairperson 
25 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence  

 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
PART 1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
 
Sainik Schools 
 
 Sainik Schools were established as a joint venture of the Central and 
State Governments and have been in existence since 1961.  These schools 
are under the overall governance of Sainik School Society, Ministry of 
Defence.  
 
1.2 The first objective of Sainik Schools is to prepare cadets for entry into 
the National Defence Academy and the Indian Military Academy. The next 
objective is to remove regional imbalances in the officers cadre of the Armed 
Forces. Another important role is to provide training to develop body, mind 
and character, so that the young cadets can become good and responsible 
citizens of the nation. This is achieved by implementing a scientific and time-
tested curriculum of training and related activities in each Sainik School. The 
ultimate objective is to provide high quality education within the reach of the 
common man. This objective is achieved by providing various financial 
incentives to the parents.  
 
 
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
 
1.3     The Committee learnt that the Rashtriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC) was founded on 13th March, 1922. The RIMC follows CBSE 
curriculum and offers only science stream at the plus two level. The aim of 
RIMC is to educate, train and nurture cadets into capable, effective leaders 
inspiring them to take up profession of arms as their natural preferred 
calling. The candidates (25 Boys and 05 Girls) aged between 11 and a half 
year and 13 years  are admitted every six months. Admissions are made to 
standard VIll only. The selection is carried out on the basis of an All India 
Entrance Examination held twice a year which includes written examination, 
interview and medical. Traditionally an all boys schools, the establishment 

 
2 
 
changed the status quo with the introduction of first girl cadet in 2022. Five 
girls per batch are being admitted to RIMC each term. As on December, 
2024, 24 girls are currently studying at the college. 
 
 
Rashtriya Military Schools 
 
1.4 The Committee have been informed that there are five Rashtriya 
Military Schools (RMS) in the country located at Belgaum and Bengaluru in 
Karnataka. Chail in Himachal Pradesh and Ajmer and Dholpur in Rajasthan. 
The Rashtriya Military Schools at Chail, Ajmer, Belgaum, Bengaluru, 
Dholpur was established on 1925, 1930, 1945, 1946 and 1962, respectively. 
The aim of the Rashtriya Military Schools is "To impart quality education and 
prepare the cadets to join the Defence Services". The candidates (Boys and 
Girls) aged between 10-12 years are eligible for admission in class VI and 
candidates (Boys) aged between 13-15 years are eligible for admission in 
class IX. Admissions in Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) are carried out 
through a Common Entrance Test conducted Pan India in December every 
year, which includes written examination, interview and medical. The 
admission to girl cadets in class VI has already commenced w.e.f academic 
session 2021-22. As on December, 2024, total girl cadets in RMS's is 87. 
Lateral admission of girl cadets in class IX has opened w.e.f academic 
session 2024-25. 
 
 
 

 
3 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
 
A. Sainik Schools Under Erstwhile Pattern 
 
 (i) Overview and Objectives 
 
 The Ministry have informed that Sainik Schools, which have been in 
existence since 1961, are a joint venture of the Central  and State 
Governments, under the overall governance of Sainik Schools Society, 
Ministry of  Defence. At present, there are a total of 33 Sainik Schools in 23 
states and one Union Territory, with approximately 18,366 cadets enrolled. 
The first Sainik School was started in the year 1961 and the last two Sainik 
Schools were added in the year 2020 at Amethi and Sambalpur. A list of  
existing Sainik Schools under erstwhile pattern is at Annexure-I.  It may be 
seen from the list that four (04) States viz. Tripura, Meghalaya, Goa & 
Sikkim and  the 07 Union Territories, namely, N.C.T. of Delhi, Puducherry, 
Chandigarh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Daman and Diu and Lakshdweep do not have even a single Sainik School 
under erstwhile pattern till the year 2020. 
 
 
(ii) Budgetary allocation  
 
    2.2   When the Committee enquired regarding budget allocation to Sainik 
Schools and its utilization, the Ministry in their written reply stated that in F.Y . 
2023-24, out of the allocated budget of Rs. 175.87 Crore, an amount of Rs. 
152.43 Crore was allocated for Sainik schools. The balance amount of Rs. 
23.44 Crore was surrendered to Government account. The said amount was 
adequate to fulfil the obligation of Ministry of Defence towards functioning of 
Sainik schools which includes, but not limited to, providing various grant-in-
aids, scholarships, incentives, additionality arising out of difference between 
5th and 7th  Pay Commission, special grants to Sainik schools. 
 
 
      2.3 When further enquired regarding budget allocation to Sainik Schools 
for FY 2024-25 to meet the requirement, the Ministry in its written reply 
stated that in F.Y . 2024-25, an amount of Rs. 175.87 Crore has been 
allocated for Sainik schools. To cater for the requirement in addition to BE 

 
4 
 
2024-25, an amount of Rs. 670 Crore has been projected for Revised 
Estimates 2024-25 which is Rs. 494.13 Crore more than the allocated 
amount of Rs. 175.87 Crore. The increased projections for RE 2024-25 are 
attributed to two special grants i.e.  
 
       (i) Rs. 330 Crore for One-time Infrastructure Development and 
Modernization of 33 Sainik Schools @ 10 Crores per school;  
 
      (ii) Rs. 160 Crore for construction of Sainik school in Karbi Anglong 
district of Assam. 
 
 
    2.4  On being asked about more allocation for Sainik Schools in view of 
the increase in number of such schools, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
 “In F.Y . 2023-24, one additional Sainik School in Karbi Anglong district 
of Assam was approved. Towards this, additional funds are being 
requested in phased manner.  Accordingly, Rs. 160 crore was allocated 
in RE 2024-25, out of which Rs. 100 crore was released.  Further, in BE 
2025-26, Rs. 130 crore has been allocated for establishment of Sainik 
School at Karbi Anglong.” 
 
 
   2.5 With regard to the share of budget provided to Sainik Schools during 
FY 2023-24 and 2024-25 by the State and Central Government, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“Details of budget provided to Sainik Schools by the State and Central 
Government in the last four years is as given below: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
 
 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24  2024-25  
 
Central Govt. 
Share 
119.50 190.83 
(+60%)# 
152.43  
(-20%)# 
261.63 
(+72%)# 
State Govt. 
Share 
225.98 161.07  
(-29%)# 
156.8*  
(-3%)# 
273.1 
(+74%)# 
Total 345.48 351.90 309.23  
 
534.73 
* Data has been revised based on updated information provided by the Sainik Schools. 
 
#Approximate percentage increase or decrease in the current year with respect to 
previous financial year has been indicated in parenthesis with a + or- sign respectively 
 

 
5 
 
2.6 During oral evidence, with regard to all round development of cadets 
and steps taken for new initiatives in Sainik Schools, a representative of 
Ministry informed as under: 
 
“सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  का ȯ ान िविभɄ एƜ Ōा करŎक ु लर और को-करŎक ु लर एƃ ीिवटीज़, एक ै डिमक और 
नॉन-एक ै डिमक डोमेन की गितिविधयों क े माȯ म से अपने क ै डेट्स क े ऑलराउंडर हॉिलİːक 
डेवलपमŐट पर क ेİȾत है। ……. 
 
सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  क े क ै डेट्स सिŢय ŝ प से सरकारी अिभयानों, जैसे पुनीत सागर अिभयान, ‘एक भारत, 
ŵेʿ भारत’, आज़ादी का अमृत महोȖ व, ‘मेरी माटी, मेरा देश’, चȾ यान-3 की सफलता क े सेिलŰेशन 
और अɊ  अिभयानों मŐ शािमल होते हœ ……………………. 
 
ˠ ाइड मŐ सैिनक ˋ ू लों मŐ िलए गए नए इिनिशएिट̺स िदखाए गए हœ, िजनमŐ ऑल इंिडया सैिनक 
ˋ ू ʤ  नेशनल गेʈ , 2024, राʼŌीय टेİːंग एजŐसी क े Ȫारा आयोिजत िकए गए ऑल इंिडया सैिनक 
ˋ ू ʤ  ए ं टŌेस ए̑ज़ािमनेशन, वाइज़ैग नेशनल  क े माȯ म से िलए गए ऑल इंिडया सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  
एडिमशन, काउंसिलंग, IITE, गांधीनगर मŐ टीचसŊ टŌेिनंग इȑािद Ůमुख हœ।“ 
 
 
     2.7 When enquired about any comparative analysis has been made 
regarding the intake from the three educational institutions i.e. Sainik 
Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College and Rashtriya Military Schools in 
National Defence Academy/Naval Academy, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under:- 
 
“The governing mechanism and modalities for setting up the Sainik 
Schools including the pattern for imparting education, criteria for 
reservation for defence personnel etc. are different from RMS & RIMC. 
Hence, no comparative analysis is feasible.” 
 
  2.8 When asked about the percentage of students who joined National 
Defence Academy/Naval Academy from Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College and Rashtriya Military Schools, 2020 onwards, the Ministry 
in their written reply submitted as under:  
 
“Details of students appeared in written examination of NDA/NA along 
with students who joined NDA/NA from Sainik Schools (SS), Rashtriya 
Military Schools (RMS) and Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) is 
tabulated below: 
 
S.  2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 

 
6 
 
No. SS RMS RIMC 
2020 SS RMS RIMC 
2021 SS RMS RIMC 
2022 SS RMS RIMC 
2023 
1. 
Number 
of 
students 
appeared 
in written 
exam of 
NDA/NA 
1705 145 80 1969  209 97 2032  187 80 3475  205 82 
2. 
Number 
of 
students 
joined 
NDA/NA 
190 22 32 128 31 38 117 50 29 148 35 20 
# RIMC has given data year-wise as indicated above. In addition, from RIMC in the year 
2024, 85 students appeared in NDA/NA exam out of which 36 got selected. 
 
    2.9  The Committee’s examination has revealed that in terms of 
objectives of setting up of the three institutions i.e. Sainik Schools, Rashtriya 
Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military College, Sainik Schools are 
far behind than Rashtriya Indian Military College in terms of performance….. 
   2.10  During the course of oral evidence the Committee have been 
informed that Sainik Schools were started for motivation in taking admission 
to NDA. The Committee brought to the attention of the representative of the 
Ministry on the issue that in post-liberalisation the situation has been 
changed and desired to know whether students studying in 12th class are 
focussing totally on NDA or their attitude have been changed, a 
representative of the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“…सर, यह आपने िबʋ ु ल वैिलड ɚाइंट रेज िकया है िक ओवर ए पीįरयड ऑफ टाइम और 
आजकल जैसे हम देख रहे हœ, अगर िपछले 10 से 15 साल की बात करŐ तो, some many new 
avenues have come for the children. वषŊ 1960 मŐ सैिनक ˋ ू ल का कॉɌ ेɐ सोचा गया था 
और यह कहा गया था िक इन क ै डेट्स को एनडीए की टŌेिनंग क े िलए मोिटवेट करना है और उसक े 
िलए तैयारी करनी है। िपछले क ु छ सालों मŐ यह देखने मŐ आया है िक जैसे-जैसे बǄ े Ƒ ास-6 से 
आगे बढ़ते हœ, जब Ƒ ास-8 और Ƒ ास-9 की तरफ आते हœ तो उनमŐ से क ु छ बǄ ों का ŝ झान 
द ू सरी फीʒ ्स की तरफ होने लगता है। कोई चाहता मœ डॉƃ र बनूं, कोई चाहता है मœ इंजीिनयर 
बनूं, इस तरह क े बŠत सारे अलग-अलग एवेɊूज आ गए हœ। आट्Ŋस क े फीʒ ्स आ गए हœ। यह 
एक ए˙ ेƃ  है। जब गवनŊमŐट ने पीपीपी मॉडल क े बारे मŐ सोचा तो उसमŐ यिद  आप इस एनडीए 
वाले एम को देखŐगे तो उसमŐ यह एम नहीं है िक हम क ै डेट्स को एनडीए की तैयार करŐ। हमारे 
पीपीपी मॉडल का एम है िक हम बǄ ों को एक िमिलटŌी टाइप की िडिसİɘन टŌेिनंग दŐ। उसक े बाद 
वे जो फीʒ  चुनना चाहŐ, वे चुन सकते हœ। इसमŐ मेरा कहना है िक आपने जो कहा, वह सही कहा 

 
7 
 
है। इसी चीज को ȯ ान मŐ रखते Šए हमारा जो पीपीपी मॉडल का ऑɥ ेİƃव है, उसको ȯ ान मŐ 
रखते Šए फॉलो िकया है।“ 
 
 2.11 Further, the Committee also enquired about any interaction or  
coordination plan with defence related other activities according to interest 
of students for working in Defence sector, the representative of the Ministry 
during oral evidence stated:- 
“...I think, exactly what is happening in the schools with regard to 
interaction, I will be able to submit about that before the Committee in 
writing later on. But this is a wonderful suggestion. We will definitely 
take it up henceforth. It is a great take away for us from the 
discussion. We will ensure that these kinds of interactions do take 
place so that the students get more and more motivated to various 
fields, whichever they want to take up in future. So, we will definitely 
take it up henceforth.” 
   2.12   During oral evidence, the Committee enquired regarding any plan to 
employ retired defence personnel for inculcating training in various Sainik 
Schools in the country, the representative of the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
“We have serving defence employees. We have serving officers who 
are there as Principals, Vice-Principals, ADM Officers in each of these 
schools. In PPP model, of course, it is open for those schools who 
engage ex-servicemen, which they are doing. Out of 19 schools, 
which already have their sessions commenced, around 16 have 
already engaged ex-servicemen. So, I think, Sir, it is quite adequate as 
of now insofar as service personnel are concerned.” 
    2.13  During oral evidence, on the issue of pending pension of teachers, a 
representative of Ministry apprised the Committee as under: 
 
“Sir, as per the rules and regulations of the society, the pension 
responsibility rests with the State Government. Though whenever we 
find that there is a dearth of funds or the funds have not reached in 
time, we provide them ....…” 
 
 
 
 (iii) Role of the Central and State Governments 
 

 
8 
 
   2.14  As per the Scheme governing Sainik Schools run by Sainik Schools 
Society, the responsibilities and resources are shared by Ministry of Defence 
and concerned State Government.  
 
 (a) Role of State Government  
 
          (a) Provision of a minimum of 38 acres land for a Sainik Schools 
with the strength of 300 students and 49 acres land for a Sainik 
School with a strength of 600.  
         (b) Construction of permanent buildings including:  
 
    (i) Administrative Block  
    (ii) Educational Block  
    (iii) Dormitories and Mess Hall  
    (iv) Indoor Games Hall 
    (v) Residential accommodation for all members of the 
academic/administrative staff as well as general employees 
    (vi) Swimming Pool, Auditorium, Gymnasium and others 
sports amenities. However, for setting up new Sainik Schools, 
after 1996 the requirement of a swimming pool and a covered 
auditorium has been relaxed. 
 
       (c) Provision of all the equipment including a School Bus, a 
Matador or a jeep with trailer on as required basis  
       (d) Maintenance of the School campus and building  
       (e) Grant of scholarships to all the boys belonging to the 
economically weaker sections of society on the rates decided by the 
Board of Governors. 
       (f)  Provide employer contribution towards New Pension Scheme 
(NPS)/Pension Liability and all other terminal benefit to all retiring 
employees as the case may be 
 
(b) Role of Central Government (MoD) 
 
      (a) Positioning of three officers, one each of the rank of 
Col/equivalent. Lt. Col/ equivalent and Major/equivalent to each 
school. Their salaries and other allowances are paid from Defence 
Services Estimates.  
 
      (b) NCC Staff and Army Physical Training Corps instructors also 
provided by the Ministry of Defence.  
 
      (c) Scholarship to the wards of Defence Personnel including Ex-
servicemen. 
 

 
9 
 
      (d) Provision of part of Scholarship as Central Assistance to those 
students who are awarded State Government Scholarships. 
      (e)  Incentive to those cadets who are selected for National 
Defence Academy/Naval Academy. 
      (f)  100% additionality towards Pay & Allowances arising due to 
implementation of 6th CPC and 7th CPC.  
      (g) Training Grant to the tune of Rs. 10 Lakhs to each school every 
year. 
      (h) Grant-in-aid for Infrastructural development to the tune of Rs. 1 
Crore to each school every year based on their proposals. 
      (i) Special grant-in-aid from time to time for infrastructure 
augmentation/modernization. Rs. 62.96 Crores & Rs. 11.24 Crores 
was released during financial year 2022-23 & 2023-24 for 
infrastructure development and One School One Sport scheme 
respectively. 
 
2.15  The Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations also clearly 
stipulate that the Central Government has to provide three Service Officers 
and APTCC/NCC instructors. Their salaries are paid from the Defence 
Services Estimates. 
 
 
2.16 When the Committee desired to know whether the required 
number of service officers, NCC staff and Army Physical Training Corps 
Instructors have been  positioned in all the Sainik School as per norms, the 
Ministry in its written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“Sainik schools mostly have the required number of service officers, 
APTCs, NCC staff. Wherever there is a deficiency, process of posting 
is underway.” 
 
 
    2.17 On being asked whether the requisite educational or curriculum 
eligibility are followed in appointment of Principals and Vice-Principals of 
Sainik Schools as per norms laid down by the National Council for Teacher 
Education (NCTE) or any exemption in the eligibility criteria, the Ministry in 
their written reply submitted as under:-  
 
“Given the focus and special nature of Sainik Schools, the Principal 
and Vice Principal of the school are by design drawn from the 
Education Branch of the Armed Forces. The Qualification 
Requirement for selection of Principals & Vice Principals in Sainik 
Schools are as under (as per Para 11.06 of chapter XI of Sainik 

 
10 
 
Schools Society Rules & Regulations Book 1997 and  
amended vide MoD ID No 7(6)/ SSS/2018/QR VP dated 12 Apr 
2018);  
 
For Principal : 
           (1) Colonel or equivalent from Education branch of Army/ Navy 
& Air Force.  
           (2) Post Graduate qualification with at least 05 years of 
instructional experience. Proficiency in games/sports and co-
curricular activities will be considered as additional qualification.  
           (3) Age preferably below 48 years. Relaxable in deserving 
cases although in no case an officer with less than 04 years of 
service to retire wilI be considered.  
           (4) Medical category. The officer should be in an promotable 
medical category for taking up command of an Instructional Unit.  
           (5) Preference to Officers who have successfully served as 
Vice Principal/ Adm Officer in Sainik Schools.  
 
For Vice Principal:  
         (1) Lt Colonel / Major with 10 years service of equivalent from 
the Education Branch of the three services.  
         (2) Post graduate Degree with at least 05 years teaching 
experience.  
         (3) Age should not be more than 45 years.  
         (4) Medical category SHAPE-1/S1A1/A4G1. 
         (5) Should have at least five years to service before retirement. 
The officer should have passed promotions examination upto Part-´D' 
or equivalent.  
         (6) Should have qualified on junior officer's course (in case of 
Army) with minimum 'B' grading or similar course for the officers of 
other two services. 
      The focus of Sainik School is to physically and mentally prepare 
the cadets tor serving in the Armed Forces. To achieve this objective, 

 
11 
 
the Principal and Vice Principal are serving officers of the Armed 
Forces. 
 
 2.18 During oral evidence, when the Committee desired to know 
about number of teachers employed, teaching and non-teaching strength in 
Sainik Schools, the representative of the Ministry apprised as under: 
 
“Sir, I will provide the statistics. The number of teachers is around 800 
when it comes to the 33 Sainik Schools………………. In so far as 
training is concerned, a lot of impetus has been given. We already 
have an established MoU with IITE, Gandhinagar and the training has 
already started. It is in three phases. For each and every teacher, they 
have to undergo each of these phases right from the induction 
training. It is a very detailed training pattern which has been decided 
with Gandhinagar Institute....... 
 
...... It is for all the schools, including even the PPP model schools” 
 
    2.19 On the issue of students and teachers ratio in the existing Sainik 
Schools as per Sainik Schools Society rules and the current status, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted that all Sainik Schools adhere to 
CBSE Curriculum and hence follow the students teacher ratio as prescribed 
by CBSE. As per the CBSE norms the student teacher ratio is 40:1 and the 
ratio of teachers to cater the academic needs of existing students of Sainik 
Schools is adequate. 
 
 
(c) Scholarships/Grant-in-Aids/Incentives and Central Assistance 
  
 2.20 So far on scholarships to wards of Defence personnel (including 
ex-servicemen) is concerned, the State Governments award scholarships 
on merit-cum-means basis. Ministry of Defence similarly awards 
scholarships to wards of Defence personnel including ex-servicemen. In 
addition, Ministry of Defence provides a part of scholarships as Central 
assistance to those students who are awarded State Government 
scholarships. The sharing of expenditure on fees/scholarships amongst 
Central Government, State Governments and the parents will be as decided 
by the Board of Governors from time to time. 
 

 
12 
 
 2.21  When asked about the details of wards of Defence Personnel 
including Ex-Servicemen who have been awarded scholarships and Central 
Assistance given by Ministry of Defence, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as under:- 
 
“(a) The details of wards of Defence Personnel including Ex-
Servicemen who have been awarded scholarships during five years is 
given below: 
 
Sr. No. Financial Year Number of wards who 
were awarded 
Defence Scholarship 
1.  2020-21  2393 
2. 2021-22  2532 
3.  2022-23  2609 
4. 2023-24 2456 
5. 2024-25 1232 
 Total 11222 
 
 
(b) The amount of Central Assistance given by Ministry of Defence to 
the students of Sainik Schools during last five years is as below: 
 
Sr. No. Financial Year Amount of Central 
Assistance (in Crores) 
1.  2020-21  1.13  
2.  2021-22  1.16  
3.  2022-23  1.10  
4. 2023-24 1.03  
5. 2024-25 1.24 
 Total 5.66 
 
 
 2.22  Further, when enquired about State-wise Grant of scholarship to 
the students belonging to economic weaker section of the society and about 
any special scheme for girl students, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
 
“State Governments provide scholarships, based on the income slabs 
of parents of the cadets/marks scored by the students of Sainik school 
belonging to that State as per their own policy. Ministry of Defence 
provides a part of scholarship as Central Assistance to those cadets 
who are awarded State Govt. scholarship. No special scheme has 
been introduced for girl cadets.” 

 
13 
 
 
    2.23 Further, on a related query inquired about the number of students 
who have been granted scholarships from the State Governments/ Union 
Territories/ Ministry of Defence for study in Sainik Schools and also to 
provide data for the last five years, year-wise along with the amount of 
scholarship per student and particularly to the students of lower strata of the 
society both economically and socially, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:-  
 
“The number of students of Sainik Schools who have been granted 
scholarship by State Government and Ministry of Defence are as 
follows:- 
S. 
No. 
Year Number of 
Students 
granted 
scholarships by 
the State 
Governments 
Number of 
Students 
granted 
scholarships by 
Ministry of 
Defence 
1 2020-21 5952  2047 
2. 2021-22 6472  2170 
3. 2022-23 6693  2174 
4. 2023-24 6671  2028 
5. 2024-25 6888 1107 
 
Ministry of Defence provides Annual Fee Support to wards of Defence 
Personnel and Ex-Servicemen. The amount of scholarship per cadet 
provided by Ministry of Defence is as follows: 
For Non Commissioned Officer / Other Ranks : Rs. 32,000/- 
For Junior Commissioned Officer  :Rs. 16,000/ 
The scholarships provided by the concerned State Government to 
cadets  of Sainik School varies from State to State based on merit, 
reservation category and financial status of parents of cadets who are 
domicile of the State.”  

 
14 
 
    2.24  When asked specifically whether the Ministry of Defence has any 
proposal for extending inclusive education to the students belonging from 
weaker sections of the society by way of exemption or minimizing or 
subsidizing fee in their admission and study in Sainik Schools irrespective of 
grant of scholarships by States/Union Territories/ Ministry of Defence, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“Reservation in admission to Sainik School is being provided to  
students belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Other 
Backward Classes. Additionally, certain State Governments provide 
merit-cum-means based scholarships to the students who are domicile 
of the states and admitted in the Sainik Schools. Presently there is no 
proposal in Ministry of Defence for extending any other benefit apart 
from existing benefits to cadets  
of Sainik Schools.” 
2.25  When asked about the incentives being given to cadets who get 
selected for NDA/NA, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“All the cadets of Sainik schools joining the National Defence 
Academy/Naval Academy are given NDA incentive in the form of 
reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI and XIl by such 
cadets.” 
 
 2.26  On being asked whether the training grant provided to each 
Sainik School is found adequate in view of changing paradigm of training 
module, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
“On the basis of proposals received from Sainik schools, Ministry of 
Defence provides an amount of Rs. 10 Lakhs every year to each 
Sainik school for meeting expenditure related to NDA training of 
cadets as well as in-service training of teachers.” 
 
 
          2.27  Further, on enquiry that how many Sainik Schools have been 
given grant-in-aid for infrastructure development, the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under: 
 
“The details of number of Sainik schools which have received grant-in-
aid for infrastructure development based on their proposals during the 
last five years is as follows:- 
 
 

 
15 
 
 
Sr. No. Financial Year Number of schools 
who were awarded 
grant in-aid for 
infrastructure 
development 
1.  2020-21  14 
2  2021-22  09 
3.  2022-23  19 
4. 2023-24 25 
5. 2024-25 31 
 
           
Following Sainik Schools have not been granted grant-in-aid for 
infrastructure grant during last five years:- 
 
Sr. No. Financial Year Number of schools 
who were not awarded 
grant-in-aid for 
infrastructure 
development 
1.  2020-21  19 
2.  2021-22  24 
3.  2022-23  14 
4. 2023-24 8 
5. 2024-25 2 
*The major reason for non-allotment of infrastructure grant to 
Sainik schools was non-submission of requisite documents for 
availing the said grant including non submission of vetted 
Utilization Certificates of the last availed grant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (d) Infrastructure/maintenance 
 
2.28  With regard to the infrastructure development in Sainik Schools, 
the representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee as under: 
 
“राǛ ों और क ेȾ  सरकार क े लगातार सपोटŊ क े साथ सैिनक ˋ ू लों को वʒŊ-Ƒ ास इंůाː Ō Ɓर क े 
साथ अपŤेड िकया जा रहा है, जो रेिसडŐिशयल पपŊस क े िलए अनुक ू ल हœ।“ 
 
 

 
16 
 
 2.29 When inquired by the Committee that whether the States have 
provided the requisite criteria with regard to land and permanent building, 
the Ministry in their written reply submitted that the State Govt. has provided 
100% of the requisite land and permanent buildings to all Sainik Schools. In 
4 Sainik schools some of the requisite buildings/ land have been handed 
over and process of handing over of the remaining land/ buildings is at 
various stages of planning/construction/approval.  
 
 2.30 Further, on a query regarding relaxation in the required criteria 
provided to any State, the Ministry in their written reply submitted that no 
State has been provided any relaxation in the required criteria. 
 
 
(iv) Induction of Girl Students in Sainik Schools 
 
     2.31   The Ministry have informed that after successful completion of the 
pilot project of girls admission in Sainik School Chhingchhip from 2018-19, 
the Government decided to implement admission of girls children in another 
05 Sainik Schools viz. Kalikiri (Andhra Pradesh), Kodagu (Karnataka), 
Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Chandrapur (Maharashtra) and Bijapur 
(Karnataka) from the academic session 2020-21. From the academic 
session 2021-22, all 33 Sainik Schools have started admitting girls. This 
decision has opened doors of quality training of girls cadets at par with boys. 
Transformation of Sainik Schools from all-boys' schools to Co-ed schools 
would further boost personality development in both boys and girls. Best 
possible interaction methodology is being adopted in all the Sainik Schools. 
The girls and boys will be actively participating in all co-curricular activities 
and sports together. As on 21th October 2024, 1578 girl cadets are studying 
in 33 Sainik Schools. 
 
     2.32  As regards admission of girl cadets to Sainik Schools, a 
representative of Ministry informed as under: 
 
 “ सैिनक ˋ ू लों मŐ गʤŊ क ै डेट्स का एडिमशन अकादिमक वषŊ 2018 से शुŝ  Šआ। कƗा-
VI मŐ क ु छ सीटों का 10 Ůितशत ˕ ान लड़िकयों क े िलए आरिƗत है। कम से कम दस लड़िकयों 
को हर साल एडिमशन िदया जाता है। अकादिमक वषŊ 2024-25 मŐ मौजद ू ा सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  और नए 
सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ , दोनों मŐ लड़िकयों की संƥ ा 2,000 पार कर गयी है। 
रƗा मंũालय Ȫारा गʤŊ होːʤ  क े िनमाŊण क े िलए Ůित सैिनक ˋ ू ल को 3.3 करोड़ Ŝपये 
Ůदान िकए गए। सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  का ȯ ान िविभɄ एƜ Ōा करŎक ु लर और को-करŎक ु लर एƃ ीिवटीज़, 
एक ै डिमक और नॉन-एक ै डिमक डोमेन की गितिविधयों क े माȯ म से अपने क ै डेट्स क े 
ऑलराउंडर हॉिलİːक डेवलपमŐट पर क ेİȾत है। िविभɄ गितिविधयों की झलिकयां ˠ ाइड्स पर 
िदखायी गयी हœ।“ 

 
17 
 
 
  2.33  The representative of Ministry further added the following- 
 
“सैिनक ˋ ू लों मŐ गʤŊ क ै डेट्स की भतŎ मŐ वृİȠ को देखते Šए गʤŊ क ै डेट्स क े िलए Ůȑेक ˋ ू ल 
मŐ अनुक ू ल और हाइजीिनक रेिसडŐिशयल फ ै िसिलटीज़ Ůदान करने क े सजग Ůयास िकए जा रहे 
हœ।“ 
 
 
(v) Review/ monitoring 
 
      2.34  On a query regarding record maintenance of school campus and 
building by the State Government and existence of any mechanism in this 
regard, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
 
“Schools are receiving Grant-in-Aid from respective State Govt., which 
varies from School to School. The requirements and grievances are 
being addressed by Sainik Schools with State Govt. as and when 
required through correspondence, Local Board of Administration 
meetings and physical follow-ups.” 
 
 
   2.35 When enquired about the existence of mechanism for review and 
monitoring of the Sainik Schools by the Central Government, the Ministry in 
their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“Various mechanisms exist for review and monitoring of the Sainik 
school which includes Annual inspection by Sainik Schools Society 
and regular meetings of Local Board of Administration (LBA). No such 
discrepancy has been noticed so far by Central Government”. 
 
    2.36 When enquired about any time-lines been framed by the Ministry of 
Defence to review the existing Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, 
1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) with a view to amalgamate relevant provisions of 
Central Civil Service Rules for the benefits of employees of Sainik Schools, 
the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
“Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, 1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) 
is reviewed on need basis, and whenever required changes are made 
following the due procedure. This is a continuous process.” 
 
    2.37 Further, on a related query about the steps being taken by the 
Ministry of Defence to fill the gap/vacancy of teachers in the existing Sainik 

 
18 
 
Schools with a view to impart quality education in such Sainik Schools, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“Existing vacancies of teachers are filled either by holding selection 
by regular appointments or by filling the vacancy gaps through 
contractual appointments. The concerned Sainik Schools are 
authorised to carry out these selections.” 
 
   2.38  As regards functioning of Sainik Schools, a Board of Governors, 
functioning under the Chairmanship of the Defence Minister, is the Chief 
Executive body of the Sainik Schools Society.  The Board of Governors will 
meet as often as is considered necessary by the Chairman.  Each school 
has a Local Board Administration for overseeing the functioning of the 
school and its finances. 
 
        2.39 When asked about the grievance redressal mechanism in Sainik 
Schools and providing data regarding number of grievances received and 
their redressal during the last five years, year-wise, the Ministry in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
“The grievance in Sainik Schools and Sainik Schools Society are being 
efficiently addressed through CPGRAMS (Centralised Public Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System).  The number of Grievances received 
and redressed in Sainik Schools during the last five years are as 
follows:- 
 
 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Year Number of 
Grievances 
received 
Number of  
received 
redressed 
1.  2020-21 6  6  
2.  2021-22 7  7  
3.  2022-23 20  20  
4.  2023-24 37  37  

 
19 
 
5. 2024-25 85 85 
      
 
B. Sainik Schools Under PPP Mode 
 
(i) Overview and Objectives 
 
  2.40     The Ministry have informed that the Government has approved the 
initiative of setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in partnership with 
NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments in a graded manner class-wise, 
starting from Class 6th onward. As on date, Sainik Schools Society has 
approved 86 new Sainik Schools in partnership mode with NGO's/Private 
Schools/State Governments. Out of which, Memorandum of Agreement 
(MoA) has been signed with 64 new Sainik Schools. Out of these, Academic 
Session has already begun in 45 such schools. A list of 45 new Sainik 
Schools under partnership mode is at Annexure-II. 
 
    2.41  The scheme envisages to provide Annual Fee Support of 50% of fee 
(subject to an upper limit of Rs 40,000 per annum) for 50% of the class 
strength (subject to an upper limit of 50 students per year) from class 6 to 
class 12th, on Merit-cum-Means basis. It is also proposed to  incentivize the 
approved schools with.an amount of Rs. 10 Lakh as training grant to each 
such  approved school annually based on annual academic performance of 
the students in class 12th. 
 
  2.42  The Committee have also been informed that the resources involved 
in setting up of new Sainik Schools i.e., Land, infrastructure, facilities, 
teachers is to be provided by the entity i.e., NGO's/Private Schools/State 
Governments entering into MoA with Sainik Schools Society for opening of 
new Sainik Schools under this scheme. Sainik Schools Society, Ministry of 
Defence supervises the new Sainik schools through Mentor Sainik schools. 
An academic plus curriculum has been prescribed by Sainik Schools 
Society for implementation by new Sainik school.  
 
   2.43  During oral evidence, on aims and objectives of new Sainik Schools, 
the representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee as under: 
 
“अब मœ ‘एʈ  ए ं ड ऑɥ ैİƃ̺स ऑफ Ɋू सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ ’ क े बारे मŐ बात कŝं गा, जो िक इस 
Ůकार हœ। राʼŌीय भावना क े मूʞ ों का िवकास, अदʄ  साहस, देश और समाज क े Ůित 
सʃ ान क े मूʞ ों क े Ůित अिडग ŮितबȠता, िफिज़कल िफटनेस क े महȕ को आȏ सात 

 
20 
 
करना, क ै डेट्स की आȏ ा मŐ राʼŌीय गौरव का भाव जगाना और ‘बोडŊ ɘ स’ एजुक े शन 
एनवायनŊमŐट Ůदान करना है। 
 
............ एİ̑ज़İːंग सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  क े भांित Ɋू सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  मŐ भी ऑल राउंड डेवलपमŐट 
एİƃिवटीज़ की जाती हœ, जो िक ˌ ीन पर दशाŊयी गई हœ। Ɋू सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  क े क ै डेट्स भी 
सिŢय ŝ प से सरकारी अिभयानों मŐ, िजस तरह एİ̑ज़İːंग सैिनक ˋ ू ʤ  पािटŊिसपेट करते 
हœ, उसी तरह पािटŊिसपेट करते हœ।“ 
 
   2.44   During the course of oral evidence when the Committee desired to 
know the reason for entry into the PPP mode by the Government in Sainik 
Schools, the representative of the Ministry in this regard stated as under:- 
 
“Sir, the whole object was to try to attract the expertise which is there 
outside the Government, especially with the private sector, with the 
NGOs, and get that expertise into the whole Sainik School ecosystem. 
….…. schools are already operating, and they are doing well. There is 
a lot of motivation among them. जो वहां क े बǄ ों मŐ है, वहां क े टीचसŊ मŐ है। 
अब उɎोंने एƛ  सिवŊसमैन को भी ए ं गेज िकया है, to do all the drillings, 
exercises, parades and all that.  
 I feel that this Government’s approach towards the education as 
well as that of the private sector together will really meet the objective 
of the Government. “ 
 
….Other than that, more or less, even from a State Government 
perspective what I feel it is a much better proposition to go in for a 
Public Private Partnership model. Very importantly, the affiliation of 
that school can be with the State Board. For our school, it has to be 
CBSE. The medium of instruction of that school can be any language, 
and need not be English. So, a lot of flexibility is there in PPP model 
schools combined with our academic and curriculum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
as well as our supervision. We feel that it is a much, much better 
system of giving out military kind of a disciplined training. I think that is 
the need of the hour’’.  
 
  
   2.45  Further, when the Committee enquired about characteristics of 
schools under PPP model,  the representative of the Ministry apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
 
“Sir, these are the schools in partnership mode. In this, the affiliation 
and the approval would be given by the Ministry of Defence. They will 
be the Sainik Schools under the overall brand of the Sainik School 
Society. They will run as per the rules and regulations which are made 
by the Sainik School Society. The cadets will join there after passing 
the All India Exam conducted by the Sainik School Society but the 
infrastructure, faculty and the operation of the school would entirely 
rest with the State Government or the trust or the NGO, which is 
seeking approval for that PPP mode.  अगर कोई Ůाइवेट ˋ ू ल है, जो भी 
एनटीटी Ůाइवेट ˋ ू ल को चला रही है, वही चलाती रहेगी। उसी का क ं टŌोल रहेगा। 
उस ˋ ू ल क े अंदर, there will be a separate vertical from Class 6th सैिनक 
ˋ ू ल सोसाइटी ने जो कįरक ु लम बताया है, अकादिमक ɘ स पाǬŢ म बनाया है, 
उस कįरक ु लम क े िहसाब से पढ़ाई होगी और उसका सुपरिवजन सैिनक ˋ ू ल 
सोसाइटी करेगी।“ 
 
 
   2.46 On the issue of transition of State Government School into new 
Sainik School, the representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee as 
under:- 
“……..The land belongs to the State Government – both the cases. 
Infrastructure is to be provided by the State Government – both the 
cases. आप पुराने ˋ ू ल मŐ जाए ं या नए ˋ ू ल मŐ जाए ं । Facilities to be provided 
by the State Government – both the cases. फकŊ िसफŊ इतना है िक 
िŮंिसपल, वाइस िŮंिसपल ए ं ड एडम ऑिफसर हम सिवŊसेज़ का लगाते हœ, जो हमारा 
अपना ˋ ू ल होता है। If I am not wrong, the Chief Minister is the Chairman 
of that Board of Governors of that school.   
 
  

 
22 
 
   2.47  The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry consider that 
PPP mode for setting up of Sainik Schools is success, the Ministry in the 
written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The Government has approved the scheme of setting up 100 New 
Sainik Schools in partnership mode with NGOs/ State Government/ 
Private Schools, out of which Sainik Schools Society has approved 86 
New Sainik Schools. Out of these, 45 schools have commenced 
Academic session. The first batch of 17 such schools (out of 45 
schools) started in the Academic session 2022-23.  
 
The PPP model brings in the strength of public and private sector 
together to achieve the objectives behind the vision of setting up of 
100 New Sainik Schools, which is to provide quality education to the 
students in tune with National Education Policy, give students better 
career opportunities and make them responsible citizens of tomorrow.  
 
The process for setting up of remaining 14 New Sainik School on 
partnership mode is underway. The efficacy of the PPP model in 
entirety can only be ascertained once these New Sainik Schools are 
well established and quantifiable outcomes can then be evaluated in 
terms of Class X & XII Board results and other achievements of these 
New Sainik Schools.” 
 
 
(ii) Criteria for approval of New Sainik Schools and progress 
 
   2.48  On being asked about the criteria for approval of Sainik Schools by 
Sainik Schools Society, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as 
under:-  
 
 The criteria/parameters for approval of New Sainik school majorly 
comprise:  
 
i.    Land availability  
        a. Day School .-6 acres 
        b. Residential Schools -8 acres  
 ii    Adequate Academic and Administrative infrastructure  
iii.   Sufficient and qualified Academic and Administrative Staff 
iv.   Affiliation with board of education (CBSE/State)  
 
 
 

 
23 
 
v.    Transparent fee structure  
vi.   Sound financial health of school  
vii.  Signing of Memorandum of Agreement (MoA)  
viii. Recommendation of the School Evaluation Committee 
 
 
      2.49  When enquired about the share of the State Government in 
opening of Sainik School in their States, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
“The Government has approved the scheme of setting up 100 new 
Sainik Schools in partnership mode with NGOs/ State Government/ 
Private Schools. Interested State Governments can apply through the 
online portal https://sainikschool.ncog.gov.in for opening of new Sainik 
Schools in their states. Moreover, under this scheme, the responsibility 
of providing necessary land, infrastructure, staff, facilities etc for the 
new Sainik School lies with concerned entity which runs/operates the 
school. In case, the said entity is State Government, the said State 
Government shall be responsible for providing all the requisite 
resources for opening of new Sainik School.   
 The application received from State Government/s will be 
evaluated based on the Qualifying Requirements set for the new 
Sainik Schools and on being found fit provisional approval will be 
granted by Sainik Schools Society. Thereafter, the approved School 
will be required to sign a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with 
Sainik Schools Society for setting up as new Sainik School.”  
 
   2.50  When the Committee desired to know about opening up of the new 
Sainik Schools throughout the country on the basis of geographical 
distribution is being considered by the Ministry while according approvals to 
scheme, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“Yes, in the first phase of this scheme for setting up of 100 new Sainik 
schools, all efforts are being made to allocate the schools on pro-rata 
basis depending on number of districts in a State/UT, subject to 
allocation of at least one Sainik School in each State/UT and further 
subject to receipt of sufficient number of valid applications from each 
State/UT. Such pro-rata distribution can however be reviewed in case 
nil/less number of valid application are received for certain 
States/UTs.” 

 
24 
 
   2.51  During the course of oral evidence, on students’ participation to the 
activities in new Sainik Schools, the representative of Ministry apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
“ये नए डे-ˋ ू ल या रेिजडŐिशयल ˋ ू ल हो सकते हœ। नए ˋ ू लों मŐ मेįरट बे̾ड एडिमशन का 
Ţाइटेįरया एİƪİːंग 33 सैिनक ˋ ू लों क े समान है, जहां क ै डेट्स को एनटीए Ȫारा 
आयोिजत ऑल इंिडया लैवल कॉमन टैː  सामाɊ  Ůवेश परीƗा मŐ योƶ ता क े आधार पर 
Ůवेश िदया जाता है। सरकार ने मेįरट कम मीɌ  बेिसस पर ˋ ू ल फी क े 50 परसŐट की 
वािषŊक शुʋ  सहायता Ůदान करने का िनणŊय िकया है जो कƗा संƥ ा क े 50 परसŐट क े 
िलए 40,000 Ŝपये Ůित वषŊ की अपर िलिमट और 50 छाũों की अपर िलिमट क े अधीन है। 
    नए सैिनक ˋ ू लों का ȯ ान वेįरयस ˙ ोट्Ŋस ए ं ड गेʈ , एƛ टŌा किलक ु लर एİƃिवटीज़, 
एक े डेिमक ए ं ड नॉन-एक े डेिमक डोमेन की गितिविधयों क े माȯ म से अपने क ै डेटों को 
ऑलराउंड होिलİːक डेवलपमŐट Ůदान करने पर कŐिūत है। ...... 
 एİƪİːंग सैिनक ˋ ू लों की तरह नए सैिनक ˋ ू लों क े क ै डेट्स सिŢय ŝ प से 
सरकारी अिभयानों जैसे, सेिलŰेशन ऑफ चȾ यान-3 सƛ ेस, ˢǅ ता ही सेवा अिभयान 
और अɊ  सरकारी अिभयानों मŐ भी शािमल होते हœ। ...... 
 नए सैिनक ˋ ू लों को रेिजडŐिशयल परपज़ क े िलए वʒŊ Ƒ ास इ̢ůाːŌƁर Ȫारा 
अपŤेड िकया जा रहा है। मौजूदा सैिनक ˋ ू लों क े Ůयासों क े अनुŝ प नए सैिनक ˋ ू ल 
गʤŊ क ै डर क े  िलए Ůȑेक ˋ ू ल मŐ अनुक ू ल और ˢǅ  आवासीय सुिवधाए ं Ůदान कर रहे 
हœ।“ 
 
   2.52   When asked about the current status of approved Sainik Schools 
which have not signed Memorandum of Agreements (MoA) with Sainik 
Schools Society, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“In Round-3, 42 more new Sainik Schools have been approved taking 
the tally of new Sainik Schools to 86.  Out of these 86 New Sainik 
Schools, MoA has been signed with 64 new Sainik Schools.  Further, 
the signing of MoA in respect of remaining 22 approved New Sainik 
schools is pending for want of requisite documents from the entities as 
per the terms & conditions of the approval letter issued by Ministry of 
Defence to the approved New Sainik schools.” 
 
 
     2.53  When enquired about the number of Sainik schools under 
consideration for approval by the Society,  the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
 
“The `Valid’ applications received in the first three rounds as well as 
applications received in the ongoing Round-4 will be considered for 
setting up the balance 14 new Sainik Schools.” 

 
25 
 
 
 
    2.54  When the Committee desired to know about the current status of 
scrutiny of applications for Sainik Schools Scheme, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as under:- 
 
 “As of now, the `Valid’ applications received in the first three rounds 
from various NGOs/Trusts/State Govt./Private schools are under 
consideration for opening as New Sainik School, subject to fulfilment of 
requisite criteria.  Additionally, the registration window of Round-4 for inviting 
of fresh application for setting up of 14 New Sainik Schools has been 
reopened by Sainik Schools Society.” 
 
 
   2.55  On a related query about strictly following the earmarked criteria or 
any relaxation has been accorded in some cases, the Ministry in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“A well laid down policy and criteria is followed. Necessary 
documentation and on-ground verification is carried out before setting 
up of New Sainik Schools in accordance with existing Rules & 
Regulations for New Sainik Schools.” 
 
      
(iii) Induction of Girl Students in New Sainik Schools 
 
 
    2.56  On being asked whether there is any guideline regarding intake of 
girl students in these schools, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as 
under:- 
 
“No restriction has been imposed by Sainik School Society on the 
number of girls that can be given admission in the new Sainik schools 
established under partnership mode. These schools can be set up on 
all-boys/all-girls/co-education basis.” 
 
    2.57  When enquired about enrolment of girls students State-wise in the 
new Sainik Schools established under PPP mode,  the Ministry in their 
written reply submitted as under:- 
 
 

 
26 
 
“As on August, 2025, a total of 891 girls are studying in New Sainik 
Schools. State-wise details of girl students in new Sainik schools is as 
below:- 
 
Sr. 
No. 
State/UT Number of girls 
studying under 
New Sainik 
schools in the 
State/UT 
1. Arunanchal Pradesh 31 
2. Kerala 95 
3. Gujarat 136 
4. Bihar 28 
5. Andhra Pradesh 09 
6. Himachal Pradesh 15 
7. Karnataka 112 
8. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 48 
9. Maharashtra 47 
10. Rajasthan 80 
11. Madhya Pradesh 28 
12. Uttar Pradesh 115 
13. Haryana 80 
14. Chhattisgarh 29 
15. Tamil Nadu 22 
16. Punjab 16 
 Total 891 
 
 
   2.58   When the Committee desired to know about the total strength of a 
Sainik School and the ratio of  girls to boys in the New Sainik Schools, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
 
“The total strength of a new Sainik school varies from school to 
school. The average strength of a new Sainik school is 126 per school 
having an average of approx.104 boys and 22 girls per new Sainik 
school which amount to ratio of boys to girls in New Sainik schools to 
be 4.72 to 1” 
 
 
   2.59  When asked specifically about the number of girls from the new 
Sainik Schools  qualified for NDA, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
 

 
27 
 
“The first batch of students in New Sainik schools started in Academic 
Year 2022-23 and these students including girls are presently studying 
in class 8th . Candidates who are appearing or passed class 12th are 
eligible for appearing in NDA exam. Accordingly, the details of girls of 
New Sainik schools who qualify for NDA can be known only when 
these girls will be eligible to appear in NDA exam.” 
 
 
   2.60  During oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the intention of 
the Ministry to start exclusive girls’ schools, the representative apprised as 
under: 
 
“Sir, we have exclusive girls’ school in the PPP model. We encourage 
all-girls’ school. For one of the all-girls’ school, we have given approval 
at Mathura. It is yet to start but approval has been given for all-girls’ 
sainik school. Similarly, it can be all boys, it can be all girls, and it can 
be co-ed.” 
 
.......Some private trusts have already started some Sainik Schools. 
One such example is in Kittur, Belgaum. That is the place of Rani 
Chennamma, who fought against the British. She won the war against 
Britishers in 1826. So, to commemorate her bravery, a private trust 
started Mahila Sainik School which is purely for girls. If we talk about 
the Sainik Schools run by the Government, there is only some quota 
for the girls. But if we see Rani Chennamma Sainik School in Kittur, 
that is purely for girls and only the girl students are being trained there. 
It is a very famous school. So, I would suggest you to adopt that thing 
and also involve them with you which would also be encouraging for 
these private trusts. So, this aspect has also to be discussed. 
(iv) Review/Monitoring 
 
    2.61  On being asked about any provisions in the scheme for periodical 
review of New Sainik Schools and their affiliation to the Sainik Schools 
Society, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“In the new scheme of opening new Sainik schools under partnership 
mode, the schools are initially approved provisionally for a fixed period 
of two academic years, which is subject to extension post performance 
review. If required, the schools will be inspected by an authority 
authorized by Sainik Schools Society, Ministry of Defence for ensuring 

 
28 
 
adherence to Rules & Regulations for New Sainik schools. 
Subsequent to achieving desired threshold in two successive 
performance reviews of the schools, regular approval would be 
considered for such schools for the duration of 15 years from the date 
of approval. However, Sainik Schools Society, Ministry of Defence 
reserves all rights to cancel the approval at any time if a school fails to 
meet the laid down criteria.” 
    2.62  When enquired about current status of the third party Performance 
Review of the erstwhile Sainik Schools and the new Sainik Schools done by 
NCERT and QCI (NABET), respectively,  the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
 
“The third party performance review of New Sainik schools will be 
done after completion of first phase of setting up of 100 New Sainik 
Schools. In respect of third party performance review of erstwhile 
pattern Sainik schools by NCERT, it is stated that NCERT have visited 
10 Sainik schools for the said performance review. However, Report in 
this regard is awaited from NCERT.” 
 
    2.63  When asked specifically about the problems which are being faced 
in PPP model and specific being taken to overcome the problem, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The PPP model of opening New Sainik schools is currently in its initial 
stage as students are studying in class 8th.  Evaluation of the PPP 
model of opening New Sainik schools can only be done after the 
students complete class 12th in New Sainik schools.” 
   
C. Challenges, Constraints and issues relating to Sainik Schools 
   2.64  When the Committee desired to know about the challenges and 
constraints being faced by Sainik Schools and actions have been 
contemplated to resolve/eradicate the problems, the Ministry in their written 
reply stated as under:-. 
 
“Sainik Schools have played a unique role as a recruiting and training 
ground of future leaders of the armed forces. The Sainik Schools, true 
to its aim, have contributed significantly for NDA intake during the last 
decade despite various constraints. The following are few major 
challenges faced by these schools and the measures taken by the 
Ministry to resolve the problem:  

 
29 
 
 
      (a) Pay & Pension to the Staff: The responsibility of providing 
pension and retirement benefits to the retired employees of Sainik 
Schools lies with the concerned State Government. However, share of 
contribution is not received from a few States timely or on regular 
basis. Sainik Schools Society is regularly pursuing the matter with 
concerned State Govt. to formalize the responsibility of the State Govt. 
by signing MoA. As a result, MoA has been signed with concerned 
State Govt. in respect of 25 Sainik Schools out of a total of 33 Sainik 
Schools.  
 
    (b) Infrastructure: Few of the Sainik Schools are more than 60 
years old and  their infrastructure have depleted to a considerable 
extent. For rejuvenation of such schools, a special one-time 
infrastructure grant of Rs. 62.96 crore was allotted in F.Y . 2022-23. 
 
    (c) Demand for New Sainik Schools: The Ministry received 
various proposals from the State Government(s) for opening of Sainik 
Schools in their State(s).  Government has introduced and approved 
an initiative to set up 100 New Sainik Schools across the country in 
partnership mode with NGOs/Private/State Government Schools.  As 
on date, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India has approved 86 New 
Sainik Schools and signed Memorandum of Agreement with 64 such 
New Sainik Schools in various States/UTs across the country.  Further, 
process to approve more New Sainik Schools is underway. 
 
    2.65  The Committee learnt that as per the standing directives of Board of 
Governors, Sainik Schools Society, Ministry of Defence, school fee will be 
increased by 10% every year. The Committee desired to know specifically 
about the reasons for escalation in fee structure of Sainik Schools and 
enquired whether the Ministry of Defence has any proposal to 
minimize/subsidize or Control the escalated fee structure of Sainik Schools 
at par with other similar residential recognised educational institutions in the 
country, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:-  
“Sainik School are created on a centre-state partnership model. The 
state government provides the land infrastructure, ongoing 
maintenance and in many cases also the pension liabilities and 
terminal benefits of Sainik School employees. The central government 
through the Ministry of Defence provides the Principal, the Vice 

 
30 
 
Principal, the Admin Officer, the NCC and physical training core 
Component.  
The running costs of the school including salaries to academic and 
support staff are paid from the tuition fees collected from the students. 
The escalation in fees for cadet hence may not be avoided.” 
 
      2.66 The Committee sought the reasons about Sainik School employees 
neither being treated as Central Government servants nor as State 
Government  servants and to whom the benefits of Central Government 
Health Scheme (CGHS), Children Education Allowance (CEA) and Bonus 
have not been extended, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as 
under:- 
 
“Sainik Schools are created on a centre-state partnership model. The 
state government provides the land infrastructure, ongoing 
maintenance and in many cases also bear the pension liabilities and 
terminal benefits of Sainik School employees. The central government 
through the Ministry of Defence provides the Principal, the Vice 
Principal, the Admin officer, the National Cadet Corps (NCC) and army 
physical training core component. 
The running costs of the school including salaries to academic and 
support staff are paid from the tuition fees collected from the students.  
The Sainik School employees, including the academic Staff are 
governed by the Sainik Schools Society rules and regulations of 1997. 
Engagement of these employees is done locally by the concerned 
School. As the employees of Sainik Schools are neither Central 
Government employees nor State Government employees, Central 
government benefits or state government benefits cannot be extended 
to them. 
It may be appreciated that even if salaries are to be increased or 
additional allowances are to be provided, the same may impact the 
tuition fees being paid by the students. 
Certain additional benefits are made available to Sainik School 
employees which includes rent free residential accommodation and 
meals for the teaching staff when taken in the mess with the cadets.” 
 

 
31 
 
     2.67  Further, the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry of 
Defence has any proposal to extend pay structure of 7th Central Pay 
Commission to other staff of Sainik Schools at par with regular employees 
the schools, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:-  
“The pay structure of the 7th Central Pay Commission has been  
extended only to the regular employees of the Sainik Schools. There 
is no proposal in Ministry to extend pay structure of 7th Central Pay 
Commission to other than regular employees of the schools.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
32 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RASHTRIYA INDIAN MILITARY COLLEGE AND RASHTRIYA MILITARY 
SCHOOLS  
  
(i) Rashtriya Indian Military College 
 
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) was established on March 13, 
1922 to recruit Indian citizens into the officer ranks of the Indian Army. The 
aim of RIMC is to send the RIMC Cadets Corps to the National Defence 
Academy and Naval Academy as per the Directive of the Ministry of 
Defence.   
 
3.2 During the course of oral evidence regarding selection procedure of 
cadets in in Rashtriya Indian Military College, the representative of Ministry 
apprised the Committee as under:- 
“……आरआईएमसी का एडिमशन भी नेशनल इंटीŤेशन का एक अमूʞ  उदाहरण है। 
आरआईएमसी का सेलेƕ न ऑल इंिडया लेवल पर ए ं टŌŐस एƪ ािमिनशन क े Ūू िकया जाता 
है। साल मŐ दो बार, जनवरी और जुलाई मŐ यह एƪ ाम क ं डƃ  िकया जाता है। इस समय 
आरआईएमसी का मैİƛमम ːŌœ̑थ 250 है। आरआईएमसी मŐ इंटेक 8वीं Ƒ ास मŐ जाता है, 
जब बǄ े की उŲ साढ़ ƶ ारह से तेरह साल क े बीच मŐ होता है।“ 
 
“राʼŌीय भारतीय सैɊ  कॉलेज मŐ एडिमशन इस Ůकार से होते हœ। हर साल, साल मŐ दो बार 
एक ऑल इंिडया लेवल ए ं टŌŐस ए̑ज़ाम क े जįरए आरआईएमसी देश क े िविभɄ राǛ ों से एक-
एक छाũ चुनता है। यह ŮिŢया जनवरी और जुलाई मŐ होती है। टŌेिनंग क े िलए 
आरआईएमसी हर एडिमशन ŮिŢया मŐ लगभग 25 लड़क े और पांच लड़िकयां आठवीं कƗा 
मŐ दाİखल करता है। सन् 2025 क े जुलाई से गʤŊ सैɊ  छाũों की संƥ ा, हर बैच मŐ पांच से 
दस कर दी जाएगी।“ 
 
     3.3 When the Committee desired to know about determination of state-
wise quota based on the population for admission in RIMC,  the Ministry in 
their post evidence reply submitted that the admission quotas are allocated 
on state-wise basis proportionate to each State’s population for ensuring 
broad representation. 
 
    3.4  The Committee sought to explain about the rational for holding board 
exams twice annually in RIMC, the Ministry in their  post evidence reply 
submitted as under:- 

 
33 
 
 “RIMC follows a semester system aligned with the structure of 
National Defence Academy (NDA) & Naval Academy (NA) necessitation to 
board exams annually. Army HQ’s (Army Education Directorate) conducts 
these exams following the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) 
curriculum. 
 30 cadets are included every 6 months in RIMC.” 
 
    3.5   On the issue of participation in various activities by cadets in 
Rashtriya Indian Military College, the representative of Ministry apprised the 
Committee as under:- 
“सरकार की पॉिलसीज को ȯ ान मŐ रखते Šए और आरआईएमसी क ै डेट्स को सबसे 
बेहतरीन टŌेिनंग Ůदान करने क े मकसद से आरआईएमसी मŐ इस समय काफी इनीिशएिट̺स 
चल रहे हœ।  
िडिजटल लिनōग- िजसमŐ िडिजटल ɘ ेटफॉʈŊ और इंटरनेट क े माȯ म से भारत क े कोने-
कोने से सीिनयर कमांडसŊ और एजुक े शन क े Ɨेũ मŐ सीिनयर लीडर क ै डेट्स से रेगुलर 
बेिसस पर इंटर ैƕ न करते हœ, उनको मोिटवेट करते हœ और देश का अǅ ा नागįरक बनने 
की Ůेरणा देते हœ।  
ˢǅ  भारत- आरआईएमसी का हर क ै डेट न क े वल अपने आस-पास, बİʋ  पूरे कœपस और 
देहरादून को ˢǅ  रखने का महȕ  समझता है। इस कायŊवाही को हम हर रिववार ŵमदान 
क े माȯ म से भी अंजाम देते हœ।  
पयाŊवरण- आरआईएमसी का हर क ै डेट अपने 5 सालों की टŌेिनंग क े दौरान आरआईएमसी 
क े कœपस और देहरादून मŐ कम से कम 35 पेड़ लगाने का काम करता है।  
एआई लिनōग मॉǰ ूʤ - आिटŊिफिशयल इंटेिलजŐस को मȞेनजर रखते Šए आरआईएमसी मŐ 
हमने एआई लिनōग मॉǰ ूʤ  की ː ैİɰशमŐट की है और इस समय क ै डेट्स हॉबीज और 
Ƒ̭  स क े जįरए एआई को एजुक े शन और देश को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए इˑ ेमाल करते हœ।  
 नेशनल मै̠स िƓज, हाल ही मŐ आरआईएमसी ने नेशनल मै̠स िƓज जीता है, िजसमŐ 
देश क े बेहतरीन ˋ ू ʤ  ने पािटŊिसपेट िकया था।  
 नेशनल ˋ ू ल िडबेट, हाल ही मŐ आरआईएमसी ने नेशनल ˋ ू ल िडबेट भी जीता है, 
िजसमŐ देश क े बेहतरीन से बेहतरीन ˋ ू लों ने पािटŊिसपेट िकया था।“ 
 
    3.6 Further, on being asked by the Committee about participation in 
shooting competitions by RIMC cadets, the Ministry in their reply submitted 
as under:- 
 “Details of cadets from RIMC participated in shooting competitions is 
given in the Annexure-III “ 
 

 
34 
 
    3.7   With regard to induction of girls cadets in Rashtriya Indian Military 
College, the  representative of Ministry apprised the Committee as under: 
 
 “गʤŊ क ै डेट्स, जुलाई 2022 से आरआईएमसी मŐ गʤŊ क ै डेट्स की भी टŌेिनंग हो रही है। 
अभी वतŊमान मŐ आरआईएमसी मŐ 14 गʤŊ क ै डेट्स टŌेिनंग कर रहे हœ, जो आरआईएमसी की 
ːŌœ̑थ का 25 परसŐट है।  
 
 उनका इंडƕ न ɘ ान - वषŊ 2028 तक गʤŊ का ːŌœ̑थ लगभग 100 क े बराबर 
इ̢Ţीज िकया जाएगा, िजसक े िलए इंů ाːŌƁर, एडिमिनːŌेिटव इंů ाːŌाƁ र और 
डारमेटŌीज का िŢएशन इस समय चल रहा है। उस समय आरआईएमसी का ːŌœ̑थ 250 
ɳ ॉयज और 100 गʤŊ होगा।“ 
 
 
(ii)  Rashtriya Military Schools 
 
     There are five Rashtriya Military Schools which are located at Ajmer, 
Belgaum, Bengaluru, Dholpur and Chair.  The aim of these schools is on 
the similar patter of Sainik Schools to impart quality education and to 
prepare the cadets to join the Defence Services as officers. 
 
 
  3.8 The details of reservation of seats for admission in Rashtriya Military 
Schools are as under: 
 
    (i)  70% for wards of Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) / Other 
Ranks(OR)of Army, Navy and Air Force including Ex-Servicemen 
(27%, 15%, 7.59% reservation for OBC, SC and ST respectively is 
applicable) 
 
   (ii) 30% for wards of officers of Army, Navy and Air Force (including 
retired officers) and civilians (27%, 15%, 7.5% reservation for OBC, 
SC applicable) 
 
   (iii) A total of 50 seats are earmarked for killed in Action category, in 
all five RMSs put together, at any point of time. 
 
   (iv) For class VI, 10% seats or 30 vacancies maximum (put together 
in all 05 RMSs) reserved for girl candidates. 
 
   3.9 During the course of oral evidence, on students’ participation in 
activities in Rashtriya Military Schools, the representative of Ministry 
apprised the Committee as under:- 
“.....In order to provide the overall development of the cadets, apart 
from the education, we carry out curricular as well as co-curricular, 

 
35 
 
club activities and sports activities which are given there on the 
slide.    
We have declamation, painting competition, debates, dramas, archery, 
pot making etc. Science club is there. In fact, we have clubs for the 
subjects. These are a few slides which we have brought.  
 We carry out almost all the sports activities in all the schools. There 
are periodic competitions between the schools and they also 
participate in various district and national-level competitions. We have 
NCC in all our five schools. All the activities, which have been 
designed for NCC cadets, are being carried out regularly including 
firing. Adventure activities are the part of our curriculum and extra-
curricular activities of the schools. They go for trekking; they go for 
rock climbing, mountaineering. We also carry out cycle expedition.  
Academic infrastructure has been development to the world-class 
level in all the schools and the efforts are on in this regard. The 
Government has been giving adequate funds to all the schools to 
provide them all the necessities of CTL and labs. School infrastructure 
has been development over a period of time. We are still in the 
process of improving the infrastructure so as to provide adequate and 
viable accommodation to the girl cadets also.  
We carry out Armed Display Activity by the armed forces. This is one 
of the activities which we have shown here. This was done exclusively 
by the girls to align them for the future role.  
We also participated in Government initiatives, Swachh Bharat 
Abhiyan, celebration of Chandrayan 3 success, Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav. All these activities were carried out in all the schools. Demo 
on waste management was also carried out. Apart from these, all 
other academic activities are carried out to make the students efficient 
to appear for NDA examination. 
  
 
 
(iii) Management and Governance of  RMS and RIMC 
 
    3.10 When the Committee desired to know about the management 
and governance of the five Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) and Rashtriya 

 
36 
 
Indian Military College (RIMC), the Ministry in their written reply submitted 
as under:- 
“Rashtriya Military Schools: The Central Governing Council (CGC) 
headed by the Defence Secretary is the Apex policy making body for 
these RMSs. A Local Board of Administration headed by the Major 
General/Brigadier, looks after the local administration of the schools. 
School is headed by a Principal of the rank of Lt. Colonel. 
Rashtriya Indian Military College: Rashtriya Indian Military College 
is headed by an officer of the rank of Colonel as Commandant. Two 
more officers are authorized to RIMC for performing the duties of 
Administrative Officer and Assistant Administrative & Training Officer.” 
 
   3.11 On being enquired about the difference between the curriculum and 
fee structure of Rashtriya Indian Military College, Rashtriya Military Schools 
and Sainik Schools,  the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“RMSs and RIMC follow CBSE curriculum and both are funded out of 
Defence Budget of the Central Government. 
Fee Structure: - 
The present fees structure per annum in RMSs is as under: - 
S No Category Fee per annum 
1 OR  Rs 12,000/- 
2 JCOs Rs 18,000/- 
3 Officers Rs 25,000/- 
4 Civilians Rs 51,000/- 
 
In case of SC/ST, 25% fee is charged in each category. 
The fee structure of RIMC is as under: - 
S No Category Fee per annum 
 
1 Boarder Cadet 
(General) 
Rs 1,48,650/- 
2 Boarder Cadet 
(SC/ST) 
Rs 1,31,850/- 
3 Day Scholar Cadet * Rs 65,700/- 
* Only wards of RIMC staff is allowed as day scholar. 
 
   3.12  When the Committee desired to know the motive behind setting 
up of Rashtriya Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military College and 

 
37 
 
differences between them, the Ministry, in their written reply submitted as 
under :- 
 
“RIMC is a feeder institute to National Defence Academy & Naval 
Academy. The aim of Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) is to impart 
quality education and prepare cadets to join Defence Services. 
Admissions to RIMC is carried out in grade - VIII whereas admission 
to RMS is done in class VI and class IX. Statewise quota is earmarked 
for admission to RIMC whereas reservation of 70% to wards of Junior 
Commissioned Officers / Other Ranks and 30% to wards of officers 
and civilians is provided in RMS’s.” 
 
   3.13 When the Committee desired to know whether the budget allocation 
to Rashtriya Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military College in BE for 
2024-25 is sufficient to meet the requirement, the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under:- 
“An amount of Rs. 713.97 Lakhs has been allocated in the BE  2024-
25 for RMS’s. Similarly an amount of Rs. 598 Lakhs has been allotted 
to RIMC in the BE 2024-25. 
The Budget allocations are sufficient to meet the present 
requirements.” 
 
    3.14 On being asked whether Sainik School students are given 
preference for admission in the Military College and Military School, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“Candidates are selected through an All India level Entrance Exam. No 
preference is given to any student from a Sainik School for admission 
to RIMC and RMS.” 
 
    3.15   When the Committee desired to know whether any preference is 
given to the students from Rashtriya Military Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College and Sainik Schools for joining the Armed Forces and also 
the status of dropout rate in these institutes,  the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted as under:- 
“So far, approximately, 1907 cadets of RMSs and 2763 cadets of 
RIMC have joined the Armed Forces.  No preference is given to the 

 
38 
 
cadets of Sainik Schools, RMSs and RIMC in Armed Forces.  The 
average dropout rate in last give years for these institutes is as under: 
S. 
No. 
Institute  Average dropout rate 
for last five years 
(i) Sainik Schools 6.93% 
(ii) Rashtriya Military Schools 
(RMS) 
6.96% 
(iii) Rashtriya Indian Military 
College (RIMC) 
7.1% 
 
     3.16 The Committee have been informed that there is one Military 
College and 5 Military Schools in the country, whereas there are 33 Sainik 
Schools under the earstwhile pattern and the Government has approved the 
scheme for establishment of 100 more Sainik Schools under the PPP mode. 
On a specific query regarding any plan to open new Military College and 
Military Schools under any such scheme, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
“No proposal for opening of new RIMC/ RMS is under consideration.” 
 
    3.17 During the course of oral evidence, the Committee desired to know 
about inclusion of topics related to modern technology used in warfare in the 
curriculum, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under :- 
“Elements of strategic thinking, information technology and associated 
scientific principles are embedded across various subject taught in 
RIMC and RMS’s.  Guest lectures are also organised to provide 
perspective of modern warfare.” 
    3.18 The Committee also enquired about emphasis given on Indian 
Military History, Indian Warriors and their warfare techniques,  the Ministry in 
their  post evidence reply submitted as under :- 
 
“Students are provided with insights into the bravery and sacrifices of 
Indian freedom fighters and Armed Forces. RIMC maintains a well 
stocked library with separate section on military history.  Cadets also 
participate in military historic seminars.” 

 
39 
 
 
    3.19 The Committee desired to know about participation in Yoga and 
Pranayam by cadets, the Ministry in their  reply submitted that Yoga and 
Pranayam are integral to the physical training curriculum and the cadets 
regularly engage in these practices. 
 
    3.20 To be specific, the Committee also desired to know whether there is 
any reservation for children of civilians, the Ministry in their written reply 
intimated the Committee as under:- 
 “State-wise quota is earmarked for admission to RIMC.  For admission 
to RMS’S 30% seats are reserved for children of service officers and 
civilians.” 
    
     3.21 When the Committee desired know about the challenges and 
constraints being faced by Rashtriya Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian 
Military College, the Ministry through written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“No challenges are being faced by Rashtriya Military Schools and 
Rashtriya Indian Military College.”   
 
 
 
 
 

 
40 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Background of Sainik Schools 
 
The Committee note that Sainik Schools are set-up in 1961 and  a jointly 
run by the Central and State Governments, under the overall governance 
of Sainik School Society, Ministry of Defence. The foremost objective of 
Sainik Schools is to prepare the cadets/students academically, physically 
and mentally and also instil qualities of leadership, patriotism and 
discipline in them  for entry into the National Defence Academy (NDA) 
and the Indian Military Academy alongwith ensuring the removal of 
regional imbalances in the Officers cadre of the Armed Forces. Further, 
Sainik Schools play an important role to provide balanced 
education/training that includes academics, physical training and 
character development which helps the young cadets to become good 
and responsible citizens of the nation. The Committee observes that the 
ultimate objective is also to make accessible high quality education 
within the reach of the common man. The Committee, further note that 
prior to the scheme for establishment of Sainik Schools, there  existed 5 
Rashtriya Military Schools and 1 Rashtriya Indian Military College, with 
the same objectives as that of Sainik Schools. All of these institutions 
basically train and nurture cadets for entry into the coveted National 
Defence Academy or other defence institutions/sectors. The Committee, 

 
41 
 
in course of its examination of the issues, have commented upon the 
topics like allocation of funds, performance of Sainik Schools, training to 
teachers,  scholarships for deserving students, provision of grants-in-aid 
for Sainik Schools infrastructure, opening of new Sainik Schools under 
PPP mode, proper infrastructure for girl students and timely updation of 
curriculum for best results. Further, the examination of the subject has 
revealed certain impediments in achieving the laid out objectives for 
which  Sainik Schools were established alongwith their performance, 
which could be improved or taken care of to reach the expected levels. 
Some concerns have also surfaced on the issue of the opening of new 
Sainik Schools during the course of examination, whereas the expansion 
of Sainik Schools has proved to be a piecemeal process. Further, the 
States interested in opening of the new schools have also not been able 
to conclusively pursue their requests, especially when the financial 
obligation on the part of the State Governments was conveyed. The 
various recommendations/observations of the Committee emerging out 
of the detailed deliberations on the subject have been enumerated in the 
succeeding paragraphs of the report. 
Budget allocation for functioning of Sainik Schools  
 
2. The Committee note that at present there are 33 Sainik Schools 
under erstwhile pattern located in various parts of the country.  The 
Committee further note that the Government has approved the initiative 

 
42 
 
of setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in partnership mode with 
NGO’s/Private Schools/State Governments in a graded manner class-
wise, starting from class 6th onwards with a vision to create a system that 
combines academic vigour with a degree of discipline and increased 
focus on value-based education.  As per the latest information provided 
by the Ministry of Defence, Sainik Schools Society has approved 86 new 
Sainik Schools so far in partnership mode with NGO's/Private 
Schools/State Governments. The Committee observes that for the 
functioning of Sainik Schools, allocated funds are utilized in providing 
various grant-in-aids, scholarships, incentives, special grants to  Sainik 
Schools.  In F.Y. 2023-24, out of the allocated budget of Rs. 175.87 crore, 
an amount of Rs. 152.43 crore was allocated for Sainik Schools.  The 
balance amount of Rs. 23.44 crore was surrendered to Government 
account.  Although the amount of Rs. 152.43 crore, as stated by the 
Ministry was adequate to fulfil the obligation of Ministry of Defence 
towards functioning of Sainik Schools, the Committee are of the   view   
that surrendered amount of Rs. 23.44 crore could have been gainfully 
utilized towards various other issues, especially those pertaining to 
lacking infrastructure of Sainik Schools.  The Committee desire that the 
Ministry in future may ensure that all sanctioned amount is gainfully and 
effectively utilized and generally no surrender of funds should take place. 
Further, to cater to the additional requirement with regard to BE 2024-25, 
an amount of Rs. 670 crore was projected for Revised Estimates 2024-25, 

 
43 
 
which was Rs. 494.13 crore more than the earlier allocated amount of Rs. 
175.87 crore. The Committee are of the considered view that sufficient 
funds should be allocated to Sainik Schools, wherever necessary, to 
meet the heads of grant-in-aids, scholarships, incentives and special 
grants in respect of erstwhile Sainik Schools and also in terms of annual 
fee support and training grant to new upcoming Sainik Schools. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence should 
make all out efforts to impress upon the Ministry of Finance for  
providing sufficient budgetary support or allocation for required 
infrastructure development, alongwith ensuring timebound 
modernization of 33 Sainik Schools, as well as the new upcoming 
schools, so as to ensure that Sainik Schools function smoothly towards 
playing the unique role of recruiting and training future leaders for the 
Armed Forces and other national service sectors.  
Performance/comparison of Sainik Schools with Rashtriya Military 
School, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
3. The Committee note that Sainik Schools were established after the 
Rashtriya Military Schools and the Rashtriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC), with clearly defined aims and objectives i.e to prepare cadets for 
entry into NDA, and to rectify regional imbalance in the Officers cadre of 
Indian Armed Forces. These institutions were designed with a robust 
organizational structure extending from the Ministry of Defence at the 

 
44 
 
apex level to Local Boards of Administration at the ground level. The 
importance accorded to Sainik Schools is evident from the fact that the 
Raksha Mantri serves as the Chairman of the Board of Governors. 
Further, to ensure efficient functioning and streamlined operations, 
Sainik Schools are staffed with serving Service Officers in key leadership 
positions such as Principal, Vice-Principal, and Administrative Officer, in 
addition to APTC/NCC instructors and other requisite skilled personnel. 
 The Committee also observe that Sainik Schools are established on 
expansive campuses and are equipped with well-developed 
infrastructure and facilities to impart quality education and 
comprehensive training. These institutions are intended to develop 
cadets into capable individuals who can serve as officers in the Armed 
Forces in the future.  Keeping in view the above moto of Sainik School, 
the Government should make all out efforts to increase the intake of  the 
NDA cadets from Sainik School at par with RIMC. 
 The Committee further note, based on submissions from the Ministry, 
that in recent years students have been increasingly exploring diverse 
career options, influenced by wider availability of opportunities and 
personal interests. In this context, the Committee are of the view that 
Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military Schools, and RIMC must adapt to 
evolving aspirations and advancements, particularly in relation to the 
range of career choices made available to students. 

 
45 
 
 While reaffirming the core objective of new Sainik Schools—namely, 
nurturing candidates for entry into the Armed Forces—the Committee 
emphasize that students should also be encouraged to pursue alternative 
career pathways aligned with their interests and aptitudes directly or 
indirectly related to national defence. 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the time is opportune for 
students of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military Schools, and RIMC to be 
motivated to pursue careers not only in the Armed Forces but also in 
allied fields related to defence research, innovation, design, and 
medicine. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, 
through these schools and colleges, adopt a multi-pronged approach to 
build awareness and instil a sense of purpose aligned with students’ 
interests from an early stage. Such an approach would ensure holistic 
development and enable students to emerge as responsible citizens and 
future leaders of the nation. 
Training for teaching staff 
4. The Committee note that most of the Sainik Schools have the 
required number of Service Officers, APTCs and NCC staff. Across the 33 
Sainik Schools, there are approximately 800 teachers, and significant 
emphasis is being placed on their training and professional development. 
The Committee note that the Ministry has entered into an MoU with IITE, 
Gandhinagar, under which training has already commenced. The 

 
46 
 
programme comprises three phases, and every teacher is required to 
undergo each phase, beginning from the induction stage. The Committee 
observe that a detailed training pattern has been decided with the 
Gandhinagar Institute which is available for all Sainik Schools including 
the schools under PPP mode. In this regard, the Committee recommend 
that, particularly in the context of the PPP mode, training should place 
greater emphasis on instilling discipline, fostering national values, 
integrating modern technological advancements, including the use of AI 
and adopting contemporary pedagogical strategies. 
      The Committee further recommend that the teachers should be 
systematically and periodically trained to deliver quality education, build-
awareness of defence culture and expectations,  while aligning with the 
latest curriculum in force alongwith cultivating leadership values, 
discipline and patriotism.  The outcome of the training imparted to the 
teachers should also be quantified, especially in terms of the increased 
academic performance of students and number of selection of cadets in 
NDA.  The Committee, further desire that the Ministry should make 
concerted efforts by exercising the requisite due diligence, so that the 
number of cadets selected for NDA and other defence related domains 
invariably goes up. The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the 
Ministry towards training of teaching staff also urge the Ministry to take 
assistance from various institutes of repute by conducting a proper 
study on the performance of teaching staff alongwith the requirement of 

 
47 
 
additional teachers training institutes, in order to ensure that the 
objective of setting up of the Sainik Schools are fully met and results 
achieved as per the expectations.  
Scholarships and Incentives 
5. The Committee note that the State Governments provide 
scholarships based on the income slabs of parents of the cadets/marks 
scored by the students of Sainik Schools belonging to that State as per 
their own policy. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence 
also provides a part of scholarship as Central Assistance to those cadets 
who have been awarded State Government scholarship. The Committee 
further note that the Central Government also provides incentive to those 
cadets who are selected for National Defence Academy/Naval Academy. 
In this regard, all cadets of Sainik Schools who join the National Defence 
Academy/Naval Academy are given NDA incentive in the form of 
reimbursement of entire tuition fee paid for classes XI and XIl by such 
cadets. The Committee are of the view that substantial amount is being 
spent by the parents of the students/cadets in terms of payment of entire 
tuition fees during their course study in Sainik Schools.  Also, the 
students/cadets are coming from various economic and social 
backgrounds and different income groups.  In this regard, the Committee 
while appreciating the new PPP scheme which envisages to provide 
Annual Fee Support of 50% of fee (subject to an upper limit of Rs 40,000 

 
48 
 
per annum) for 50% of the class strength (subject to an upper limit of 
50% students per year) from class 6th to class 12th, on Merit-cum-Means 
basis are of the view that with respect to scholarship and incentives, 
more initiatives are required to motivate the students and retaining them 
within the ecosystem of Sainik Schools.   
        The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure increased incentive 
towards merit, need, category and performance based scholarships and  
initiatives towards providing a holistic support.  The Committee also 
recommend the Central Government to enhance their share/component 
within the scholarship/incentive schemes, wherever possible.  Further, 
the Committee also desire that assistance with regard  to admission and 
examination support, educational infrastructure support alongwith 
providing guidance for higher education towards specialized research 
areas be regularly provided.  The Committee, with regard to special 
schemes for girl cadets, recommend that the Ministry should review its 
existing scholarship policy with a view to include special scholarship 
scheme for girl cadets, towards motivating and providing them with an 
opportunity to serve the nation. Further, with regard to class based 
incentives, the Committee desire that the reimbursement of entire tuition 
fee paid for classes XI and XIl as incentive may be extended to include 
classes IX to XII.  The Committee strongly feel that such an increased 
amount as incentive would definitely motivate the cadets of Sainik 
Schools for joining National Defence Academy/Naval Academy and other 

 
49 
 
defence related establishments thereby meeting the objectives of Sainik 
Schools. 
Grant-in-aid 
6. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence provides training 
grant to the tune of Rs. 10 lakh to each Sainik School every year for 
meeting expenditure related to NDA training of cadets as well as in-
service training of teachers. The Grant-in-aid for infrastructure 
development to the tune of Rs. 1 crore is also provided to each Sainik 
School every year based on their proposals.  The Committee observe that 
the main reason for non-allotment of infrastructure grant to some of the 
Sainik Schools was due to non-submission of requisite documents for 
availing the said grant including non-submission of vetted Utilization 
Certificates of the last availed grants. The Committee recommend that all 
required formalities like submission of required documents, utilization 
certificates, etc. to ensure timely allotment of grants should be amicably 
resolved well in advance to avoid any delay in disbursement of the grant.  
As regards, submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs) which is a pre- 
requisite for further grants/release of funds, the Committee desire that a 
timeline be drawn for submission of UCs so that further release of 
funds/grants are not delayed due to non-submission of UCs. 
       The Committee have also been informed  that Sainik Schools are 
being upgraded with world-class infrastructure suitable for residential 

 
50 
 
purposes with continuous support from the State Governments and 
Central Government.  The Committee appreciate the role being played by 
Central and State Governments towards providing grants-in-aid for 
training and infrastructure development of Sainik Schools.   In this 
regard, the Committee desires that the ongoing efforts to develop world-
class infrastructure in Sainik Schools be sustained as a continuous 
process, with timely provision of additional grant-in-aid whenever 
required.  Further, regarding  infrastructure development the requisite 
criteria of changing paradigm and advancement of the training modules 
should be given top priority. 
7. Inclusive education for students  of economically weaker sections 
The Committee are pleased to note that reservation in admission to 
Sainik School is being provided to students belonging to Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. In addition, 
certain State Governments provide merit-cum-means based scholarships 
to the students who are domicile of the States and admitted in the Sainik 
Schools. The Committee have also been informed that  there is no 
proposal in Ministry of Defence for extending any other benefit apart 
from existing benefits to cadets of Sainik Schools.  The Committee feel 
that students from economically weaker sections of the society 
irrespective of their social  background should get an opportunity for 
admission in Sainik Schools by ways of extending inclusive education to 

 
51 
 
them so that all the students should be benefitted by fostering empathy, 
social skills, understanding of diversity, thus boosting academic 
outcomes, confidence and real-world readiness through collaborative 
learning with peers from varied backgrounds. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry of Defence to review its existing Sainik Schools 
Society Rules & Regulations, 1997 (SSSR&R, 1997) for consideration of 
exemption and provisions for  minimizing or subsidizing fees to the 
students belonging to economically weaker sections of the society for 
their admissions and studying in Sainik Schools so that they also get an 
opportunity to serve the nation. 
Fee structure of Sainik Schools  
8. The Committee note that Sainik School are created on a Centre-
State partnership model. The State Government provides the land 
infrastructure, ongoing maintenance and in many cases also the pension 
liabilities and terminal benefits of Sainik School employees. The 
Committee have been informed that the Central Government through the 
Ministry of Defence provides the Principal, the Vice Principal, the Admin 
Officer, the NCC and physical training core component to Sainik Schools.  
As per the standing directives of Board of Governors, Sainik School 
Society, Ministry of Defence, the school fee will be increased by 10 
percent annually (Annexure IV). The scheme for Sainik School under PPP 
mode envisages to provide Annual Fee Support of 50% of fee (subject to 

 
52 
 
an upper limit of Rs. 40,000 per annum) for 50% of the class strength 
(subject to an upper limit of 50 students per year) from class 6th to class 
12th on Merit-cum-means basis.  It is also proposed to incentivize the 
approved schools with an amount of Rs. 10 Lakh, as training grant to 
each such approved school annually based on annual academic 
performance of the students in class 12th. The Committee also note that 
the running costs of the school including salaries to academic and 
supporting staff are paid from the tuition fees collected from the 
students, and hence, the escalation in fees for cadet may not be avoided. 
The Committee observe that the high annual fee for admission in Sainik 
Schools which generally include tuition fee, food, uniform, sports, text 
book, annual charges, transportation charges is creating significant 
burdens upon the middle-class families with their meagre income. 
Further, the parents have also to bear annual 10% increase of tuition fee 
as per rules of Sainik Schools Society throughout the study of their ward. 
Although scholarships are available based on parental income, however, 
the scholarship is not available to all students. The Committee are of the 
view that the annual fee hike of 10 per cent poses barrier for many 
deserving students from low-income, middle-class, and lower middle-
class families. Such increases deprive meritorious candidates from 
gaining admission to Sainik Schools, thereby limiting their access to 
quality education and opportunities to serve the nation. 

 
53 
 
         The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry of Defence to 
address the issue of  high annual fee  on priority basis and take 
necessary steps in this regard like creation of Fund to grant financial 
assistance or special concession to wards particularly belonging to 
middle-class and lower middle-class/low income families so that after 
selection for admission their dream to study in Sainik School may come 
true and is in no way shattered due for non affordable high fee structure. 
Opening of new Sainik Schools under PPP mode 
9. The Committee note that the Central Government has approved 
the initiative of setting up of 100 new Sainik Schools in partnership with 
NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments in a graded manner class-
wise, starting from class 6th onward. As on 5 August, 2025, Sainik 
Schools Society has approved 86 new Sainik Schools in partnership 
mode with NGO's/Private Schools/State Governments. Out of these, 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been signed with only 64 new 
Sainik Schools and  Academic Session has already begun in 45 such 
schools. The Committee are constrained to note  that the signing of MoA 
in respect of 22 newly approved Sainik Schools is pending for want of 
requisite documents from the entities as per the terms and conditions of 
the approval letter issued by Ministry of Defence to the approved New 
Sainik Schools.  The Committee further note with concern that the 
process for evaluation of applications to approve 14 New Sainik schools 

 
54 
 
is still not completed by Sainik Schools Society.  The Committee desire 
that Sainik Schools Society should establish a dedicated mechanism and 
appropriate coordination, in a time bound manner with States/Union 
territories for speedy disposal of all pending application/requests, so that 
the target of setting up of 100 New Sainik Schools could be achieved.  
For this, the Committee recommend setting up of High Powered 
Committee to phase out all roadblocks to ensure that the future of 
students is not compromised in any way for want of basic coordination 
between Centre and State Governments. The Committee also recommend 
that the Ministry of Defence and Sainik Schools Society should prepare a 
comprehensive action plan to sensitize and create awareness among the  
State Governments/Union territories, so that at least one new Sainik 
School under PPP mode is established in each State/Union territory.   
Review of Criteria/Parameters for opening of new Sainik Schools 
10. The Committee note that the main criteria and parameters for 
approval of new Sainik Schools comprises land availability i.e. 6 acres 
land for day school and 8 acres land for residential schools alongwith 
other conditions i.e. adequate academic and administrative 
infrastructure,  sufficient and qualified academic and administrative Staff, 
affiliation with board of education (CBSE/State),  transparent fee 
structure,  sound financial health of school, signing of Memorandum of 
Agreement (MoA) and recommendation of the School Evaluation 

 
55 
 
Committee. The Committee have been informed that a well laid down 
policy and criteria is followed for establishment of new Sainik Schools. 
Further, necessary documentation and on-ground verification is carried 
out before setting up of new Sainik Schools in accordance with the 
existing Rules & Regulations for new Sainik Schools.  The Committee are 
of the considered view that most of the smaller north-eastern States and 
hilly States like Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union territory of 
Ladakh have limited amount of suitable land due to their peculiar 
geographical condition which renders distribution of land for various 
other purposes equally important.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
such States/areas which are bound by such unavoidable hindrances 
should be positively backed by the Government, so that they are not left 
behind.  The Committee would also like to reiterate that contribution of 
such States/areas to the armed forces is well known and therefore, they  
urges the Government to ease up the conditions and requirements both 
in terms of land, infrastructure and financial obligations, which is 
required for establishment of new Sainik Schools.  In this regard, the 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review/revisit 
its existing policy, particularly relating to land criteria required for 
establishment of new Sainik Schools. Further, the Government should 
also consider granting approval to such States/Union territories on 
priority which lack suitable land for setting of up new Sainik Schools as a 
special case to achieve the desired objectives. The Committee also 

 
56 
 
desire that sincere efforts should be made to utilise the 
unutilized/surplus land available in cantonment areas if feasible for new 
Sainik Schools, without compromising the requirement of defence. 
Upgradation of infrastructure for girl students 
11. The Committee are pleased to note that the admission of girl 
cadets in Sainik Schools has started from the academic year 2018 and at 
least ten girls are admitted every year in each school.  The Committee 
note that as on 21th October 2024, 1578 girl cadets were studying in 33 
Sainik Schools. The Committee have learnt that the first batch of 
students in new Sainik Schools has started in Academic Year 2022-23. 
Further, the details of the girl students of new Sainik Schools who will 
qualify for NDA can be known only when these girls will be eligible to 
appear in NDA exam after appearing or passing out of class 12th. The 
Committee have been informed that in the academic year 2024-25, the 
number of girls in both the existing Sainik Schools and in the new Sainik 
Schools has crossed 2,000. Also,  an amount of Rs. 3.3 crore per Sainik 
School was provided by the Ministry of Defence for construction of girls' 
hostels. The Committee have also been apprised that in view of the 
increase in the recruitment of girl cadets in Sainik Schools, proactive 
efforts are being made to provide favourable and hygienic residential 
facilities for girl cadets in each school. The Committee have been further 
apprised that approval for one of the all-girls’ school have been given at 

 
57 
 
Mathura which is yet to be started alongwith some private trusts like  
Rani Chennamma Sainik School in Kittur where only the girl students are 
being trained.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should take all 
necessary steps for upgradation of the existing infrastructure facilities 
with a view to provide best possible, favourable and hygienic facilities to 
girls cadets. The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the 
Ministry towards girls education in Sainik Schools would also like the 
Ministry to take required steps to incrementally increase the number of 
all-girls Sainik Schools, which would surely pave the way for intake of 
more female officers in the NDA course alongwith other areas of defence 
related institutions/organisations. 
Facilities for Girls Cadets in RIMC 
12. The Committee note that the aim of Rastriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC) is to educate, train and nurture cadets into capable and  effective 
leaders while inspiring them to take up profession of armed forces as 
their natural preferred calling. The Committee observe that the selection 
is carried out on the basis of an All India Entrance Examination held 
twice a year which includes written examination, interview and medical. 
Currently, the maximum strength of RIMC is 250.  The Committee have 
been given to understand that the intake at RIMC starts from 8th class, 
when the child's age is between eleven and thirteen years.  Further,  
RIMC admits about 25 boys and 5 girls in the Eighth grade in each 

 
58 
 
admission process. The Committee have also been apprised that the 
number of girl students will increase from five to ten in each batch from 
July 2025.  The Committee further note that the induction  plan of RIMC is 
to increase the strength of girls to about 100 by the year 2028, for which 
the creation of necessary infrastructure is currently underway.  The 
Committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Government towards 
ensuring regular  induction of girl cadets in RIMC.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to reinforce its commitment and take all 
necessary steps in a time bound manner for providing requisite 
infrastructure including administrative infrastructure, dormitories and 
related facilities for girls cadets in RIMC, which would eventually result in 
enhancement of their physical and mental faculties for preparation and 
induction into the armed forces of the nation.  The Committee would also 
like the Ministry of Defence to share a status report on the same within 
three months of the presentation of the report.  
Periodical review and updation of Curriculum in RIMC and RMS 
13. The Committee observe that the elements of strategic thinking, 
information technology, modern technology used in warfare and 
associated scientific principles are embedded across various subjects 
taught in RIMC and RMS. Yoga and Pranayam are integral to the physical 
training curriculum and the cadets regularly engage in these practices. 
The Committee have been informed that guest lectures are also 
organised to provide perspective of modern warfare.   The Committee 

 
59 
 
while appreciating the efforts to keep the curriculum up-to-date, desire 
that the curriculum related to modern technology and warfare such as 
the concepts associated with AI, cyber and space warfare, autonomous 
systems (e.g drone warfare), defence related directed energy and 
quantum technology, geopolitics of energy related concepts, etc. should 
be included and required to be reviewed periodically so that cadets of 
RIMC and RMS are in sync with the latest information and development in 
those fields.  The Committee also recommend for inclusion of student 
and faculty exchange programmes for increased exposure with defence 
schools and universities of friendly countries so that the students are 
aware of the best practices in defence related education and curriculum. 
Minimizing Dropout rate in Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military School and  
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
14. The Committee note that the average dropout rate during the last 
five years in the Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military School and  Rashtriya 
Indian Military College is 6.93 per cent, 6.96 per cent and 7.1 per cent, 
respectively. The Committee feel that the seats which fall vacant after the 
cadets leave these institutions midway remain vacant until the next 
entrance examination is held.  This has a rippling effect as on one side 
the precious resources of the Government go waste due to idling of 
seats, on the other side it curtails the opportunities of candidates who 
intends to join the 

 
60 
 
 NDA course.  The Committee, therefore, urges upon the Ministry to 
address this dropout issue on priority basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
16 March, 2026 Chairperson 
25 Phalguna, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 

 
61 
 
 Annexure -I 
LIST OF 33 SAINIK SCHOOLS functioning under erstwhile pattern 
Ser Name of School State Year 
1 Sainik School Satara Maharashtra 1961 
2 Sainik School Kunjpura Haryana 1961 
3 Sainik School Kapurthala Punjab 1961 
4 Sainik School Balachadi Gujarat 1961 
5 Sainik School Chittorgarh Rajasthan 1961 
6 Sainik School Korukonda Andhra Pradesh 1962 
7 Sainik School Kazhakootam Kerala 1962 
8 Sainik School Purulia West Bengal 1962 
9 Sainik School Bhubaneswar Odisha 1962 
10 Sainik School Amaravathinagar Tamil Nadu 1962 
11 Sainik School Rewa Madhya Pradesh 1962 
12 Sainik School Tilaiya Jharkhand 1963 
13 Sainik School Bijapur Karnataka 1963 
14 Sainik School Goalpara Assam 1964 
15 Sainik School Ghorakhal Uttarakhand 1966 
16 Sainik School Nagrota Jammu 1970 
17 Sainik School Imphal Manipur 1971 
18 Sainik School Sujanpur Tira Himachal Pradesh 1978 
19 Sainik School Nalanda Bihar 2003 
20 Sainik School Gopalganj Bihar 2003 
21 Sainik School Punglwa Nagaland 2007 
22 Sainik School Kodagu Karnataka 2007 
23 Sainik School Ambikapur Chhattisgarh 2008 
24 Sainik School Rewari Haryana 2009 
25 Sainik School Kalikiri Andhra Pradesh 2014 
26 Sainik School Chhingchhip Mizoram 2017 
27 Sainik School Jhunjhunu Rajasthan 2018 
28 Sainik School East Siang Arunachal Pradesh 2018 
29 Sainik School Chandrapur Maharashtra 2019 
30 Sainik School Jhansi Uttar Pradesh 2019 
31 Sainik School Mainpuri Uttar Pradesh 2019 
32 Sainik School Amethi  Uttar Pradesh 2020 
33 Sainik School Sambalpur  Odisha  2020 
 

 
62 
 
Annexure-II 
LIST OF 45 NEW SAINIK SCHOOLS (ON PARTNERSHIP MODE) WHERE ACADEMIC 
SESSION HAS COMMENCED 
 
S. No. Name of School District State 
1.  Adani World School SPSR Nellore Andhra Pradesh 
2.  Tawang Public School Tawang Arunachal Pradesh 
3.  Sundari Devi Saraswati Vidya 
Mandir 
Samastipur Bihar 
4.  Keshav Saraswati Vidya Mandir Patna Bihar 
5.  Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
Military Academy 
Silvassa Dadra And Nagar 
Haveli 
6.  Shri Brahmanand Vidya Mandir Junagadh Gujarat 
7.  Shri. Motibhai R Chaudhari Sagar 
Sainik School 
Mehsana Gujarat 
8.  Banas SainikSchool Banaskantha Gujarat 
9.  Royal International Residential 
School 
Fatehabad Haryana 
10.  Shri Baba Mastnath Residential 
Public School 
Rohtak Haryana 
11.  Raj Luxmi Samvid Gurukulam Solan Himachal Pradesh 
12.  Sangolli Rayanna Sainik School Belagavi Karnataka 
13.  Viveka School of Excellence Mysure Karnataka 
14.  Vedvayasa Vidyalaya Senior 
Secondary School 
Kozhikode Kerala 
15.  Saraswati Vidhya Mandir Higher 
Secondary School 
Mandsaur Madhya Pradesh 
16.  Padmashree Dr. Vitthalrao Vikhe 
Patil Sainik School 
Ahmednagar Maharashtra 
17.  SK International School Sangli Maharashtra 
18.  Dayanand Public School Patiala Punjab 
19.  The Vikasa School Tuticorin Tamil Nadu 
20.  Shri Bhawani Niketan Public 
School 
Jaipur Rajasthan 
21.  Adarsh Public School,  Solapur  Maharashtra 
22.  Samvid Gurukulam Senior 
Secondary School, Mathura, Uttar 
Pradesh  
Mathura Uttar Pradesh 

 
63 
 
23.  Vidyadhiraja Vidyapeetom Central 
School  
Alappuzha Kerala 
24.  Good Day Defence School Hanumangarh Rajasthan 
25.  Ganpat Rai Salarpuria Saraswati 
Vidya Mandir  
Bhagalpur Bihar 
26.  Sree Sarada Vidyalaya,  Ernakulam Kerala 
27.  Wood Park School  Hamirpur Himachal Pradesh 
28.  Bhartiya Public School  Sikar Rajasthan 
29.  Smt Kesari Devi Lohia Public 
School 
Kurukshetra Haryana 
30.  National English Medium School Bidar Karnataka 
31.  Bhonsala Military School Nagpur Maharashtra 
32.  The Great India School Raipur Chhattisgarh 
33.  Shri Hanwant Senior Secondary 
English Medium School 
Jodhpur Rajasthan 
34.  Saraswati Gramodaya Higher 
Secondary School 
Hoshangabad Madhya Pradesh 
35.  Aadharshila Vidya Mandir Bilaspur Chhattisgarh 
36.  Delhi Public School Rajnandgaon Chhattisgarh 
37.  Allons Public School Bemetara  Chhattisgarh 
38.  Gokuldas Public School Khargone Madhya Pradesh 
39.  Syna International School Katni Madhya Pradesh 
40.  Shakuntalam International School Etawah Uttar Pradesh 
41.  Surya Sainik School Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 
42.  HJD Institute  Kachchh Gujarat 
43.  Tagore Science Residential School Nagpur Rajasthan 
44.  Mannan Memorial Residential 
School 
Thiruvanantha-
puram 
Kerala 
45.  North-East Military School Chirang Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
64 
 
Annexure III 
 
    

 
65 
 
Annexure IV 
 
 

 
66 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2023-24) 
  
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2023-24) 
  
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th February, 2024 from 1500 hrs to 1615 hrs 
in Committee Room C, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
  
Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.)-Acting Chairperson 
  
    MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma                              -          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das                              -          Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh                                  -          Deputy Secretary 
  
 
2 Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
3 Kunwar Danish Ali 
4 Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
5 Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
6 Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7 Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8 Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
9 Shri Prathap Simha  
10 Shri Durga Das Uikey 
                
               Rajya Sabha  
11 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
12 Smt. P.T. Usha 
      

 
67 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
  
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
  
Sl. No. Name & Designation  1.   Smt. Dipti Mohil Chawla, Additional Secretary 
2.   Shri Rakesh Mittal, Joint Secretary 
3.   Maj. Gen. Ashish Shah,  MGGS (Apvl & Plans) 
4.   Maj. Gen VK Bhat, ADG Army Education 
  
2.        At the outset, the the Committee were informed that the Hon’ble Chairperson 
would not be able to attend the Sitting and that as per Rule 258 of ‘Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’, if the Chairperson is absent from any sitting, the 
Committee shall choose another Member to act as Chairperson for the sitting. In this 
connection, the Members requested Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) to Chair the Sitting.  
 
3.        Thereafter, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. Consideration and Adoption of the 
Draft Report on the subject ‘A review of functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the country’ 
and Oral evidence of the representatives of the MoD on the subject ‘Review of Sainik 
Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on the subject ‘A review of 
functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the country’. 
  
4.        After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Report without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
  
5.        Then, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence and drew their attention to Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  
 6.        The representatives of the Ministry of Defence, through a Power Point 
Presentation, briefed the Committee on the Subject. Thereafter, the Acting Chairperson 
and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points, as indicated below and 
sought clarifications/information from the representatives of the Ministry of Defence 
thereon: 

 
68 
 
a. Change in choice of career of the students of Sainik Schools; 
b. Modifications required in syllabus and training process in Sainik Schools; 
c. Giving exposure to students of Sainik Schools, RIMC, Rashtriya Militray Schools 
to Defence sector related activities; 
d. Reservation for the students of a particular State in the Sainik School; 
e. Opening of Sainik Schools under PPP model; 
f. Inclusion of patriotic and inspiring stories of the Defence Forces’s brave fights in 
the curriculum of the Sainik Schools, RIMC and Rashtriya Militray Schools; 
g. Number of applications received from the entire country to start Sainik Schools; 
h. Even distribution of Sainik Schools throughout the country; 
i. Exclusive girls’ Sainik Schools in different locations; 
j. Strength of teaching and non-teaching staff and steps taken to establish Teachers’ 
training institute for the Sainik Schools; 
k. Employment of retired Defence personnel for inculcating training in various Sainik 
Schools in the country; 
l. Proposal to start more Sainik Schools in Bihar; 
m. Time limit for starting of remaining new Sainik Schools under PPP mode; 
n. Issue of payment of pension of teachers in the old Sainik schools; 
o. Difference in syllabi of RIMC, Sainik schools and  Rashtriya Military Schools; and 
p. Appointment of an Ex-Serviceman as an administrative/training Officer in Sainik 
Schools. 
  
7.        The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence responded to the queries 
raised by the Members. The Acting Chairperson directed the representatives of the 
Ministry to furnish written replies/information on the points raised by the Members which 
were not readily available at the earliest. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

 
69 
 
    CONFIDENTIAL 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 25th October 2024 from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. 
in Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Shashank Mani 
4 Shri Lumba Ram 
5 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
6 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
7 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
8 Shri Naresh Bansal  
9 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
10 Shri Naveen Jain 
11 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
12 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
13 Shri Sanjay Singh 

 
70 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
Sl. No. Name & Designation 
 
1. Smt. Dipti Mohil Chawla, Addl. Secretary 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar Sharma, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rakesh Mittal, Joint Secretary 
4. Maj. Gen. Ashish Shah, MGGS (Apvl & Plans) 
5. Maj. Gen VK Bhat, ADG Army Education 
6. Cmde R.K. Sharma, Inspecting Officer 
7. Brig JS Chauhan, Brig AE 
8. Col. Vijay Rana, Principal, SS 
9. Col Anant Thapan, Col AE-2 
10. Lt. Col. Abhishek Rana, Training Officer, RIMC 
11. Lt. Col. YK Verma, GSO-1, (Plg), (Apvl & Plans) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and informed them about 
the agenda of the Sitting i.e. to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence on the subject ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. He also informed the members that the previous 
Committee had selected this subject and had taken an oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence in connection with examination of the subject, 
but the examination remained inconclusive. The new Committee has re-selected the 
subject to complete examination of the subject. 
 
3. The Chairperson then, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Defence 
and requested them to give an overview on the Subject.  He then drew their attention to           
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings of the Committee and requested them to introduce themselves to the 
Committee before proceeding to submit their views.  
 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence introduced themselves 
before giving an overview on the subject, through a Power Point Presentation. The 
Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several queries on a wide gamut of 
issues which inter-alia include the following: 
 
 inclusion of technology in the curriculum of Sainik Schools to acquaint them 
in consonance with the requirement of modern warfare; 
 
   inclusion of historical war strategies in the training module in a modernize 
way which had been used by our brave fighters; 
  counselling programme in Sainik Schools; 
  opening of more Sainik Schools under PPP mode; 
  number of applications received from the entire country to start Sainik 
Schools; 
  provision of State wise quote for admission in Indian Military College; 

 
71 
 
  facilities which are being provided to students in erstwhile Sainik Schools 
and new Sainik Schools; 
  status of Sainik Schools in Rajasthan State; 
  maintenance of ongoing Sainik Schools; 
  increase in percentage of girls candidates in the Sainik Schools; 
  assimilation of yoga to increase efficiency among students in Sainik 
Schools; 
  difficulties being faced by Sainik Schools under PPP mode; 
  increase number of Sainik Schools for girl students in the country; 
  admission of wards of civilians at par with the wards of defence forces in 
the Sainik Schools; 
  encourage private trust for setting up schools exclusively for girls students 
like Chennamma Sainik School in Kittur; 
  positioning of required number of service officers, NCC staff and Army 
Physical Training Corps Instructors in all the Sainik Schools as per norm; 
and 
 setting up of Sainik Schools in other States which has no such Schools. 
  
  
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by 
the members. 
6. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of Ministry for the free and frank 
discussion held on the subject. The Chairperson also directed the representatives of the 
Ministry to furnish written replies/information at the earliest on those points raised by the 
Members but could not be answered during the sitting of the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  
      

 
72 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26)  
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th March, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1616 hrs. 
in the Committee Room No. `62’, Samvidhan Sadan,  New Delhi. 
 
  PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj 
3 Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4 Shri Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes  
6 Shri Rahul Gandhi  
7 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan  
8 Shri Shashank Mani  
9 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
10 Shri Jagadish Shettar  
11 Shri Virendra Singh  
12 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha  
Rajya Sabha 
13 Shri Naresh Bansal  
14 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda  
15 Shri Muzibulla Khan  
16 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  

 
73 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha     - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Amrish Kumar      - Director   
3.        Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad         - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Reports:- 
(i) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’; 
 
(ii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Army, Air 
Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme and 
Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services  (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Capital 
Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement Policy and Defence 
Pensions (Demand Nos. 21 and 22)’;  
 
(iv) Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2026-27 on ‘Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services–New DPSUs), Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Directorate 
General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand 
Nos. 20 and 21)’; and 
 
(v) Draft Report on the subject  ‘Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military 
College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications.  
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on a date convenient to 
him. 
5. ****Does not pertain to the report****  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 