i 
 
11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand 
Nos. 19 and 22)’] 
 
  
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 


ii 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, 
Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of 
Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Sravana 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) ……………………....….  iv 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... 
 
 vi 
CHAPTER  I   Report…………………………………………………………….. 
 
 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted  
 by the Government  
 
 12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not  desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
 
 74 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 75 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 76 
   
APPENDICES 
 
  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  
 (2024-25) held on 5th August, 2025. 
 
 77 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the First 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence 
Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 And 22)’ 
 
 80 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25)  
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  –  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
*Shri N. Chandrasegharan ceased to be a Member of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25) w.e.f. 25 July, 2025 consequent upon cessation of his 
Membership of Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2025.
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Adhikari Deepak Dev 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Shri Lumba Ram 
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
24 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
25 Shri Naveen Jain 
26 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
27 Shri Praful Patel 
28 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
29 Shri Sanjay Singh 
30 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
31 Vacant* 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar  - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen* - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Preeti Negi  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*served in the Committee Branch till 14.07.2025 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2024-25), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’.  
2.  The First Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2024. The Report contained 27 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in May,  2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 5th August, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
05 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14  Sravana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence  

vii 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
REPORT  
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 
22)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2024.  
 
 2.        The First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 27 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No.             Subject 
General Defence Budget 
1 Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2024-25: A bird’s eye 
view 
2 Defence Budget 2024-25 
3 Utilization of Defence Budget 2023-24 
4 Budget allocation to the Services 
5 Modern warfare 
6 Emergency procurement 
Border Roads Organisation 
7 Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
8 Challenges faced in execution of projects 
9 Sharing of technology by BRO with other agencies 
Indian Coast Guard 
10 Budget 2024-25 
11 Stray Incident of leaking of sensitive information 
Defence Estates Organisation 
12 Budgetary provision 

2 
 
13 Excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with 
adjoining municipalities 
14 Interests of the Civil Population in Cantonment Areas 
15 Civic and welfare facilities in the Cantonment Areas 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings 
16 Profitability of the DPSUs 
17 Indigenization efforts and self reliance in Defence sector 
18 Delivery of products/equipment/platforms by DPSUs 
19 Defence Start ups 
20 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)  Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
21 Budget 
22 Re-settlement of ESM 
23 Re-settlement avenues for ESM 
24 Facilities for ESM 
25 Prime Minister's Scholarship Scheme (PMSS) 
  Defence Pension 
26 Budgetary Provisions 
27 SPARSH-System for Pension Administration (RAKSHA) 
  
3.        The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
27 Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) in 
May, 2025. Replies to these Observations/Recommendations have been examined and 
categorized as follows:- 
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II)  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22, 23,24,25,26 and 
27                                                                                                                      (Total - 27) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 

3 
 
 Para No.   Nil                                                                                                  (Total -0) 
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration (Chapter 
IV): 
  
Para No. Nil                                                                                                   (Total - 0) 
  
(iv)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 Para No.  Nil                                                                                                   (Total - 0) 
4.        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments of 
the Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to them at 
the earliest and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this 
Report.   
 5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations made in the First Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) in the succeeding paragraphs.  
General Defence Budget 
A.        Utilization of Defence Budget 2023-24 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee, on scrutiny of the budgetary documents furnished by the Ministry 
of Defence, note that out of the amount of ₹ 6,23,888.94 crore allocated for total 
Defence Budget at Revised Estimates 2023-24 stage, the actual expenditure 
incurred for Financial Year 2023-24 is ₹ 6,09,853.98 crore. During deliberations, 
the Committee were apprised that global geo-political situation causing supply 
chain disruptions and efforts made by the Indian Defence Industry in achieving 
greater self-reliaance in Defence manufacturing led to some delays in projects 
fructification and incomplete utilization of funds. The Committee hope that 

4 
 
measures would be put in place to ensure full utilization of funds in the coming 
years.” 
 7.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is stated that 
progress of expenditure is reviewed from time to time to ensure that the budgetary 
allocations are fully utilized. Further, necessary instructions are also issued for 
compliance with financial propriety norms and avoidance of 
overspending/underutilization of funds. The Committee may be assured that all 
efforts are made to ensure optimum utilization of available resources.” 
Comments of the Committee 
8.        The Committee in their First Report had noted that with respect to the issue 
of budget allocation and utilization, required measures would be put in place to 
ensure full utilization of funds in the coming years. Consequently, the Ministry of 
Defence in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that in this regard, the progress of 
expenditure is reviewed from time to time to ensure that budgetary allocations are 
gainfully utilized. Further, necessary instructions are also issued for compliance 
with financial propriety norms to ensure avoidance of overspending and 
underutilization of funds. The Committee during examination of Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2025-26, noted that out of the amount of ₹ 
6,41,060 crore allocated for total Defence Budget at RE 2024-25 stage, the actual 
expenditure incurred upto December 2024 was ₹ 4,53,010.39 crore i.e., 
approximately 71 percent.  The Committee therefore reiterate that henceforth, the 
funds be optimally utilised towards ensuring steadfast adherence to principles of  
fiscal prudence and propriety by the Ministry of Defence in letter and spirit, while 
also instituting measures to avoid surrender of funds allocated for the vital sectors 
of Defence. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of 
utilization of funds for FY 2024-25 by the Ministry at the stage of furnishing Action 
Taken Statements. 
  
 
 

5 
 
 
 B.        Modern warfare 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
9.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee are cognizant that a paradigm shift in the strategy of warfare is 
taking place in contemporary theatre of war where non-conventional means such 
as non-kinetic warfare, cyber warfare, cognitive warfare etc. are being increasingly 
employed. The Committee learn that efforts are ongoing to increase our 
capabilities in this modern warfare and have every reason to believe that with right 
combination of strategy, morale and infrastructure, our country will be at par with 
other advanced countries. In this regard, the Committee recommend that urgent 
and coordinated efforts by all the stakeholders i.e. the Ministry of Defence, 
Services, Defence Research & Development Organisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings etc. may be made to achieve excellence in hybrid and modern war 
tactics” 
10.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Modernisation of Armed 
Forces ensure that existing capabilities remain relevant efficient and integrated with 
contemporary technologies. The synergy between Headquarters Integrated 
Defence Staff (HQ IDS), Services HQs, DRDO and the Department of Defence 
Production (DDP)/MoD is fundamental to advancing India’s defence self-reliance 
and strengthening its strategic capabilities. As India aims to modernize its Armed 
Forces and reduce dependency on foreign imports, this collaboration ensures a 
seamless alignment of operational requirements, indigenous manufacturing and 
policy execution.  
HQ IDS serves as the apex organization to foster Jointness amongst three 
services. It is responsible for consolidating operational requirements, long-term 
planning, roll on Plan and prioritizing procurements for the Armed forces in view of 
changing security and technological advancement. By representing the Services’ 
needs, HQ IDS provides the foundational input necessary to guide defence 
production initiatives. The DDP/MoD, oversees the indigenous defence 
manufacturing, facilitating the private sector’s involvement, and implementing 
policies to bolster domestic production capacities. It coordinates with Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), DRDO, Ordnance Factories and private 
players to ensure that the production ecosystem meets the operational and 
strategic needs of the armed forces. 

6 
 
The collaboration amongst stakeholders ensures that defence manufacturing 
priorities are aligned with the current and future needs of the defence forces. The 
partnership facilitates the development of customized solutions, ensuring timely 
availability of weapons, platforms, and technologies. The synergy provides a 
crucial role in streamlining the defence requirement and provides insights to refine 
R&D efforts and ensure relevance to operational needs of modern warfare.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 11.      The Committee whilst taking cognizance of the paradigm shift in the strategy 
of warfare had recommended that urgent and coordinated efforts by all the 
stakeholders i.e. the Ministry of Defence, Services, Defence Research & 
Development Organisation, Defence Public Sector Undertakings etc. be ensured to 
achieve excellence in hybrid and modern war tactics. The Ministry in this regard 
submitted that synergy between Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Services 
Headquarters, DRDO and the Department of Defence Production (DDP)/MoD is 
fundamental towards advancing India’s self-reliance in defence, alongwith 
strengthening its strategic capabilities. Further, as India aims to modernize its 
Armed Forces and reduce dependency on foreign imports, such collaboration 
ensures a seamless alignment of operational requirements, indigenous 
manufacturing and timely policy execution. The Committee note that the synergy 
among various stakeholders across the Defence ecosystem in the country together 
with their concerted efforts have accomplished concrete results. Further, the 
Committee note that country’s recent military operation is a testimony  to the 
Armed Forces’ mounting prowess in both conventional and modern warfare. 
Therefore, keeping in view the constant reinventions in modern warfare, the 
Committee reiterate that the stakeholders in the Defence sector of the country work 
in mission mode, while also leveraging technological innovations, human resource, 
strategy and tactics to further bolster our operational preparedness in all 
dimensions of warfare. The Committee also desire that action being 
taken/contemplated by the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces to address 
the evolving challenges of modern warfare be intimated to them at the earliest. 
 
 

7 
 
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
C.        Delivery of products/equipment/platforms by DPSUs 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
12.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  “The Committee note that there have been time overruns on the part of DPSUs in 
conforming to the delivery schedule of certain products for the Forces. The 
Committee, taking into account the written submission of the Ministry and oral 
deposition of the Defence Secretary in this regard, note that the primary reason for 
the delay in most cases is dependence on imported items. One such instance of 
delay in delivery of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) M1A was also highlighted by the 
Committee during deliberations on DFG 2024- 25. In this context, the Committee 
are of the view that the DPSUs should intensify their efforts to ensure timely supply 
of various equipment /platforms/weapon systems/ accessories so that our Armed 
Forces are  equipped with state-of-the-art equipment and platforms to encounter 
any unforeseen situation at any point of time.  
The Committee are also given to understand that the delays are sometimes caused 
due to focus on indigenization and preserving strategic autonomy. The Committee 
are of the considered view that for achieving self reliance for inventing, developing 
and producing cutting edge Defence technology, R&D activities in Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) should be further strengthened in terms of adequate 
budgetary, infrastructural and human resource support.” 
13.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
“Many projects executed by DPSUs are technology intensive with dependence on 
multiple stakeholders including foreign OEMs. Various factors such as Covid, Geo-
Political etc, which were beyond control of the DPSUs, contributed in the delay of 
timely supply of equipment/platforms/ weapon systems/accessories to the Armed 
Forces. With a view to ensure timely supply of the equipment/platforms/weapon 
systems/accessories to equip Armed Forces, DPSUs are taking multipronged 
initiatives. Some of the major initiatives by DPSUs are enumerated below: 
(a) New production lines have been established and are also under establishment 
by DPSUs to increase production capacity.  
(b) Augmented Repair and Overhaul (ROH) facilities to ensure quicker turnaround 
times. 

8 
 
(c) Created Operations Monitoring & Analytics (OMA) group at Corporate Office to 
monitor and review progress of key production projects and critical deliverables.  
(d) Deployed Obsolescence Check software tool across the company to ensure 
that obsolescence-related issues do not delay manufacture & delivery.  
(e) Indigenisation of imported sub-systems / modules / components are undertaken 
simultaneously under multiple initiatives viz iDEX-DIO, Srijan portal, Make-I/II and 
also through own initiatives by DPSUs. 
(f) Import of long lead critical items in advance.  
(g) Indigenization of critical imported parts and aggregates resulting in time saving 
and import cost. 
(h) Development of alternate and multiple sources. 
(i) Long-term contracts with major suppliers for critical aggregates. 
(j) Development of multi-level skilled man power. 
(k) Minimizing slippages in delivery schedule with better capacity utilization and 
efficient supply chain management.  
(l) Integrated Construction with high degree of pre-outfitting towards construction of 
quality ships in reduced timeframe. 
(m) Introduction of Virtual reality lab, Product Data Management (PDM)/ Project 
Lifecycle Management (PLM), Cutting edge design Softwares, Robotic welding, 
Introduction of AI in various spheres of operation etc in shipbuilding. 
(n) Standardisation of stock control items involved in shipbuilding. 
Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production is providing various 
supports to strengthen R&D activities of DPSUs towards achieving self-reliance, 
inventing, developing & producing cutting edge Defence technology by them 
through various enabling measures:  
(i) DPSUs are participating in Innovation in Defence excellence (iDEX) initiative 
which was launched in 2018 to foster innovation & technology development in 
Defence & Aerospace by engaging industries including MSMEs, Start-ups, 
Individual Innovators, R&D institutes and Academia.  

9 
 
(ii) DPSUs participate in the “Make India Initiative” launched in 2016 aimed to 
achieve Self – reliance by involving greater participation of industries, both private& 
public. 
(iii)  With the supports of the Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence 
Production, DPSUs are augmenting their R&D facilities, Production capacity, 
testing facilities, Ship building capacity, Repair and Overhaul(ROH) facilities.  
(iv) To accelerate the efforts, DPSUs are undertaking modernization of existing 
infrastructures and plants & machineries. DPSUs have proposed expenditure of 
total Rs 6587 Cr for the FY 2024-25 for CAPEX. The modernization will help the 
DPSUs position themselves to cater to the need of existing and new customers in 
domestic and global markets and will also help them venture into new strategic 
business areas. 
(v)  Augmenting the efforts and aligned with the goal of self-reliance in inventing, 
developing and producing cutting edge Defence technology, DPSUs are 
undertaking various R& D activities with focused objectives with plans for R&D 
spends in the coming years. All DPSUs have already earmarked funds for their 
R&D activities upto FY 2028-29. The total R&D expenditure planned by the DPSUs 
is Rs 6280 Cr for FY 2024-25.  
(vi) Establishment of Rate Contract for purchase of steel and shipbuilding 
services. 
(vii) Distributed manufacturing through development and leveraging of vendor 
base in shipbuilding. 
(viii) In the area of Human Resource, DPSUs are having tie-ups with reputed 
Academia and other institutes and deputing the R&D engineers for 
trainings/seminars/interactions etc. to enhance the knowledge in their respective 
domains to give impetus to R&D activities.” 
Comments of the Committee 
14.      The Committee in their original Report had noted time overruns on part of the 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) in conforming to the delivery 
schedule of certain products for the Forces. In this regard, the Committee were of 
the view that DPSUs should intensify their efforts to ensure timely supply of 
various equipment /platforms/weapon systems/ accessories so that our Armed 
Forces are  equipped with state-of-the-art equipment and platforms to encounter 

10 
 
any unforeseen scenario. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry submitted that 
many projects executed by DPSUs are technology intensive with dependence on 
multiple stakeholders, including foreign Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). 
Further, various factors such as Covid, Geo-Political etc, which were beyond 
control of the DPSUs, lead to the delay in timely supply of equipment/platforms/ 
weapon systems/accessories to the Armed Forces. The Committee further note 
from the reply of the Ministry, that with a view to ensure timely supply of the 
equipment/platforms/weapon systems/accessories to equip Armed Forces, DPSUs 
are taking multipronged initiatives. Therefore, the Committee reiterate that the 
Ministry initiate steps to resolve all constraints plaguing timely delivery of the 
required platforms. Towards this, the Committee desire that in order to gauge the 
effectiveness of these initiatives put in place by DPSUs, a brief factual note 
containing the details of major projects for equipment/platforms/ weapon 
systems/accessories for the Armed Forces which have been facing delay, progress 
made till date, revised  timelines of delivery and financial implications alongwith the 
challenges being faced in realization of the objectives, be intimated to them at the 
earliest. 
WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN 
 D.        Re-settlement avenues for ESM 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
15.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee learn that the present re-employment avenues for ESM offered by 
DGR inter alia include security guards in various CPSEs, Corporate Houses, 
PSUs, Tipper attachment, Oil Retail Outlet dealership, CNG Retail outlets, Mother 
Dairy/Safal outlets. The Committee, during deliberations on the subject, raised 
concerns regarding work profile of certain re-employment avenues being offered to 
ESM, which could affect their morale and mental health. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that concrete efforts may now be made to increase the self-
employment and entrepreneurial opportunities, especially in their local/native 
places for ESM by the Ministry of Defence. Further, viability of reservation of jobs 
for ESM in Sainik Schools and Cantonment Boards may be explored by the 
Ministry of Defence and the Committee be apprised accordingly.” 

11 
 
16.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 “The observations of the Committee have been noted.” 
Comments of the Committee 
17.      The Committee in their original Report had recommended that concrete 
efforts be made to increase the self-employment and entrepreneurial opportunities 
for Ex-Servicemen (ESM), especially in their local/native areas by the Ministry of 
Defence. They had also recommended that viability of reservation of jobs for ESM 
in Sainik Schools and Cantonment Boards be explored by the Ministry of Defence. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted that the observations of the 
Committee have been noted. The Committee therefore expect that their 
recommendation regarding deserving re-settlement avenues for Ex-Servicemen be 
taken in the right earnest and to this extent, the Committee desire that meaningful 
and tangible efforts befitting the status of ESM be taken by the Ministry. A status 
report in this regard may be furnished at the time of submitting Action Taken 
Statement for the perusal of the Committee. 

12 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2024-25: A bird’s eye view: 
  
Recommendation No. 1 & 2 
The Committee note that the Defence Budget is categorised/grouped under four 
Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20– 
Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – Capital Outlay on Defence Services and 
Demand No. 22 – Defence Pension. Demand Nos. 19 and 22 come under Civil/Pension 
Estimates and Demand Nos. 20 and 21 constitute Defence Services Estimates. They also 
note that the requirements for the Civil expenditure of the Ministry of Defence Secretariat, 
Defence Accounts Department, Canteen Stores Department, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry (J&K LI), 
Border Roads Organization etc. are provided for in Demand No. 19- MoD(Civil). The 
Defence Services Estimates (DSE) reflects the detailed estimates for the Defence 
Services and Organizations/Services covered under Grant Number 20 and 21 of the 
Ministry of Defence. The Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army 
(including National Cadet Corps, Director General Quality Assurance and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air Force, Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO) and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & 
Services). Grant Number 20 caters to revenue expenditure which includes expenditure on 
pay & allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, ration, petrol, oil 
and lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms/equipment etc), revenue works 
(which include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, rates and 
taxes, etc.) and other miscellaneous expenditure. Grant Number 21 caters to Capital 
expenditure which includes expenditure on land, construction works, plant and machinery, 
equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero engines, 
Dockyards, etc. The Committee also note that re-structuring of Capital budget has been 
done with effect from Financial Year 2024-25 wherein budgetary allocation of the three 
Services under common minor heads has been clubbed under the newly introduced Sub 
Major Head 09 i.e Defence Services. Allocation under other minor heads which are not 
common to the Services has been kept as it is. Demand No. 22 provides for Pensionary 
charges (Service pension, gratuity, family pension, disability pension, commuted value of 
pension, leave encashment etc.) in respect of the retired Defence personnel (including 
Defence civilian employees) of the three Services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and 
employees of erstwhile Ordnance Factories.  
 

13 
 
Defence Budget 2024-25  
Recommendation No. 2 
  During examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2024-25, 
the Committee find that out of the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence for 
Financial Year 2024-25 i.e. ₹ 6,21,940.85 Crore, largest share of 73.12 percent, i.e. ₹ 
4,54,772.67 Crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant Number 20 
and 21). An amount of ₹ 2,82,772.67 Crore has been allocated to Defence Services 
Revenue (Grant Number 20). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 21) 
has been allocated an amount of ₹ 1,72,000 Crore. Defence Pension (Grant Number 22) 
has secured 22.70 percent of the total Defence budget i.e. ₹ 1,41,205 Crore. The 4.17 
percent of the total Defence budget i.e. ₹ 25,963.18 Crore has been allocated to Ministry 
of Defence (Civil) (Grant Number 19). The Committee observe that the total Defence 
Budget is 12.90% of total Central Government Expenditure and 1.91% of GDP for the 
year 2024-25. Further, total outlay for the Defence budget in Budget Estimates (BE) 2024-
25 has shown an increase of ₹ 28,403.21 Crore i.e. 4.79 percent in comparison to Budget 
Estimates in 2023-24. The Committee also notes the Ministry’s submission that Defence 
Budget has increased at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 7.6% from FY 
2019-20 to FY 2024-25 which is greater than the inflation rate in each year. However, 
when compared to the Revised Estimates allocation of ₹ 6,23,888.94 Crore for 2023-24, 
the BE allocation for 2024-25 shows a decrease of ₹ 1,948.09 Crore. The Committee are 
aware that the Revised Estimates exercise of the budgetary process which takes into 
account variety of factors such as inflation, trend of expenditure so far, emergency 
procurement etc. has already been commenced in various Ministries. The Committee, 
therefore, hope that if need be the Ministry of Defence will allocate additional funds at 
Revised Estimates stage to ensure optimum operational preparedness of our Armed 
Forces at all times. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee may be apprised that in RE 2024- 25, an amount of                      
Rs. 6,41,060.00 Crore has been allocated to Ministry of Defence which is an increase of 
Rs. 19,119.15 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocation. The procedure followed for allocation 
involves trend of expenditure, projections made by the Services, Committed Liabilities to 
be fulfilled, critical requirements etc. The allocated funds will be optimally utilized towards 
operational preparedness of the Armed Forces. On the basis of additional requirement, 
funds will be sought at Supplementary stage. Also, if required, through reprioritization, it 
will be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise 
to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
 
 

14 
 
Utilization of Defence Budget 2023-24  
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee, on scrutiny of the budgetary documents furnished by the Ministry 
of Defence, note that out of the amount of ₹ 6,23,888.94 Crore allocated for total Defence 
Budget at Revised Estimates 2023-24 stage, the actual expenditure incurred for Financial 
Year 2023-24 is ₹ 6,09,853.98 Crore. During deliberations, the Committee were apprised 
that global geo-political situation causing supply chain disruptions and efforts made by the 
Indian Defence Industry in achieving greater self-reliance in Defence manufacturing led to 
some delays in projects fructification and incomplete utilization of funds. The Committee 
hope that measures would be put in place to ensure full utilization of funds in the coming 
years. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and it is stated that 
progress of expenditure is reviewed from time to time to ensure that the budgetary 
allocations are fully utilized. Further, necessary instructions are also issued for 
compliance with financial propriety norms and avoidance of overspending/underutilization 
of funds. The Committee may be assured that all efforts are made to ensure optimum 
utilization of available resources. 
Budget allocation to the Services 
Recommendation No. 4 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection 
with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2024-25, the Committee find that in 
comparison to the Budget Estimates 2023-24, while capital allocation to Navy and Air 
Force has been increased to 20.07 percent and 1.36 percent, respectively, the allocation 
to Army under this head has registered a decline of 4.49 percent in Budget Estimates 
2024-25. During oral evidence in connection with examination of DFG 2024-25, the 
Defence Secretary has attributed the reason for this uneven increase in Capital allocation 
to the three Services to the higher cost of the equipment and platforms required by Navy 
and Air Force than that of Army. Further, admittedly, the increase in Capital allocation to 
Navy in BE 2024-25 is highest among the three Services due to order of Predator Drones 
for Navy. The Committee also note the deposition of the representative of the Ministry that 
Capital allocation to the Army for BE 2024-25 is adequate. While keeping in mind the 
assurance of the Ministry regarding adequacy of the Capital Allocation for the Forces, the 
Committee hope that requirements for additional funds, if any, by the Forces will be taken 
care of by them at the Revised Estimates stage to upkeep and maintain the existing 
robust Armed Forces. 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In RE 2024-25, the allocation made to the Ministry of Defence under Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services (i.e. Grant No. 21) has been decreased by Rs. 12,500.00 Crore from 
BE 2024-25 allocation (i.e. Rs. 1,72,000.00 Crore). The procedure followed for allocation 
involves trend of expenditure, past absorption capacity of the Services, projections made 
by the Services, inter-Ministry priorities, Committed Liabilities to be fulfilled, critical 
requirements etc. Further, the Committee may be assured that the allocated funds will be 
optimally utilized towards operational preparedness of the Armed Forces. On the basis of 
additional requirement, funds will be sought at Supplementary stage. Also, if required, 
through reprioritization, it will be ensured that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired 
without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Defence Services. 
2. Moreover, it may be stated that in BE 2025-26, an amount to the tune of Rs. 
1,80,000.00 Crore has been allocated to Ministry of Defence under Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services (i.e. Grant No. 21) which is an increase of Rs. 20,500.00 Crore over RE 
2024-25 allocation. 
Modern warfare 
Recommendation No.5 
 The committee are cognizant that a paradigm shift in the strategy of warfare is 
taking place in contemporary theatre of war where non-conventional means such as non-
kinetic warfare, cyber warfare, cognitive warfare etc. are being increasingly employed. 
The Committee learn that efforts are ongoing to increase our capabilities in this modern 
warfare and have every reason to believe that with right combination of strategy morale 
and infrastructure, our country will be at par with other advanced countries. In this regard, 
the Committee recommend that urgent and coordinated efforts by all the stakeholders i.e. 
the Ministry of Defence, Services, Defence Research & Development Organisation, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings etc. may be made to achieve excellence in hybrid 
and modern war tactics. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Modernisation of Armed 
Forces ensure that existing capabilities remain relevant efficient and integrated with 
contemporary technologies. The synergy between Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff 
(HQ IDS), Services HQs, DRDO and the Department of Defence Production (DDP)/MoD 
is fundamental to advancing India’s defence self-reliance and strengthening its strategic 
capabilities. As India aims to modernize its Armed Forces and reduce dependency on 

16 
 
foreign imports, this collaboration ensures a seamless alignment of operational 
requirements, indigenous manufacturing and policy execution. 
 HQ IDS serves as the apex organization to foster Jointness amongst three 
services. It is responsible for consolidating operational requirements, long-term planning, 
roll on Plan and prioritizing procurements for the Armed forces in view of changing 
security and technological advancement. By representing the Services’ needs, HQ IDS 
provides the foundational input necessary to guide defence production initiatives. The 
DDP/MoD, oversees the indigenous defence manufacturing, facilitating the private 
sector’s involvement, and implementing policies to bolster domestic production capacities. 
It coordinates with Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), DRDO, Ordnance 
Factories and private players to ensure that the production ecosystem meets the 
operational and strategic needs of the armed forces. 
 The collaboration amongst stakeholders ensures that defence manufacturing 
priorities are aligned with the current and future needs of the defence forces. The 
partnership facilitates the development of customized solutions, ensuring timely 
availability of weapons, platforms, and technologies. The synergy provides a crucial role 
in streamlining the defence requirement and provides insights to refine R&D efforts and 
ensure relevance to operational needs of modern warfare. 
Emergency procurement 
Recommendation No. 6: 
The Committee’s oral evidence of the representatives of MoD has revealed that the 
Emergency Procurements for the Forces were sanctioned four times in 2020. They also 
learn that a mechanism is being worked out in the Ministry of Defence for fast track 
procurement for the services. In this regard, the Committee desire that modalities being 
worked out for fast track procurement for the services be finalized at the earliest and the 
Committee be apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government attaches the highest priority to ensure that the Armed Forces are 
sufficiently equipped to meet any operational requirement. Capital Acquisition for the 
Indian Armed Forces is made as per guidelines under the Defence Acquisition Procedure 
(DAP), 2020 which is a flexible document continuously evolving on the basis of 
operational experience, changing threat perceptions and technological advancements. 
Continuous review of DAP ensures that hurdles in speedier acquisitions are identified and 
removed swiftly which ultimately reduces the acquisition cycle.  DAP 2020 has been kept 
updated via Business Processing Reengineering (BPR) wherein 103 amendments have 
been carried out to align the same towards more efficient and effective processes. 

17 
 
In this regard, with a view to further strengthen the resolution of the Government for 
modernization of Armed Forces, a decision has been taken to observe 2025 as the ‘Year 
of Reforms’ in the Ministry of Defence, which inter alia aimed for simplification in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated budget.  
DAP 2020 is due for revision in the current year. The refinement of defence 
acquisition procedures including the Fast Track Procedure (FTP) will be carried out to 
ensure faster and more transparent acquisitions. 
Border Roads Organization (BRO) 
Recommendation No. 7: 
 The committee note that for BE 2024-25, under MoD (civil), the total  allocation to 
BRO is  ₹ 12,107.41 crore; allocation under Revenue head is ₹  5,595.41 crore and 
Capital head is  ₹ 6,512 crore. In FY 2023-24,the BE  allocation to BRO under MoD (civil) 
was ₹ 10,179.75 crore. Further, as on 31.10.2024, BRO has spent ₹  3,121 crore under 
capital head and ₹ 4,147 crore under Revenue Head. In the past 60 years, BRO has 
constructed more than 61000 km of roads, 915 permanent bridges, 04 tunnels and 19 
airfields under adverse climatic and geographical conditions. The committee would like to 
place on record their appreciation for the BRO in carrying out mammoth and arduous 
tasks of creating strong and viable infrastructure in the inhospitable and far-flung areas of 
the country. In this context, the committee recommend that additional funds at Revised 
Estimates stage, as sought by BRO may be favorably considered by the Ministry so that 
construction and maintenance of operational infrastructure for the Forces in Border Areas 
of the country remains unabated. 
Reply of the Government 
 The total  BE 2024-25 allocation to BRO is ₹ 12,107.41 crore ( ₹  5,595.41 crore 
under Revenue head and ₹ 6,512 crore under Capital head).  At RE 2024-25 stage, BRO 
has projected a total amount of Rs. 12307.41 crs.  ( Rs. 5795.41 crs under Revenue Head 
and 6512.00 crs. under Capital Head).  Against this projection,  a total amount  of Rs. 
12,233.91 crs has been allocated to BRO ( Rs. 5721.91 under Revenue Section and Rs. 
6512.00 crs under Capital Section). Whereas meagre reduction is made in the Revenue 
Section, the projected amount under Capital Section has been allocated in the RE 2024-
25 without any reduction.   
Further, it is also important to mention here that, while allocating funds Ministry of 
Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Organization, pace of expenditure in the 
current Financial Year, overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from 
other quarters etc. Based on the overall ceiling conveyed by Ministry of Finance, Ministry 
of Defence allocates funds among the Departments and Organization of MoD, including 

18 
 
Border Road Organisation, taking into account Inter Organization priorities, pace of 
expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  
Moreover, the committee may be assured that the allocated funds will be optimally 
utilized towards operational activities.  If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to 
ensure that construction and maintenance of operational infrastructure for the Forces in 
Border Areas of the country remains unabated. 
Challenges faced in execution of projects  
Recommendation No. 08 
     The Committee are aware that in the past, certain projects of BRO were delayed due 
to delay in granting Forest and Wildlife and land acquisition clearance. The Committee 
understand that challenges faced by BRO in this regard have reduced to a great extent. 
Nevertheless, the Committee urge that in order to save precious time and energy of BRO 
in getting the requisite approvals, remaining pending cases of Forest and Wildlife and land 
acquisition Clearance may be resolved at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Following steps/actions have been taken by MoD/BRO for early finalization of 
pending Land Acquisition (LA)/Forest Clearance (FC)/Wildlife Clearance (WLC) cases:- 
 Uploading of proposals for FC/WLC on PARIVESH Portal of MoEF&CC and 
continuous follow-ups and monitoring. 
 Declaration of BRO projects falling within 100 km of IB/LAC/LC as ‘Strategic 
projects of National importance’ for seeking Forest clearance exemption 
under Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 2023. This 
provision has fast tracked requisite FC/WLC clearances for strategic 
projects. 
 Co-ordination meetings with MoEF&CC and State Authorities for expediting 
statutory clearances. 
 Escalating issues relating to Critical Projects on PMG Portal/PRAGATI & 
NITI Aayog for early resolution. 
 

19 
 
 
Sharing of technology by BRO with other agencies   
Recommendation No. 09: 
        The Committee note the submission of the Director General, Border Roads that BRO 
is open to sharing its expertise and knowledge of construction and maintenance of 
infrastructure with other concerned agencies in various State Governments. In this 
context, the Committee recommend that feasibility of creation of an online portal by BRO 
for facilitation of guidance and co-ordination with other Government construction agencies 
for this purpose may be explored and the Committee be apprised accordingly.    
Reply of the Government 
        Sharing of BRO’s expertise and knowledge in construction and maintenance of 
infrastructure with other construction agencies is being done through seminars, 
conferences, lectures, compendium and magazine etc. In the meantime, BRO portal is 
being upgraded for facilitation of guidance and up to date information on important and 
key issues pertaining to BRO. 
Indian Coast Guard       
Recommendation No. 10 
The committee learn that the amount allocated under capital and Revenue heads 
to Indian Coast Guard Organisation (ICG) in Budget Estimates (BE) 2024-25 is  ₹ 3,500 
crore and ₹ 4151.80 crore, respectively. Out of this allocation for FY 2024-25,the total 
expenditure by coast Guard upto 20.11.2024 is ₹ 4,338 crore. The committee note that for 
Revised Estimates 2024-25, the projection in respect of coast Guard is  ₹ 8,964.27 crore, 
seeking an increase of ₹  1,312.47 crore over BE 2024-25. Keeping in view the past trend 
of full utilization of funds by ICG, the committee desire that reasons for increase in RE 
projection for 2024-25 may be furnished to the committee at the earliest. Nevertheless, 
the committee also recommend that justified demands for funds for Indian coast Guard 
may be suitably met at RE stage to aid this organization in carrying out its multifarious 
roles efficiently. 
Reply of the Government 
The amount allocated to Indian Coast Guard organisation (ICG) in Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2024-25 is Rs. 7651.8 crores ( ₹ 4151.80 crore under Revenue heads and 
₹ 3,500 crore under Capital heads). For Revised Estimates, ICG has projected                 
₹ 8,964.27 crore, (Revenue + Capital) thereby seeking an increase of ₹  1,312.47 crore 

20 
 
over BE 2024-25. The projection of ICG has been considered in this Ministry and the 
same was forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration. As desired by the 
Committee, the reasons for increase in RE projection for 2024-25 under Revenue and 
Capital Section of the Organization, falling under the main relevant heads, are mentioned  
below, in tabular form :- 
                                                                                                                             
(Rs. in Crs.) 
  Object Heads  Additional 
amount 
projected in 
RE 2024-25 
over BE 2024-
25 
Reasons for additionally over BE 2024-25 
Revenue    
Salary   108.53  the additional amount over BE has been  projected  
which includes disbursement of salary of ICG 
personnel and the same to new officers, Enrolled 
Personnel(EPs) and Civilian recruitees who will join 
the service during the second half of the current fiscal 
and for the personnel of ADG(P).   
Allowances   85.70 
Office 
Expenses  
  62.65  The increase in RE 2024-25 over BE has been 
projected for recurring and non –recurring contingent 
expenses to be incurred for the maintenance of office 
establishment 
Material & 
Supplies  
. 240.00  This additionally is proposed for payment of items to 
be procured towards ration etc. for ships, which have 
been increased since last fiscal under naval stores, 
victualing stores, clothing stores, mess traps, ARD 
and all those items under ‘Warrant of Stores’ for all 
new ships/boats likely to be commissioned during the 
FY 2024-25.  The increase is due to increase in 
market price index and number of afloat/ air units 
added to the ICG infrastructure and growing force 
levels.  
Repair and 
Maintenance  
36.00 Additional fund over BE 24-25 is required mainly for 
Repair of sensore against RRC and Custom Duty 
Other 
Revenue 
Expenditure  
45.00 The additional fund is proposed to meet the 
miscellaneous expenditure i.e. OSD of Ships 
including 1TS/EEZ Surveillance  
Capital    
Land  50.00 The additional fund is proposed due to upcoming 
land projects i.e. extension of lease period, Leasing 
of finger jetty No.1&02 from MPA at Goa 
Buildings and 
Structures  
330.00 The additional fund is proposed as the said 
requirement has been received from CEs/MEs. 
Infrastructural 
Assets  
504.75 The increase requirement is proposed is mainly due 
to 1st and 2nd stage payment towards acquisition 

21 
 
projects likely to be fructified during current fiscal.  
The major envisaged cash outgo in this detailed 
heads are : 01  raining Ship, 14 FPVs, 06 
NGOPVs,07 OPVs, 06 ACVs, 02 PCVs, MLU of 17 
Dor Account, 16 ALH MK-III and 09 ALH MK-III 
Machinery and 
equipment  
146.58 Additional fund requirement is proposed for the cash 
outgo due to following major schemes/projects: 
SDR-TAC (Qty-149), MRSCs equipment, OCPP 
Schemes.    
However, the total approved ceiling  for RE 2024-25 as intimated by Ministry of 
Finance was 8279.50 crs i.e. Rs. 4080.00 crs  in the Revenue Section and Rs. 4199.50 
crs in  the capital Section of Indian Coast Guard.  
It may be stated here that, while allocating funds, Ministry of Finance analyses past 
absorption capacity of the Organization, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, 
overall resource envelope available and pressing demands from other quarters etc. Based 
on the overall ceiling conveyed by Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds 
among the Departments and Organization of MoD, including Indian Coast Guard taking 
into account inter Organization priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed 
liabilities etc.  
As regards organizations ongoing pace of expenditure and past absorption trend, it 
is mentioned that the actual expenditure of CGO upto Jan 2025 is Rs. 3194.03 crs under 
Revenue Section  against the allocated RE 2024-25 of Rs. 4080.00 which is 78.28 % . 
Similarly actual expenditure of CGO upto Jan 2025 is Rs. 2988.12 crs under Capital 
expenditure against the allocated RE 2024-25 of Rs. 4199.50 crs which is only 71.54% of 
the allocated RE 2024-25. It may be relevant to mention here that in the FY 2023-24, 
under Revenue Section, the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 4062.65 crs only, 
against the final allocation of Rs. 4109.23 crs. and under Capital Section, the actual 
expenditure was Rs. 4125.24 crs. only against the final allocation of Rs. 4149.35 crs . 
Therefore, the Committee may be assured that the allocated funds will be optimally 
utilized towards operational activities.  If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to 
ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are required without any compromise to 
operational preparedness.  
Stray Incident of leaking of sensitive information 
Recommendation No.11 
 The Committee take cognizance of a recent reported event of arrest of a 
Probandar resident for allegedly sharing sensitive information about Indian Coast Guard 
vessels. In this regard, the Committee note the submission of the Director General Coast 

22 
 
Guard that this was a one-off incident. It was also submitted that a thorough background 
and antecedent verification of the contractual staff is undertaken by the Coast Guard. In 
this regard, the committee recommend that the extant system of detecting and monitoring 
channels of leakage of sensitive information may be further strengthened to avoid 
recurrence of such cases in future. The contractual staff in the Coast Guard may also be 
suitably sensitized in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Action taken report on the observations/recommendations of SCoD is 
enumerated below. By implementing these detailed measures, ICG has significantly 
enhanced its security framework and ensured the safety of its personnel, assets, and 
sensitive information. 
(a) Enhanced Security and Surveillance Measures: ICG has implemented robust 
security and surveillance measures at all ICG establishments, jetties, and associated 
assets. These measures include thorough entry and exit checks for all individuals and 
vehicles to prevent unauthorised access, utilization of modern surveillance tools such as 
CCTV cameras, biometric systems, and security alarms to monitor activities effectively. 
(b) Reporting of Potential Security Breaches: It is being ensured that incidents 
suggesting a potential breach of security or information are promptly reported to security 
personnel and duty staff by first responder. 
(c) Comprehensive Checks on Civilians: The verification process for all civilians 
engaged in ICG-related jobs is being instituted at unit levels. This includes background 
checks, employment history reviews, and identity verification to minimize risks associated 
with unauthorized or suspicious individuals gaining access to sensitive areas. 
(d) Sensitizing Local Firms: The registered firms/vendors working with ICG are being 
encouraged to educate their works on the dangers associating with Anti-National 
Elements (ANEs) and engaging in subversive activities. 
(e) Police Verification of Employees:  It has been made mandatory for all civil firms 
engaged with ICG to obtain Police Verification Certificates for their employees involved in 
ICG-related tasks. These certificates are being checked on regular basis and proper 
records are being maintained to ensure compliance accountability. 
(f) Prohibition of Smartphone: The prohibition on use of smartphone by workers and 
traders within ICG premises including surrounding jurisdiction areas is already in place. 
This prevents unauthorized photography, recording or sharing of sensitive information. 
The civilian traders/workers have to deposit their mobile phones at designated gangways 
or points prior entering ICG premises. 

23 
 
(g) Monitoring Civilian Activities: The Duty staff maintain surveillance on civil workers 
while they are working on board ICG ships or within ICG establishments. 
(h) Deployment of Intelligence Staff: Intelligence staff is being deployed randomly to 
oversee activities involving civilian workers. Monitoring and analysis of behaviors, 
interaction and activities are being carried out to detect any sings of security risks or 
breaches.  
(i) Continued Awareness and Precautionary Efforts: The efforts to educate ICG 
personnel about potential threats such as PIO activities are being undertaken on regular 
basis. Lectures, SMP protocols, cyber security advisories and regular meeting (e.g. Cyber 
Jagrookta, webinars etc) to enhance awareness are being undertaken. Information are 
also being disseminated though Daily Orders, directives, and unit-level events like 
Captain’s Durbars to reinforce precautionary measures and encourage a proactive 
approach to security. 
(j) Regular Audits of Security Infrastructure: Periodic audits of all security measures 
and infrastructure is being undertaken to identify and address potential vulnerabilities. 
These audits include inspections of physical barriers, surveillance system, and 
communication equipment to ensure they are fully functional and up to date.  
(k) Collaboration with Law Enforcement Agencies: The collaboration with local law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies is being strengthened to share information on 
potential threats, suspicious activities, and individuals. ICG is trying to establish a joint 
response mechanism to ensure swift and effective handling of any security breaches. 
Budgetary provision  
Recommendation No.12 
The Committee learn that for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE), under 
Budget Estimates 2024-25, ₹ 621.61 crore and ₹  42.60 crore have been allocated under 
Revenue and capital Head, respectively. They also learn that the Ministry of Defence 
(MoD) provides financial assistance to cantonment Boards in the form of ordinary Grant-
In-Aid to balance their budget and during 2023-24, 50 cantonment Boards out of 61 
received Grant-in-Aid from the MoD. The committee find that for BE 2024-25, the total 
Grant-in-Aid to the cantonments amounts to ₹ 439.69  crore. In this regard, the committee 
recommend that if required, Grant-in-Aid to the Cantonments be appropriately examined 
by the Ministry at Revised Estimates stage so that various civic and welfare 
schemes/initiatives being undertaken in the Cantonment areas continue unhampered. 
 

24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The provisions for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE), under Budget 
Estimates 2024-25, ₹ 621.61 crore and ₹  42.60 crore have been allocated under 
Revenue and capital Head, respectively. Out of this total provisions of BE 2024-25 an 
amount of Rs. 439.69 has been provided under Grant-in-Aid.  
On the basis of Pace of expenditure upto September 2024, the  total Budget 
allocated for RE 2024-25 (Revenue Section) is Rs. 725.59 crs. and  an amount of Rs. 
557.28 crs has been allocated under Grant-in-Aid, thus an additional amount of Rs. 
117.59 crs. has been provided under Grant-in-Aid in RE 2024-25 over BE 2024-25 which 
was Rs. 439.69 crs.    
  Further, while allocating funds , Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption 
capacity of the Organization, pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year, overall 
resource envelope available and pressing demands from other quarters etc. Based on the 
overall ceiling  conveyed by Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence allocates funds 
among the Departments and Organization of MoD, including DEO taking into account 
inter Organization priorities, pace of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc.  
 Further, it is also important to mention here that any additional funds under Grants-
in-aid is provided by Ministry of Finance with the prior approval of Parliament.  The 
committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional funds 
projected by Defence Estate Organization for “Grants-in-Aid”  in future under Revenue 
Section so that any civic facilities and welfare schemes/initiatives in the Cantonment 
areas are not affected due to lack of adequate funds.  
Excision of Civil areas of Select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining 
municipalities. 
Recommendation No. 13: 
The Committee learn that in order to move away from the Cantonment concept and 
bring uniformity in municipal laws governing civil areas of Cantonments and adjoining 
State Municipal areas, it has been decided to consider excision of civil areas of select 
Cantonments and merge them with adjoining municipalities. Further keeping in view that 
the outcome of this exercise may have a bearing on the relevance of Cantonment Boards 
as prescribed under Cantonments Act 2006, the draft Cabinet Note on Cantonments Bill 
2022 has been withdrawn. The Committee also note the Defence Secretary’s submission 
in this regard that the matter is being discussed with various State Governments. Since 
this process of excision of civil areas of Select Cantonments and their merger with 

25 
 
adjoining municipalities is a comparatively new development, the Committee, at this 
stage, desire that details regarding this process may be furnished to this Committee at the 
time of submitting Action Taken Replies on this report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In light of in-principle decision taken to excise civil areas of Select Cantonments, 
broad modalities/ guiding principles for excision of Cantonments have been shared with 
the concerned State Governments for their views/comments. 
MoD has already constituted Cantonment-wise committees consisting of all 
stakeholders in respect of 36 Cantonments to look into the details of proposed modalities 
in terms of transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, Cantonment Board employees, 
pensioners and other issues for excision of civil areas of Cantonments and their merger 
with adjoining State Municipalities. After detailed deliberations, comprehensive proposals 
in respect of 34 Cantonments have been sent to respective State Governments. 
Gazette notifications have been issued for inviting public objections/suggestions 
concerning de-notification or excision of civil areas as the case may be, in respect of 10 
Cantonment Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, Clement Town, 
Dehardun, Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjahanpur. The views / comments from 
the State Governments are still awaited. 
Interests of the Civil Population in Cantonment Areas 
Recommendation No. 14: 
During deliberations on Demands for Grants 2024-25, the Committee raised the 
issue of grievances of the civil population in the Cantonment areas such as thoroughfare 
through some roads in the Cantonments areas, cleaning of drainage etc. In this regard, 
the Defence Secretary apprised the Committee that the services and facilities provided by 
the Cantonment Boards in their areas are generally better than in general local bodies 
and that requires strict enforcement of development controls. The Committee understand 
that with the passage of time and the growing urbanization around Cantonment areas, 
efforts to maintain the pristine status of the Cantonment areas cause certain restrictions 
for the civilian population in the Cantonment areas. The Committee are aware that in view 
of the interest of the residents in the Cantonment areas and need for greater 
democratization in the functioning of the Cantonment Boards in the country, a new draft 
Cantonment Bill was conceptualized and was also introduced in the public domain. 
However, now, consequent to the decision of consideration of excision of civil areas of 
select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining municipalities, the draft Cabinet Note 


26 
 
on Cantonments Bill 2022 has been withdrawn. At this stage, the Committee recommend 
that the process of excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with 
adjoining municipalities be expedited to address the grievance of the civil population in the 
Cantonment areas. The Committee in this regard also desire that balanced decisions 
regarding restriction and controls in the Cantonment areas be taken so as to maintain 
mutual faith and camaraderie between civil society and defence dispensation. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to excision of civil areas from the limits of Cantonments, broad 
modalities for excision have been shared with the State Governments. In addition, 
detailed proposals in respect of 34 Cantonments have also been shared with the State 
Governments for their comments/concurrence. The same is awaited.  
As regards closure of roads, MoD had issued instructions on 04.09.2018 outlining 
the procedure to be adopted for closure of roads in Cantonments under Section 258 of 
Cantonments Act, 2006. Further, a Committee has been constituted by MoD to look into 
the issue of closure of roads. The Committee has been tasked to assess the need for their 
closure based on threat perception and to make suitable recommendations to the 
Competent Authority. 
Civic and welfare facilities in the Cantonment Areas.  
Recommendation No. 15: 
The committee learn that main duties and discretionary functions of the 
Cantonment Boards include Sanitation, Water Supply, Education, Health facilities, Birth 
and Death registration, regulation of building construction etc. The Cantonment Boards in 
the major cities in the country also have facilities such as Biowaste management plants, 
ITI centres, e-waste banks etc. The Committee recommend that meaningful and 
concerted efforts to be made by the Ministry so that new welfare and civic amenities 
available in the Cantonment areas in the major cities of the country be uniformly extended 
to all the Cantonment areas in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
Cantonment Boards are engaged in providing civic services including primary and 
secondary education, basic health services including specialist services through 
Dispensaries and Hospitals. In some cases, Boards have taken steps to upgrade their 
health services by providing facilities like labour room, minor surgery OTs, diagnostic and 
radiology services, ambulances, specialized services, etc. 

27 
 
At present, there are 181 schools (ranging from Primary to Higher Secondary 
levels) in which approximately 59961 children are studying and 39 hospitals & 36 
dispensaries in various Cantonments (Annexure ‘A’). Further, 63 Skill Development 
Centres and 30 Centres for differently abled children are also running in Cantonments.  
Under the Swachh Bharat Mission launched by Govt. of India, all 61 Cantonments 
have been certified by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs as ODF (Open 
Defecation Free) or ODF+ areas and the ODF /ODF+ status is also being sustained in all 
Cantonments. All Cantonment Boards participated in National level Swachh Survekshan 
2023 conducted by MoHUA. Swachhta Award 2023 was given to Mhow Cantonment 
Board. 
For preservation of underground water, 55 Cantonment Boards have framed 
regulations for Digging and use of Bore wells which was notified in the month of August 
2024. Streamlining and regulation of groundwater extraction in Cantonment areas will be 
benefiting residents of these Cantonments. 
Energy conservation measures like fixation of LED street lights has been done. 
Further, 43 Cantonment Boards have installed Solar Panels with a total capacity of 4404 
KW at an estimated cost of Rs. 29.6 Cr. 
In 2024, All 61 Cantonment Boards have framed byelaws for Solid Waste 
Management. 35 Cantonment Boards have installed Solid Waste Processing Plants 
(SWPPs) for scientific disposal of solid waste (Annexure ‘B’). 
Cantonment Boards have taken multiple steps to achieve the goal of “Digital India” 
and improve the quality of service delivery. A online portal “e-Chhawani” has been 
introduced to provide grievance redressal and online civic services to over 20 lakh 
residents of 61 Cantonment Boards across the country. The online services include: - 
(a) Major Services:  
  (i) Information portal – CB Website 
  (ii) Trade License  
  (iii) Public Grievances Redressal 
  (iv) Miscellaneous Collection 
  (v) Lease renewal/ Extension 
  (vi) Birth and Death Certificate download 
  (vii) Online OPD registration 
 (viii) GIS based Water Connection (SWAJAL) and Sewerage 
 Connection  

28 
 
  (ix) Online Property Tax payment facility 
  (x) Booking of community hall and water tanker 
  (xi) Mobile Toilet locator facility 
  (xii) Online Building Plan Approval 
  (xiii) Mutation of names in Property Tax records 
  (xiv) Rent collection module 
  (xv) Online Building Plan Approval System (OBPAS) 
 
(b) Fully Automated services: 
 
  (i) GIS based Water Connection (SWAJAL) & Sewerage  connection.  
  (ii) Community Hall Booking 
  (iii) Auto-renewal of Trade License 
 
Profitability of the DPSUs 
Recommendation No. 16 
On scrutiny of the data regarding profitability of the old 9 Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs), the Committee find that Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has 
registered the highest profitability (Profit after Tax) in 2023-24. The Committee appreciate 
that Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is the only DPSU which has been conferred the 
status of Maharatna Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) on October 12, 2024. On 
further examination of the data regarding profitability of 9 DPSUs for the period 2019-20 to 
2023-24, the Committee find that profitability of Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) 
for Financial Year 2023-24 is the lowest among the old DPSUs. The Committee note the 
Chairman & Managing Director (CMD), MIDHANI’s submission in this regard that 
MIDHANI deals with manufacturing of super alloys for which they are dependent on 
imported raw materials. Admittedly, the profitability of MIDMANI for the said Financial 
Year has suffered because of the fluctuations in price of these raw materials. However, 
they have assured that the loss in profitability will be recovered during the current year by 
MIDHANI. In this regard, the Committee hope that urgent and concerted efforts are being 
made by the Department of Defence Production (DDP) and MIDHANI to ensure that 
profitability of MIDHANI does not trail in comparison. The Committee wish that the MoD 
may inform the profitability of MIDHANI in 2024-25 at the stage of furnishing Action Taken 
Replies on this Report.  
Reply of the Government 
Some steps taken to improve profitability of MIDHANI are as under:-  

29 
 
1. More consumption of Plant Reverts. Various steps taken to consume plant reverts 
are: - 
(a) Plant reverts, which are scrap materials from production are cleaned to remove 
contaminants before they can be remelted.  
(b) Regular collection of plant reverts from various production units inside MIDHANI at 
designated place.  
(c) Plant reverts are classified and stored according to their alloy composition.  
(d) In house R&D department has made a SOP for effective utilisation and recovery of 
expensive elements like Nickel, cobalt, Molybdenum, Chromium etc. by recycling process.  
(e) Modification in melting process modified to extract materials efficiently.  
(f) Due to more consumption of scrap or plant reverts reduction of costly raw materials 
is expected.  
(g) During the year 2023-24, due to improved raw materials and revert ratio company 
has saved 19 Crs. 
2. Improvement in Process  
(a) New VIM facility which has helped production of quality products and increased 
better yield.  
(b) Installation of state of art wire drawing machines for better quality and efficiency.  
3. Reduction in the Raw Materials Consumption 
(a) Developed plans to manufacture superalloys and steels that require fewer raw 
materials less expensive materials. 
(b) Chemical composition is optimized for these materials in order to reduce the need 
for consumption of  high-cost or rare raw materials like nickel or cobalt.  
(c) High-quality scrap reused, saving both material and cost. 
(d) Established closed-loop system wherein discarded or obsolete parts are reused. 
Particularly useful for superalloys and titanium.  

30 
 
(e) Resulted in lesser raw materials during the FY 24-25, Rs. 311 crs compared to Rs. 
448 crs in FY 23-24.  
 
 
 
4. Focus on Indigenization of Specific Raw Materials 
(a) Various vendors identified to develop raw materials which were being imported, 
such as Aluminium and Vanadium master alloy (used in making titanium alloys). 
(b) Certification for change in raw materials source taken up with airworthiness 
agencies for continuous supplies within India and reducing dependency on imports.  
5. Priority Manufacture of High Margin Products. Priority to supply core and high 
margin products like Titanium Alloy, Maraging Steel & Super Alloy. Titanium sale has 
gone up from 9 % to 13% and special steel sale increased from 27% to 37%.  
6. Outsourcing of Identified Activities for Cost Competitiveness 
(a) Outsource non-core manufacturing activities to thereby reducing operational cost.  
(b) MIDHANI explored external facilities (including DPSUs) with specialized machinery 
and advanced technology that resulted in better yield.  
7. Profitability data of MIDHANI till Quarter Ending Dec is as given below: 
Particulars 2024-25 (till Dec 2024)  2023-24 (till Dec 2023) 
Profit Before Tax (PBT) Rs. 78.88 Cr Rs. 66.29 Cr 
Profit After Tax (PAT) Rs. 53.92 Cr Rs. 44.88 Cr 
 
Indigenization Efforts and Self reliance in Defence sector 
Recommendation No. 17: 
The Committee learn that various steps are being taken for indigenization of 
Defence production by the DPSUs. These inter alia include promulgation of 5 positive 
indigenisation lists comprising of 5012 items, launching of SRI JAN portal in August 2020 

31 
 
to facilitate Private Industry to become part of the indigenisation drive of DPSUs & Service 
Headquarters, introduction of Make I and II Procedures, promotion of Startups through 
iDEX and ADITI scheme. The Committee note that the country’s journey on the path of 
self-reliance sector in Defence Sector is showing considerable progress. This is 
substantiated from the fact that the Defence production in the country increased from 
1,08,684 crore in 2022-23 to 1,27,265 crore in 2023-24 and 4555 items were indigenized 
in 2023-24 versus 3414 items in 2022-23. Also, out of 37000+ items displayed on SRIJAN 
portal by DPSUs, approximately 13,000 items have already been indigenized. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, the DPSUs are the pillars of our defence production 
and therefore, the Committee desire that concerted and timely measures be taken by the 
Ministry and the DPSUs to further develop their core competencies to ensure that our 
country achieves complete self-reliance in defence production at the earliest. It goes 
without saying that this gargantuan task requires adequate support to both DPSUs and 
Defence Private Sector in terms of budgetary support, investment in Research & 
Development, transfer of technology etc. and the Committee hope that the Government 
will take appropriate steps to cater to the needs of the time. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The Government has taken several policy initiatives in the past few years and 
brought in reforms to encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture of 
defence equipment, thereby promoting self-reliance in defence manufacturing & 
technology in the country. These initiatives, inter-alia include the following:- 
  (a) Priority to procurement of capital items from domestic sources under 
 Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP)-2020. 
   (b) Five ‘Positive Indigenization Lists’ comprising of total 5012 items 
have  been  notified by Department of Defence Production (DDP), MoD 
with timeline  beyond which they will only be procured from domestic 
industry. Till 31  Jan 2025, 3040 items have been indigenised.  
  (c) Launch of SRIJAN indigenization portal to facilitate indigenisation by 
 Indian Industry including MSMEs. 
  (d)  Launch of Make Projects for development of defence 
platforms/systems through Indian Industries. 
  (e) Launch of Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX) scheme. 
(f) Establishment of two Defence Industrial Corridors, one each in Uttar 
 Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. 

32 
 
 (g) Simplification of Industrial licensing process with longer validity 
period. 
 (h) Liberalization of Foreign Direct Investment(FDI) policy allowing 74% 
FDI     under automatic route. 
 (j) Implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) 
 Order  2017. 
 (k) Opening up of Defence Research & Development (R&D) for industry, 
 startups and academia. 
  (l) Progressive increase in allocation of Defence Budget of military 
 modernization for procurement from domestic sources, etc.  
2. Patents obtained by DRDO are available on DRDO website for use by industries, 
which are available free of cost to the industry. Ownership of IPR generated in iDEX and 
Make cases is also provided to the Industry. Ministry monitors the IPRs filed and granted 
in case of Indian designs developed by DPSUs and Industry under “Mission Raksha Gyan 
Shakti”. A dedicated IP Cell has been created in the MoD. 
 
Delivery of products/equipment/platforms by DPSUs 
Recommendation No. 18: 
The Committee note that there have been time overruns on the part of DPSUs in 
conforming to the delivery schedule of certain products for the Forces. The Committee, 
taking into account the written submission of the Ministry and oral deposition of the 
Defence Secretary in this regard, note that the primary reason for the delay in most cases 
is dependence on imported items. One such instance of delay in delivery of Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA) M1A was also highlighted by the Committee during deliberations on DFG 
2024-25. In this context, the Committee are of the view that the DPSUs should intensify 
their effort to ensure timely supply of various equipment/platforms/ weapon 
systems/accessories so that our Armed Forces are equipped with state-of-the-art 
equipment and platforms to encounter any unforeseen situation at any point of time. 
The Committee are also given to understand that the delays are sometimes caused due 
to focus on indigenization and preserving strategic autonomy. The Committee are of the 
considered view that for achieving self-reliance for inventing, developing and producing 
cutting edge Defence technology, R&D activities in Defence Public Sector Undertakings 

33 
 
(DPSUs) should be further strengthened in terms of adequate budgetary, infrastructural 
and human resource support. 
40. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
Many projects executed by DPSUs are technology intensive with dependence on multiple 
stakeholders including foreign OEMs. Various factors such as Covid, Geo-Political etc, 
which were beyond control of the DPSUs, contributed in the delay of timely supply of 
equipment/platforms/ weapon systems/accessories to the Armed Forces. With a view to 
ensure timely supply of the equipment/platforms/weapon systems/accessories to equip 
Armed Forces, DPSUs are taking multipronged initiatives. Some of the major initiatives by 
DPSUs are enumerated below: 
(a) New production lines have been established and are also under establishment by 
DPSUs to increase production capacity.  
(b) Augmented Repair and Overhaul (ROH) facilities to ensure quicker turnaround times. 
(c) Created Operations Monitoring & Analytics (OMA) group at Corporate Office to monitor 
and review progress of key production projects and critical deliverables.  
(d) Deployed Obsolescence Check software tool across the company to ensure that 
obsolescence-related issues do not delay manufacture & delivery.  
(e) Indigenisation of imported sub-systems / modules / components are undertaken 
simultaneously under multiple initiatives viz iDEX-DIO, Srijan portal, Make-I/II and also 
through own initiatives by DPSUs. 
(f) Import of long lead critical items in advance.  
(g) Indigenization of critical imported parts and aggregates resulting in time saving and 
import cost. 
(h) Development of alternate and multiple sources. 
(i) Long-term contracts with major suppliers for critical aggregates. 
(j) Development of multi-level skilled man power. 
(k) Minimizing slippages in delivery schedule with better capacity utilization and efficient 
supply chain management.  

34 
 
(l) Integrated Construction with high degree of pre-outfitting towards construction of quality 
ships in reduced timeframe. 
(m) Introduction of Virtual reality lab, Product Data Management (PDM)/ Project Lifecycle 
Management (PLM), Cutting edge design Softwares, Robotic welding, Introduction of AI in 
various spheres of operation etc in shipbuilding. 
(n) Standardisation of stock control items involved in shipbuilding. 
Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production is providing various supports to 
strengthen R&D activities of DPSUs towards achieving self-reliance, inventing, developing 
& producing cutting edge Defence technology by them through various enabling 
measures:  
(i) DPSUs are participating in Innovation in Defence excellence (iDEX) initiative which 
was launched in 2018 to foster innovation & technology development in Defence & 
Aerospace by engaging industries including MSMEs, Start-ups, Individual Innovators, 
R&D institutes and Academia.  
(ii) DPSUs participate in the “Make India Initiative” launched in 2016 aimed to achieve 
Self – reliance by involving greater participation of industries, both private& public. 
(iii)  With the supports of the Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production, 
DPSUs are augmenting their R&D facilities, Production capacity, testing facilities, Ship 
building capacity, Repair and Overhaul(ROH) facilities.  
(iv) To accelerate the efforts, DPSUs are undertaking modernization of existing 
infrastructures and plants & machineries. DPSUs have proposed expenditure of total Rs 
6587 Cr for the FY 2024-25 for CAPEX. The modernization will help the DPSUs position 
themselves to cater to the need of existing and new customers in domestic and global 
markets and will also help them venture into new strategic business areas. 
(v)  Augmenting the efforts and aligned with the goal of self-reliance in inventing, 
developing and producing cutting edge Defence technology, DPSUs are undertaking 
various R& D activities with focused objectives with plans for R&D spends in the coming 
years. All DPSUs have already earmarked funds for their R&D activities upto FY 2028-29. 
The total R&D expenditure planned by the DPSUs is Rs 6280 Cr for FY 2024-25.  
(vi) Establishment of Rate Contract for purchase of steel and shipbuilding services. 
(vii) Distributed manufacturing through development and leveraging of vendor base in 
shipbuilding. 

35 
 
(viii) In the area of Human Resource, DPSUs are having tie-ups with reputed Academia 
and other institutes and deputing the R&D engineers for trainings/seminars/interactions 
etc. to enhance the knowledge in their respective domains to give impetus to R&D 
activities.  
 
 
 
Defence Start ups 
Recommendation No. 19 
The Committee learnt that 534 Start ups and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) have been engaged by the Ministry of Defence so far and contracts have been 
signed with 378 Startups and MSMEs. The Committee, keeping in view the sensitive 
nature of work of Defence sector, desire that the details of the extant mechanism in the 
Ministry of Defence for grant of security clearance to the Defence startups engaged by the 
Ministry be furnished to the Committee at the earliest 
 
Reply of the Government 
Adequate provisions have been made in the policies/procedures of Ministry of 
Defence to ensure that only eligible Indian Companies, including Startups and MSMEs 
are engaged to harness their potential/expertise for strengthening the defence ecosystem 
in the country. 
Moreover, Industrial Licencing Policy is in place in the Ministry to deal with security 
related issues for manufacture of critical defence items. 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
Recommendation No. 20 
The Committee note that the CSR activities of the Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs) chiefly cater to the needs of the poor and marginalized sections of 
the society. In some cases, the CSR funds are used to address grievances of a distressed 
Ex-Servicemen. In this context, the Committee recommend that feasibility of fixing a 
percentage of the CSR funds of the DPSUs to be spent on the welfare of the Ex-

36 
 
Servicemen be explored by the Ministry of Defence and the Committee be apprised 
accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
Activities to be undertaken under CSR funds are stipulated in the Schedule VII of 
the Company Act,2013 and in accordance with Section 135(Corporate Social 
Responsibility). Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board of DPSUs 
constituted under Section 135 of the Company Act,2013 can recommend the amount of 
expenditure to be incurred on the activities given in the Schedule VII of the Company Act, 
2013. 
The activities given in the Schedule VII, which can be undertaken under CSR, 
contain the following at its serial no.(vi): 
“measures for the benefit of armed forces veterans, war widows and their 
dependents, Central Armed Police Forces(CAPF) and Central Para Military 
Forces(CPMF) veterans, and their dependents including widows”. 
DPSUs undertake activities under CSR funds in accordance with above provisions 
and as per the common theme issued by Ministry of Finance, Department of Public 
Enterprises for CSR activities by the CPSEs.  
 
WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN 
Budget 
Recommendation No.21 
 The Committee learn that an amount of Rs. 33.80 crore and Rs. 6.968 crore has 
been allocated to Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), respectively, for Budget Estimates 2024-25. 
Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat and Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare 
(DESW) have been allocated sum of RS. 304.30 Crore and Rs. 11.00 crore respectively.  
The Committee, on scrutinizing the data for budgetary allocation for 
Organizations/Divisions looking after welfare of Ex-Servicemen, find that the funds 
provided to DGR, DESW and KSB except Defence Pension and ECHS, have remained 
equal to that of 23-24. Although the Committee have been assured no challenges are 
being encountered by Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare regarding budgetary 
allocation, the Committee would still hope that in case of any need in future, the requisite 
fund would be provided by the Ministry at Supplementary stage Grant.   
Reply of the Government 

37 
 
 The funds provided to Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare (DESW) caters the 
Establishment (Salaries & Office Expenses etc.) related expenditure of the Department.  
Further, as regards the Budget provision from Financial Year 2023-24 to 2025-26 in 
respect of DESW, it is stated that funds during the said period have been provided 
keeping in view of the demand/projection made by DESW. As against the Budget 
Estimates (BE) for the Financial year 2023-24 (Rs. 10.05 crore), the funds to the tune of 
Rs. 10.64 crore & 12.56 crore have been allotted in the BE 2024-25 & BE 2025-26 
respectively which amounts to  approximate 24.97% increase in BE 2025-26 over BE 
2023-24. 
 Similarly, with regards to Budget provision in respect of Kendriya Sainik Board 
(KSB) & Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR), it is stated that KSB had been 
allocated an amount of Rs. 304.30 Crore in BE 2023-24 which had been maintained at BE 
2024-25 stage. It may also be added that Budget allocated to KSB at BE 2024-25 has 
been increased to Rs. 505.30 Crore at RE 2024-25 stage and to Rs. 404.30 Crore at BE 
2025-26 stage (i.e. an increase of 32.86 % over BE 2023-24 allocation).  
Further, it may be stated that DGR had been allocated an amount to the tune of 
Rs. 33.80 Crore in BE 2023-24 which had been maintained at BE 2024-25 stage. Here, it 
may also be mentioned that in BE 2025-26, budget of DGR has been increased to Rs. 
54.80 Crore (an increase of 62.13 % over BE 2023-24 allocation).  
The committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
funds from Ministry of Finance in case it is demanded and projected by Departments at 
Supplementary Stage Grant.   
Re-Settlement of ESM 
Recommendation No. 22 
 The Committee have been given to understand that Directorate General 
Resettlement (DGR) sponsors Ex-Servicemen (Officers/ JCOs/ OR) to various 
Government organizations, Public Sector Undertakings, Corporate Houses, Private 
Sector, Central Para Military Forces etc. based on their requisition for re-employment of 
ESM. The Committee, in this regard, recommend that the process for providing re-
employment to ESM by DGR, especially the allotment of petrol pumps, CNG Retail 
outlets, may be expedited and a strict timeframe may be devised by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
The Committee appreciate that 61,810 and 43,734 ESM were given employment 
through DGR in 2023 and 2022, respectively.  The Committee desire that data for the last 
3 years regarding the number of ESM, who have applied for but are still awaiting suitable 

38 
 
re-employment opportunities, may be furnished at the time of furnishing the Action Taken 
Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme-wise data for the last 3 years (i.e. year 2022, 2023 & 2024) regarding 
the number of Ex-Servicemen, who have applied for but are still awaiting suitable 
re-employment opportunities is attached as Appendix ‘A’. 
 
 
Re-settlement avenues for ESM 
Recommendation No. 23 
 The Committee learn that the present re-employment avenues for ESM offered by 
DGR inter alia include security guards in various CPSEs, Corporate Houses, PSUs, 
Tipper attachment, Oil Retail Outlet dealership, CNG Retail outlets, Mother Dairy/Safal 
outlets. The Committee, during deliberations on the subject, raised concerns regarding 
work profile of certain re-employment avenues being offered to ESM, which could affect 
their morale and mental health. Therefore, the Committee recommend that concrete 
efforts may now be made to increase the self-employment and entrepreneurial 
opportunities, especially in their local/native places for ESM by the Ministry of Defence.  
Further, viability of reservation of jobs for ESM in Sainik Schools and Cantonment Boards 
may be explored by the Ministry of Defence and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Facilities for ESM 
Recommendation No. 24 
The Committee desire that details regarding the extant facilities for ESM namely Canteen 
Stores Department, ECHS polyclinics and Sainik Rest Houses, State-wise and district-
wise alongwith the population of ESM in respective areas, in the country may be furnished 
to them at the time of submitting Action Taken Replies. The Committee recommend that 
adequate number of CSD and ECHS Polyclinics may be opened uniformly in the country 
on the basis of the ESM population being catered to in the respective areas.  They also 
desire that proper maintenance of Sainik Rest Houses be taken care of by the Ministry to 
ensure decent temporary accommodation for the Ex-Servicemen.  

39 
 
Reply of the Government 
State & District wise Population of ESM.  State & District-wise details of population 
of ESM in the country as on 31 Dec 2023 is attached at Appendix ‘B’. 
D(CSD).  In so far Canteen Stores Department (CSD) is concerned, it is stated that 
as per CSD policy, for opening of Ex-Servicemen (ESM) Unit Run Canteen (URC), 
strength of ESM & Widows/Next of Kin (NoK) should be more than 5000 and no other 
canteen should be available within 50 Kms.  Further, for opening of Extension Counter, 
strength of ESM & Widows/NoK should be more than 2500 and no other canteen should 
be available within 50 Kms.  CSD policy aims to ensure that adequate canteen are 
available in terms of ESM population in the country.  State-wise details of URCs & 
Extension Counters may be seen at Appendix ‘C’.    
ECHS.  State-wise details of existing 427 ECHS Polyclinics is attached at Appendix 
‘D’ 
Sainik Rest House.  There are 349 Sainik Rest Houses (SRH) across the country.  
Details of SRHs is attached at Appendix ‘E’.  It is submitted that all SRHs are constructed 
by the concerned State Govt and MoD through DSE Budget, only provides 50% share of 
cost of construction of a new SRH as a grant to the State Govts.  These SRHs are 
thereafter administrated, operated and maintained by concerned State Govt through the 
ZSBs and MoD has no role in their maintenance/ upkeep separately, the Armed Forces 
Flag Day Fund is utilized to provide an annual grant of Rs. 50,000/- per SRH in the 12 
Special category States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh and 
Tripura).  An advisory with regard to ensure proper maintenance of these Sainik Rest 
Houses has been issued to respective Rajya Sainik Boards vide letter No. 
1826/Accts/SRH/KSB dated 16.01.2025.     
Prime Minister's Scholarship Scheme (PMSS) 
Recommendation No. 25 
The Committee learn that the Prime Minister’s Scholarship Scheme (PMSS), 
funded out of the National Defence Fund and administered by the Prime Minister’s Office, 
was launched in 2006 to benefit wards/widows of ESM undertaking professional 
graduation courses. The scheme awards scholarships to 5500 students every year, with 
the amount of the scholarship for boys and girls being ₹ 30,000 and ₹ 36,000 per year, 
respectively.  Under PMSS, an amount of ₹ 55 crore was disbursed in 2023-2024 to 
15,115 beneficiaries. The Committee, in this regard, desire that feasibility of increasing 
the amount being disbursed under PMSS, in pursuance with the competent authority, may 
be explored and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The PMSS is run centrally by the Prime Minister Office (PMO).  The 
recommendation/suggestion of the committee is being communicated to the PMO. 
 
 
 
 Appendix ‘A’ 
Scheme-wise Data of ESM 
Scheme  ESM Registered 
during last three 
year 
ESM awaiting  
as on 
01.01.25 
Remarks 
(a) ESM  in 
Security 
Services 
- 
 
- DGR sponsores ESM 
(Officers) Proprietors of 
Security Agencies 
(Empanelled with DGR) who 
then employ ESM Security 
Guards with various CPSEs 
as per contract.  The ESM 
Security Guards are 
employed by Security 
Agencies at State/District/ 
Regional level in coordination 
with respective Rajya Sainik 
Boards(RSBs)/ Zila Sainik 
Boards (ZSBs).  Data at ESM 
Security Guards level is not 
maintained by this office. 
(b) ESM(O) 
Security 
Agencies 
& State 
ESM 
Corporati
ons 
Empanell
ed 
3078 ESM (Officers) 
centrally registered 
with DGR for 
various schemes i.e. 
Security Agency, 
Coal Company & 
CNG Schemes. 
1132 - 

41 
 
(c) Manage
ment of 
CNG 
Station in 
NCR/Pun
e 
148 
(d) Coal 
Compani
es 
Sponsore
d/ 
ESM(O) 
Sponsore
d 
Nil Nil Coal India Ltd (CIL) has    
unilaterally withdrawn from 
the scheme. The matter is 
sub-judice.  No 
sponsorships have been 
done since Jul 2020. 
(e) ESM  
sponsore
d in Coal 
Compani
es 
Nil Nil 
(f) Widows/ 
disabled 
ESM 
attached 
in Coal 
Compani
es 
34 34 - 
(g) Sponsore
d for 
COCO 
Scheme 
(Petrol 
Pumps) 
- - DGR only Sponsores 
Name of ESMs received 
from RSBs/ ZSBs against 
the vacancies received 
from OMC for COCO 
outlets. 
(h) Issue of 
Eligibility 
Certificat
es for 
allotment 
of Oil 
Product 
Agencies 
- - DGR issue ‘Eligibility 
Certificates’ for OPA to all 
applicants who apply and 
fulfils the QR. 
(j) Mother 
Dairy Milk 
Booths/S
1504 214 - 

42 
 
afal 
Booth 
(k) ESM 
Sponsore
d/ 
Placeme
nt by 
DGR 
(Emp 
Dte) 
- - DGR only Sponsores 
Name of Ex-Servicemen 
against the vacancies. 
(l) DGR 
Technical 
Service 
Scheme 
- - DGR provides 
Ex-Servicemen manpower 
for ‘Technical Services’ to 
the Government Est/ 
Complexes through 
empanelled State ESM 
Corporations. 
 

43 
 
Appendix ‘B’ 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 
S. No. States/UTs Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 77,912 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 986 
3 Assam 41,962 
4 Bihar 133,526 
5 Chhattisgarh 7,491 
6 Goa 2,345 
7 Gujarat 33,475 
8 Haryana 175,637 
9 Himachal Pradesh 128,576 
10 Jharkhand 30,093 
11 Karnataka 94,003 
12 Kerala 181,536 
13 Madhya Pradesh 57,028 
14 Maharashtra 196,487 
15 Manipur 8,744 
16 Meghalaya 2,972 
17 Mizoram 5,506 
18 Nagaland 3,290 
19 Odisha 52,337 
20 Punjab 359,464 
21 Rajasthan 209,523 
22 Sikkim 1,075 
23 Tamilnadu 120,523 
24 Telangana 28,200 
25 Tripura 2,528 
26 Uttar Pradesh 421,145 
27 Uttarakhand 139,361 
28 West Bengal 104,193 
29 Andaman & Nicobar (UT) 1,081 
30 Chandigarh (UT) 9,160 
31 Daman & Div and Dadra Nagar Haveli 
(UT) 0 
32 Delhi (UT) 63,345 
33 Jammu and Kashmir (UT) 76,624 
34 Lakshadweep (UT) 0 
35 Leh and Ladakh (UT) 6,354 
36 Pondicherry (UT) 2,469 
Total 2,778,951 
        Source: Rajya Sainik Board of respective States/UTs 

44 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Andhra Pradesh 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Anantapur 3,360 
2 Chittor 8,156 
3 East Godavari 2,983 
4 Guntur 10,947 
5 Kadapa 3,814 
6 Krishna 4,441 
7 Kurnool 4,174 
8 Prakasam 10,729 
9 SPS Nellore 1,880 
10 Srikakulam 7,079 
11 Visakhapatnam 13,983 
12 Vizianagaram 2,773 
13 West Godavari 3,593 
Total 77,912 
          Source: Rajya Sainik Board Andhra Pradesh 
 Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Arunachal Pradesh  
 S. No. Districts Total  
 1 Longding 260  
 2 Tirap 179  
 3 Changlang 10  
 4 Namsai 8  
 5 Lohit 19  
 6 Anjaw 5  
 7 L/Dibang Valley 8  
 8 Dibang Valley 1  
 9 East Siang 38  
 10 Lower Siang 14  
 11 Leparada 21  
 12 Siang 16  
 13 West - Siang 44  
 14 Upper - Siang 2  
 15 Shi - Yomi 20  

45 
 
 16 Upper Subansiri 33  
 17 Kamle 2  
 18 Lower Subansiri 64  
 19 Papumpare 24  
 20 Tawang 79  
 21 West Kameng 112  
 22 East Kameng 21  
 23 Pakke Kesang 1  
 24 Kurung Kumey 3  
 25 Karadadi 2  
 Total 986  
 
 
   
         Source: Rajya Sainik Board of Arunachal Pradesh 
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Assam 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Barpeta & Baska 3,654 
2 Bongaigaon 2,743 
3 Chirang 716 
4 Chachar 6,283 
5 Darrang 559 
6 Udalguri 683 
7 Dibrugarh 1,338 
8 Tinsukia 641 
9 Karbi Anglong& KBL (S) 518 
10 Dhubri& South Salmara 428 
11 Golaghat 1,198 
12 Goalpara 741 
13 Hailakani 999 
14 Jorhat&Majuli 3,337 
15 Kamrup (M) 3,424 
16 Kamrup (R) 1,591 
17 Nalbari 1,289 
18 Baska 225 
19 Karimganj 1,345 
20 Kokrajhar 681 
21 Lakhimpur 1,030 
22 Nagaon, Morigaon & Hojai 4,906 

46 
 
23 Sonitpur 1,886 
24 Sivsagar & Charaideo 1,747 
Total 41,962 
   
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Assam  
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Bihar 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Patna 11,561 
2 Nalanda 4,092 
3 Bhojpur 21,323 
4 Rohtas 5,239 
5 Kaimur 2,088 
6 Chapra 13,050 
7 Muzaaffarpur 7,773 
8 Stamarhi 1,937 
9 Sheohar 229 
10 East Champaran 3,756 
11 West Champaran 2,429 
12 Darbhanga 2,573 
13 Madhubani 2,811 
14 Samastipur 3,525 
15 Bhagalpur 3,967 
16 Banka 891 
17 Katihar 1,160 
18 Puruea 808 
19 Ariria 212 
20 Kisanganj 101 
21 Saharsa 809 
22 Madhepura 633 
23 Supaul 311 
24 Munger 3,097 
25 Begusarai 1,614 
26 Khagaria 1,441 
27 Lakhisarai 765 
28 Shekhpura 353 
29 Jamui 281 
30 Gaya 3,793 
31 Nawada 915 
32 Jehanabad 3,800 
33 Aurangabad 1,895 
34 Arwal 1,029 

47 
 
35 Buxar 9,238 
36 Siwan 5,209 
37 Gopalganj 2,001 
38 Vaishali 6,817 
Total 133,526 
   Rajya Sainik Board Bihar 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Chhattisgarh 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Raipur 901 
2 Dharmtari 190 
3 Mahasamund 165 
4 Gariaband 29 
5 Balaoda Bazar 135 
6 Bilaspur 634 
7 Korba 165 
8 JangirChampa 542 
9 Gaurela Pendra Marwahi 21 
10 Mungeli 54 
11 Durg 2,175 
12 Kabirdham 34 
13 Balaod 395 
14 Bemetara 77 
15 Jashpur 675 
16 Raigarh 176 
17 Rajnandgaon 238 
18 Baikunthpur 128 
19 Ambikapur 185 
20 Surajpur 55 
21 Balrampur 109 
22 Jagdalpur 62 
23 Dantewada 19 
24 Narayanpur 9 
25 Bijapur 5 
26 Kondagaon 59 
27 Sukma 4 
28 Kanker 250 
Total 7,491 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Chhattisgarh 
 

48 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Goa 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 DSW Goa 
2,345 2 South Goa 
3 North Goa 
   
Total 2,345 
Source : Rajya Sainik  Board Goa   
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Gujarat 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Ahmedabad 6,677 
2 Gandhinagar 1,350 
3 Anand 529 
4 Kheda 746 
5 Chhotaudepur 158 
6 Vadodara 5,082 
7 Bharuch 407 
8 Surat 849 
9 Tapi 100 
10 Dangs 20 
11 Narmada 101 
12 Navsari 168 
13 Valsad 201 
14 Jamnagar 1,779 
15 Devbhumi Dwarka 399 
16 Porbandar 490 
17 Gir Somnath 305 
18 Junagadh 1,049 
19 Rajkot 1,225 
20 Surendranagar 1,045 
21 Bhavnagar 795 
22 Amreli 174 
23 Morbi 448 
24 Botad 66 
25 Sabarkantha 1,911 
26 Aravalli 1,973 
27 Kutchh 1,183 
28 Mehsana 1,279 
29 Banaskatha 529 
30 Patan 354 
31 Panchmahal 727 

49 
 
32 Mahisagar 803 
33 Dahon 553 
Total 33,475 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Gujarat 
 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Haryana 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Haryana 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Ambala 7,592 
2 Bhiwani 7,157 
3 Faridabad 6,370 
4 Fatehabad 2,118 
5 Gurgaon 16,028 
6 Hisar 10,019 
7 Jhajjar 19,766 
8 Jind 9,930 
9 Kaithal 3,086 
10 Karnal 5,150 
11 Kurukshetra 6,569 
12 Narnaul 10,352 
13 Panipat 3,673 
14 Palwal 3,164 
15 Panchkula 3,586 
16 Rohtak 19,553 
17 Rewari 11,655 
18 Sonipat 15,599 
19 Sirsa 1,197 
20 Yamuna Nagar 6,076 
21 Charkhi Dadri 6,997 
Total 175,637 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Himachal Pradesh 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Kangra 53,678 
2 Hamirpur 19,734 
3 Mandi 15,674 
4 Una 12,531 
5 Bilaspur 8,628 
6 Chamba 3,780 
7 Solan 4,644 
8 Shimla 4,183 

50 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Himachal Pradesh 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Jharkhand 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Ranchi 10,955 
2 Palamau 1,002 
3 Garhwa 271 
4 Latehar 319 
5 Khunti 621 
6 Dumka 1,308 
7 Deoghar 262 
8 Sahibganj 470 
9 Pakur 79 
10 Godda 373 
11 Jamtara 41 
12 West Singhbhum Chaibasa 3,268 
13 East Singhbhum Chaibasa 2,146 
14 Seraikela-Kharsawan 331 
15 Hazaribag 743 
16 Ramgarh 212 
17 Giridih 197 
18 Koderma 166 
19 Chatra 211 
20 Dhanbad 554 
21 Bokaro 677 
22 Gumla 4,399 
23 Lohardaga 1,000 
24 Simdega 488 
Total 30,093 
 
 
9 Sirmour 3,665 
10 Kullu 1,216 
11 Kinnaur 501 
12 Lahaul & Spiti 342 
Total 128,576 

51 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Jharkhand 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Karnataka 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Bangalore (Urban) 31,818 
2 Bangalore (Rural) 4,661 
3 Belagavi 24,092 
4 Vijayapura 2,905 
5 Dharwad 6,416 
6 Kalaburagi 2,454 
7 Karwar 1,903 
8 Madikeri 4,542 
9 Mangaluru 3,241 
10 Mysuru 4,095 
11 Shivamogga 1,754 
12 Bagalkot 3,073 
13 Hassan 3,049 
Total 94,003 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Karnataka 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 -  Kerala 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Thiruvananthanpuram 23,950 
2 Kollam 19,699 
3 Pathanamthitta 19,336 
4 Idukki 1,895 
5 Kottayam 10,149 
6 Alappuzha 28,364 
7 Ernakulam 13,853 
8 Thrissur 12,788 
9 Palakkad 13,216 
10 Malappuram 5,795 
11 Kozhikode 12,899 
12 Wayanad 1,844 
13 Kannur 15,736 
14 Kasaragod 2,012 
Total 181,536 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Kerala 

52 
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Madhya Pradesh 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Betul 1,229 
2 Bhind 7,323 
3 Bhopal 4,308 
4 Vidisha 232 
5 Sehore 343 
6 Raisen 239 
7 Chhattarpur 379 
8 Panna 167 
9 Chhindwara 582 
10 Damoh 196 
11 Katni 519 
12 Khandwa 238 
13 Burhanpur 152 
14 Barwani 82 
15 Khargone 348 
16 Gwalior 6,335 
17 Datia 171 
18 Guna 105 
19 Ashok Nagar 55 
20 shivpuri 300 
21 Hoshangabad 737 
22 Harda 75 
23 Indore 4,141 
24 Dewas 1,160 
25 Dhar 431 
26 Jabalpur 4,554 
27 Mandla 281 
28 Mandsaur 305 
29 Neemuch 255 
30 Morena 4,759 
31 Sheopur 29 
32 Narsinghpur 447 
33 Ratlam 330 
34 Jhabua 54 
35 Alirajpur 38 
36 Rewa 6,876 
37 Sagar 1,080 
38 Satna 3,273 
39 Seoni 202 

53 
 
40 Balaghat 204 
41 Shahdol 283 
42 Umaria 112 
43 Anuppur 67 
44 Dindori 34 
45 Sidhi 1,744 
46 Singroli 41 
47 Tikamgarh 213 
48 Niwari 120 
49 Ujjain 1,124 
50 Shajapur 420 
51 Rajgarh 111 
52 Agar 225 
Total 57,028 
Source : Rajya Sainik Board Madhya Pradesh 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Maharashtra 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Mumbai City 8,125 
2 Mumbai Sub 9,461 
3 Thane 11,617 
4 Sindhudurg 3,047 
5 Raigad 3,868 
6 Ratnagiri 3,776 
7 Pune 34,643 
8 Satara 20,429 
9 Sangli 14,869 
10 Kolhapur 13,581 
11 Solapur 6,664 
12 Nasik 9,302 
13 Ahmednagar 10,784 
14 Dhule 1,942 
15 Nandurbar 285 
16 Jalgaon 4,307 
17 Aurangabad 5,143 
18 Jalna 1,307 
19 Latur 3,698 
20 Nanded 1,362 
21 Osmanabad 3,640 
22 Beed 3,427 
23 Parbhani 943 
29 Hingoli 491 
24 Amravati 82 

54 
 
25 Akola 2,211 
26 Washim 801 
27 Buldhana 4,588 
28 Yawatmal 1,189 
30 Nagpur 6,153 
31 Wardha 1,188 
32 Gondia 1,160 
33 Bhandara 1,079 
34 Chandrapur 1,148 
35 Gadchiroli 177 
Total 196,487 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Maharashtra 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Manipur 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Bishnupur 
8,744 
2 Churachandpur 
3 Chandel 
4 Imphal West 
5 Imphal East 
6 Jiribam 
7 Kangpokpi 
8 Kakching 
9 Kamjong 
10 Noney 
11 Pherzawl 
12 Senapati 
13 Temenglong 
14 Thoubal 
15 Tengnoupal 
16 Ukhrul 
Total 8,744 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Manipur 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Meghalaya 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 East Khasi Hills (shilong) 1,924 
2 West Khasi Hills (Nongstoin) 33 
3 South West  Khasi Hills 
(Mawkyrwat) 7 
4 Eastern Wet Khasi Hills 
(Mairang) 26 
5 East Jaintia Hills (Khliehriat) 8 
6 West Jaintia Hills (Jowai) 44 
7 Ri-Bhoi (Nongpoh) 117 
8 North Garo Hills 
(Resubelpara) 63 
9 East Garo Hills (Williamnagar) 88 
10 South Garo Hills (Baghmara) 17 
11 West Garo Hills (Tura) 559 
12 South West Garo Hills 
(Ampati) 86 
Total 2,972 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Meghalaya 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Mizoram 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Aizawl 3,124 
2 Lunglei 963 
3 Champhai 788 
4 Kolasib 631 
   
Total 5,506 
 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Mizoram 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Nagaland 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Dimapur 531 
2 Mon 146 
3 Peren 15 
4 Chumoukedima 261 
5 Nuiland 54 
6 Kohima 377 
7 Tseminya 97 
8 Phek 147 

56 
 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Nagaland 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 -  Odisha 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Cuttack 5,310 
2 Puri 2,292 
3 Jagat Singh Pur 2,291 
4 Kendrapara 2,574 
5 Jaipur 2,409 
6 Khurda 3,499 
7 Nayagarh 1,687 
8 Ganjam & Gajapati 9,235 
9 Balasore 3,530 
10 Bhadrak 2,037 
11 Mayurbhanj 2,536 
12 Kalahandi 
1,963 
13 Boudh 
14 Nabrangpur 
15 Naupada 
16 Kandhamal 
17 Keonjhar 1,533 
18 Koraput 357 
19 Rayagada 176 
20 Malkangiri 23 
21 Dhenkanal 3,599 
22 Angul 3,385 
23 Sambalpur 
3,901 
24 Jharsududa 
25 Bargarh 
26 Deogarh 
27 Balangir 
28 Subarnapur 
29 Sundergarh 
9 Kiphire 8 
10 Mokokchung 826 
11 Tuensang 133 
12 Shamator 5 
13 Longleng 15 
14 Noklak 20 
15 Wokha 477 
16 Zunhebota 178 
Total 3,290 

57 
 
Total 52,337 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Odisha 
 
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Punjab 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Amritsar 32,374 
2 Tarantaran 28,971 
3 Bathinda 8,572 
4 Faridkot 3,599 
5 Ferozepur 3,691 
6 Fazlika 2,482 
7 Fatehgarh Sahib 5,054 
8 Gurdaspur 41,505 
9 Pathankot 20,839 
10 Hoshiarpur 50,242 
11 S.B.S Nagar 5,733 
12 Jalandhar 42,222 
13 Kapurthala 11,519 
14 Ludhiana 35,256 
15 Mansa 4,547 
16 Sri Muktsar Sahib 2,846 
17 Moga 11,509 
18 Patiala 11,066 
19 Roopnagar 10,217 
20 SAS Nagar 10,775 
21 Sangrur 11,679 
22 Barnala 4,766 
Total 359,464 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Punjab 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Rajasthan 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Ajmer 10,762 
2 Alwar 9,881 
3 Behror 18,594 
4 Barmer 2,155 
5 Jalore 169 
6 Bharatpur 8,927 
7 Dholpur 684 
8 Bhilwara 2,542 

58 
 
9 Chittorgarh 299 
10 Bikaner 4,415 
11 Churu 9,713 
12 Jaipur 13,643 
13 Dausa 1,548 
14 Jaisalmer 1,844 
15 Jhunjhunu 21,226 
16 Chirawa 21,913 
17 Jodhpur 13,398 
18 Sheragarh 5,817 
19 Kota 2,776 
20 Bundi 1,146 
21 Baran 323 
22 Jhalawar 491 
23 Nagaur 5,467 
24 Didwana 12,168 
25 Pali 2,895 
26 Sirohi 509 
27 Karauli 5,723 
28 Sawaimadhopur 1,300 
29 Sikar 11,313 
30 Neem ka Thana 6,099 
31 Sri Ganganager 1,525 
32 Hanmangarh 3,207 
33 Tonk 1,358 
34 Uaipur 2,026 
35 Rajsamand 3,219 
36 Dungarpur 298 
37 Banswara 85 
38 Pratapgarh 65 
Total 209,523 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Rajasthan 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Sikkim 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Zilla Sainik Board North/East 671 
2 Zilla Sainik Board, South, 
Namchi 194 
3 Zill Sainik Board, West, 
Geyzing 210 
Total 1,075 
 

59 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Sikkim 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Tamilnadu 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Ariyalur 1,032 
2 Perambalur 318 
3 Chennai 9,245 
4 Coimbatore 4,565 
5 Cuddalore 1,563 
6 Dharmapuri 17 
7 Dindigul 3,155 
8 Erode 973 
9 Kancheepuram 8,130 
10 Kanniyakumari 6,234 
11 Krishnagiri 6,836 
12 Madurai 7,972 
13 Nagapattinam 1,204 
14 Namakkal 912 
15 Pudukottai 680 
16 Ramanathapuram 1,523 
17 Salem 3,177 
18 Sivagangai 2,322 
19 Thanjavur 2,935 
20 The Nilgiris 1,868 
21 Theni 6,213 
22 Thoothukudi 4,045 
23 Tiruchirapali 4,184 
24 Karur 670 
25 Tirunelveli 5,053 
26 Tirupur 843 
27 Tiruvallur 5,334 
28 Tiruvannamalai 80 
29 Tiruvarur 1,082 
30 Vellore 19,651 
31 Villupuram 3,249 
32 Virudhunagar 5,458 
Total 120,523 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Tamilnadu 

60 
 
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Telangana 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Adilabad 798 
2 Hyderabad 6,614 
3 Karimnagar 1,115 
4 Khammam 1,047 
5 Mahabubnagar 2,019 
6 Meda Sanga Reddy 1,280 
7 Nalgonda 968 
8 Nizamabad 535 
9 Ranga Reddy 12,804 
10 Warangal 1,020 
Total 28,200 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Telangana 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Tripura 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Dhalai 242 
2 Gomati 279 
3 Khowai 258 
4 North Tripura 327 
5 Sepahijala 227 
6 South Tripura 159 
7 Unakoti 222 
8 West Tripura 814 
Total 2,528 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Tripura 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Uttar Pradesh 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Agra 15,320 
2 Aligarh 9,328 
3 Ambednagar 1,331 
4 Amethi 2,808 
5 Amroha 1,164 
6 Auriya 4,142 
7 Ayodhya 5,373 

61 
 
8 Azamgarh 6,626 
9 Badaun 2,916 
10 Bagpat 9,217 
11 Baharich 508 
12 Balia 14,306 
13 Balrampur 166 
14 Banda 3,120 
15 Barabanki 1,624 
16 Bareilly 9,155 
17 Basti 2,396 
18 Bhadohi 378 
19 Bijnor 2,267 
20 Bulandshahar 27,471 
21 Chandauli 2,705 
22 Chitrakoot 822 
23 Deoria 6,674 
24 Etah 10,991 
25 Etawah 7,344 
26 Fatehgarh 7,989 
27 Fatehpur 6,695 
28 Firozabad 4,996 
29 GB Nagar 9,128 
30 Ghaziabad 6,701 
31 Ghazipur 29,417 
32 Gonda 2,769 
33 Gorakhpur 6,804 
34 Hamirpur 1,762 
35 Hapur 4,496 
36 Hardoi 4,643 
37 Hathras 6,849 
38 Jalaun 3,687 
39 Jaunpur 3,252 
40 Jhansi 2,101 
41 Kannauj 3,664 
42 Kanpur Dehat 5,576 
43 Kanpur Nagar 14,246 
44 Kasganj 806 
45 Kaushambi 1,437 
46 Kheri 2,170 
47 Kushinagar 9,349 
48 Lalitpur 153 
49 Lucknow 27,473 
50 Maharajganj 1,214 

62 
 
51 Mahoba 300 
52 Mainpuri 9,936 
53 Mathura 10,510 
54 Mau 5,085 
55 Meerut 14,306 
56 Mirzapur 1,760 
57 Moradabad 1,268 
58 Muzaffar Nagar 4,446 
59 Pilibhit 884 
60 Pratapgarh 6,514 
61 Prayagraj 8,995 
62 Raibareli 7,248 
63 Rampur 1,742 
64 Saharanpur 3,917 
65 Sambhal 931 
66 Santkabir Nagar 971 
67 Shahjahanpur 2,634 
68 Shamli 3,393 
69 Shravasti 139 
70 Siddharth Nagar 632 
71 Sitapur 1,199 
72 Sonbhadra 304 
73 Sultanpur 6,128 
74 Unnao 4,800 
75 Varanasi 7,574 
Total 421,145 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Uttar Pradesh 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Uttarakhand 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Almora 9,599 
2 Bageshwar 7,838 
3 Chamoli 11,059 
4 Champawat 3,682 
5 Dehradun 29,357 
6 Haridwar 5,426 
7 Lansdowne 15,064 
8 Pauri 13,534 
9 Nainital 6,949 
10 Pithoragarh 18,146 
11 Rudraprayag 3,605 
12 Tehri 5,139 
13 Udham Singh Nagar 8,814 

63 
 
14 Uttarkashi 1,149 
Total 139,361 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Uttarakhand 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - West Bengal 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 North 24 Parganas 18,449 
2 South 24 Parganas 5,507 
3 Jalpaiguri 2,632 
4 Kolkata 7,073 
5 Burdwan 9,845 
6 Howrah 6,469 
7 Malda 2,256 
8 Murshidabad 7,227 
9 Coochbehar 1,814 
10 Alipurduar 1,141 
11 Darjeeling 16,165 
12 Nadia 10,139 
13 Dakshin Dinajpur 2,409 
14 Midnapore 13,067 
Total 104,193 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board West Bengal 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Andaman & Nicobar (UT) 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 RSB Port Blair 1,081 
   
Total 1,081 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Andaman & Nicobar (UT) 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Chandigarh (UT) 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 ZSWO, Chandigarh (UT) 9,160 
   
Total 9,160 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Chandigarh (UT) 
 

64 
 
 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Delhi 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 RSB Delhi 63,345 
   
Total 63,345 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Delhi 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 - Jammu & Kashmir (UT) 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Jammu# 12,070 
2 Jammu$ 7,685 
3 Jammu^ 8,669 
4 Samba 11,498 
5 Udhampur 4,103 
6 Reasi 532 
7 Kathua 1,171 
8 Poonch 8,442 
9 Rajouri 3,127 
10 Doda 8,744 
11 Kishtwar 1,869 
12 Ramban 924 
13 Srinagar 199 
14 Budgam 265 
15 Ganderbal 118 
16 Anantnag 1,423 
17 Pulwama 345 
18 Kulgam 417 
19 Shopian 43 
20 Baramulla 1,492 
21 Bandipora 1,242 
22 Kupwara 2,246 
Total 76,624 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Jammu & Kashmir 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 -  Leh & Ladakh (UT) 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Leh 4,921 
2 Kargil 1,433 
Total 6,354 

65 
 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board  Leh & Ladakh (UT) 
Census Data of ESMs as on 31.12.2023 -  Pondicherry (UT) 
S. No. Districts Total 
1 Puducherry 1,794 
2 Karaikal 326 
3 Mahe 310 
4 Yanam 39 
Total 2,469 
Source: Rajya Sainik Board Pondicherry (UT) 
 

66 
 
Appendix ‘C’ 
URCs & EXTENSION COUNTERS 
Ser. 
No. 
State/UT URCs Extn Counters Total 
1. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 21 1 22 
2. Andhra Pradesh 50 8 58 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 108 4 112 
4. Assam 181 6 187 
5. Bihar 23 4 27 
6. Chandigarh 15 1 16 
7. Chattisgarh 5 3 8 
8. Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Daman & Diu 
1 0 1 
9. Delhi 120 21 141 
10. Goa 10 4 14 
11. Gujarat 79 6 85 
12. Haryana 142 13 155 
13. Himachal Pradesh 79 38 117 
14. Jammu & Kashmir 438 18 456 
15. Jharkhand 33 3 36 
16. Karnataka 66 25 91 
17. Kerala 44 3 47 
18. Ladakh 178 6 184 
19. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 
20. Madhya Pradesh 97 1 98 
21. Maharashtra 199 31 230 
22. Manipur 38 5 43 
23. Meghalaya 21 0 21 
24. Mizoram 9 2 11 
25. Nagaland 46 3 49 
26. Odisha 23 4 27 
27. Puducherry 3 0 3 
28. Punjab 352 21 373 
29. Rajasthan 285 17 302 
30. Sikkim 42 0 42 
31. Tamil Nadu 70 28 98 
32. Telengana 77 13 90 
33. Tripura 10 1 11 
34. Uttar Pradesh 278 24 302 
35. Uttarakhand 147 21 168 
36. West Bengal 196 11 207 
  Total 3486 346 3832 
 
 

67 
 
 
Appendix ‘D’ 
STATE/UT WISE DETAILS OF ECHS POLYCLINICS 
Ser. 
No. 
State/ UTs Polyclinics 
 
1. Andaman & Nicobar (UT) 1 
2. Andhra Pradesh 3 
3. Arunachal Pradesh 2 
4. Assam 12 
5. Bihar 18 
6. Chandigarh (UT) 1 
7. Chhatishgarh 4 
8. Dadar & Nagar Haveli (UT) - 
9. Daman & Diu (UT) - 
10. Goa 2 
11. Gujarat 6 
12. Haryana 33 
13. Himachal Pradesh 19 
14. Jammu & Kashmir (UT) 14 
15. Jharkhand 7 
16. Karnataka 17 
17. Kerala 23 
18. Lakshadweep (UT) - 
19. Madhya Pradesh 13 
20. Maharashtra 29 
21. Manipur 2 
22. Meghalaya 1 
23. Mizoram 2 
24. Nagaland 1 
25. New Delhi (UT) 6 
26. Odisha 9 
27. Punjab 37 
28. Puducherry (UT) 1 
29. Rajasthan 32 
30. Sikkim 1 
31. Tamil Nadu 27 
32. Telangana 15 
33. Tripura 1 
34. Uttar Pradesh 49 
35. Uttarakhand 21 
36. West Bengal 16 
Total 427 
 
  

68 
 
 
Appendix ‘E’ 
DETAILS OF SAINIK REST HOUSES IN STATES/UTs 
Ser. 
No. 
State No. of 
SRH 
Details 
1. Andhra Pradesh 8 Anantapuramu,  Kadapa, Guntur, Kakinada, 
Kurnool, SPS Nellore, Visakhapatnam, 
Vizianagaram 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 Nil 
3. Assam 7 Guwahati, Cachar,  Jorhat , Dima Hasao Haflong, 
Karbi Anglong,Dhubri and Mangal Dai 
4. Bihar 8 Bhagalpur, Bhojpur, Chapra, Munger, Gaya, 
Katihar, Motihari and Patna (Danapur Cantt) 
5. Chhattisgarh 6 Raipur, Bilaspur, Durg,  Rajnandgaon, Jashpur and 
Jadalpur 
6. Delhi 1 Naraina Delhi 
7. Goa 0 Nil 
8. Gujarat 4 Ahmedabad, Rajkot,  Vadodara and Surat 
9. Haryana 29 Ambala Cantt, Ambala City, Ateli, Bahadurgarh, 
Bhiwani, Charkhi Dadri, Faridabad, Gohana, 
Gurgaon, Hisar, Jhajjar, Jind, Kaithal, Kanina, 
Karnal (Old), Karnal (New), Kosli, Kurukshetra, 
Loharu, Mohindergarh, Narnaul, Panipat, 
Punchkula, Rewari, Rohtak (Old),  Rohtak (New),  
Sirsa, Sonepat and Yamuna Nagar 
10. Himachal Pradesh 24 Bilaspur, Ghumarwin, Chamba, Chowari, Hamirpur, 
Sujanpur Tihra, Dharamshala, Dehra, Jawalamukhi, 
Kangra, Nurpur, Palampur, Kullu, Keylong, Mandi, 
Sarkaghat, Nahan, Poanta, Shimla, Rekong Peo, 
Matiana, Solan, Parwanoo and Una. 

69 
 
11. Jammu & Kashmir 14 Jammu, Samba, Kathua, Basohli, Udhampur, Ram 
Nagar, Reasi, Doda, Kishtwar, Poonch, Kupwara, 
Srinagar,  Rajouri & Akhnoor 
12. Jharkhand 5 Chaibasa, Dumka , Hazribag, Gumla and Ranchi 
13. Karnataka 10 Bangalore, Belgavi, Athali (Belgaum), Dharwad, 
Bijapur, Karwar, Madikeri, Mysore, Shimoga, and 
Mangalore 
14. Kerala 7 Alappuzha,  Ermakulam, Kozhikode, Thalappady, 
Malappuram, Toothole & Thiruvananthapuram 
 
Ser. 
No. 
State No. of 
SRH 
Details 
15. Madhya Pradesh 17 Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Sagar, Bhind, 
Morena, Chhindwara, Hoshangabad, Rewa, Satna, 
Ratlam, Khandwa, Ujjain, Betul, Sidhi & 
Narsinghpur 
16. Maharashtra 30 Sawantwadi, Mahad, Poladpur, Mangaon, 
Gondhalpada – Alibag, Ratnagiri, Burumtali, 
Naupada, Sinhgarh, Ajankitata, Sangli, Kolhapur, 
Solapur, Pandharpur, Nashik-02, Malegaon, 
Ahmednagar, Shrigonda, Dhule, Nagpur, 
Amaravati, Akola, Buldhana, Yavatmal, 
Osmanabad, Aurangabad, Jalgaon, Nanded, and 
Jalna 
17. Manipur 0 NIL 
18. Meghalaya 0 NIL 
19. Mizoram 2 Aizawl and Lunglei 
20. Nagaland 7 Dimapur, Mokokchung, Wokha, Zunheboto, Phek, 
Tuensang and Jaluki 
21. Orissa 3 Cuttack, Bhubneshwar  and Berhampur 
22. Punjab 16 Amritsar, Bathinda, Faridkot, Ferozepur, Fatehgarh 
Sahib, Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar, 
Kapurthala, Ludhiana, Patiala, Ropar, Sangrur, 

70 
 
Chandigarh, SAS Nagar and  Muktsar 
23. Rajasthan 32 Ajmer, Beawar, Alwar, Behror, Bansur, Patel Nagar, 
Barmer, Bharatpur, Bikaner, Churu, Chirawa, 
Deedawana, Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Pokaran, 
Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur, Shergarh, Kota, Jhalawar, 
Nagaur, Sojat Pali, Gadka Ki Chowki, Swai 
Madhopur, Sikar, Neem Ka Thana, Ganganagar, 
Udaipur, Bhim, Rajasamand, Hanumangarh, and 
Rajgarh 
24. Sikkim 6 Gangtok, Namchi, Jorethang, Gyalshing, Heegaon 
and Singtam 
25. Tamil Nadu 8 Chennai, Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Nagercoil,  
Thoothukudi,  Madurai, Erode & Thanjavur 
26. Telangana 1 Somajiguda 
27. Tripura 1 Agartala 
28. Uttarakhand 36 Almora, Chakhutiya, Bageshwar, Chamoli, 
Gopeshwar, Dehradun (02), Gauchar, Lansdowne, 
Kotdwara, Haldwani, Pauri Garhwal, Tanakpur, 
Thalisain, Dhumakot, Srinagar, Pithoragarh, 
Munsiari, Didihat, Berinag, Champavat, Devsthal, 
Tehri Garhwal, Uttarkashi, Ramnagar, Rishikesh, 
Narendra Nagar, Rudrapur, Khatima, Haridwar, 
Roorkee, Rudraprayag, Ukhimath, Jamanikhal, 
Ghansali and Jakholi 

71 
 
29. Uttar Pradesh 56 Agra, Aligarh, Chitrakoot, Ajamgarh, Bahraich, 
Balia, Banda, Barabanki, Bareilly, Kasganj, Basti, 
Bulndshahar, Devaria, Etawah, Ayodhya, 
Fatehgarh, Fatehpur, Basti, Gonda, Gorakhpur, 
Hamirpur, Hardoi, Jalaun, Jaunpur, Jhansi, Kanpur 
Nagar, Khiri, Kesarbagh, Mainpuri, Mathura, 
Kushinagar, Mirzapur, Muzaffarnagar, Pratapgarh, 
Raibareilly, Rampur, Saharanpur, Shajahanpur, 
Sitapur, Sultanpur, Unnao, Varansi, Gaziabad, 
Etah, Maharajganj, Moradabad, Bijnor, Bhadohi, 
Kanpur Dehat, Mahoba, Badaun, Prayagraj, 
Meerut, Mau, Kaushambi, and Balrampur. 
30. West Bengal 8 Kolkata, Burdwan, Midnapur, Dinajpur, Darjeeling, 
Kalimpong, Karseong and Bagdogra 
31. A & N Islands 0 Nil 
32. Chandigarh 1 Sector 21 D,Chandigarh 
33. Puducherry (UT) 1 Mudayanpet 
34. Ladakh(UT) 1 Leh 
Total 349  
 
 
Budgetary Provisions 
Recommendation No.26 
 The committee observe that Defence pensions, under the Ministry of Defence 
provides for Pensionary charges in respect of retired Defence personnel (including 
Defence civilian employees) of the three services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and 
employees of erstwhile Indian ordnance Factories etc. It covers payment of Service 
pension, gratuity, family pension, disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave 
encashment amongst others. The committee are informed that the total number of 
Defence pensioners in the country is 32,94,181 including 6,14,536 Defence civilian 
Pensioners and 26,79,645 Armed Forces pensioners. The committee find that out of the 
total budget of  ₹ 6,21,940.85 crore allocated to the Ministry of Defence in Budget 
Estimates (BE) 2024-25, an amount of ₹ 1,41,205 crore i.e. 22.70 percent of the entire 
Defence Budget has been earmarked for Defence Pensions. The Committee have been 
given to understand that the additional requirement of ₹ 11,000 crore for BE 2024-25 over 

72 
 
BE 2023-24 is mainly due to normal growth in pensions and impact of dearness relief. The 
committee understand that Defence pension provides much needed financial security to 
those who serve our country and therefore, recommend that, after taking into account 
factors such as increase in pension amount, enhanced Dearness Relief, additional funds, 
if sought at the Revised Estimates stage, may be favourably considered. 
Reply of the Government 
             The Budget Estimates for the Financial year 2024-25 has been approved as  ₹ 
1,49,205.00 crore (Gross) and ₹ 1,41,205.00 crores (Net). However, after taking into 
account  the relevant aspects/factors  viz (a) Last years actual expenditure  (b)  The 
financial impact due to induction of fresh retirees of the current year (c) Financial impact 
of One Rank One Pension-III (OROP-III) (d) total assessed financial impact due to 
sanction of Dearness Relief  (e) Restoration of commuted portion of pension after 15 
years (f) Wastage on account of death/disqualification of pensioners,   the  Revised 
Estimates for 2024-25 has been projected as ₹ 157681.00 crs. to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration and the same has  been accepted by Ministry of Finance and  the ceiling for  
RE 2024-25 in respect of the Defence Pensions Grant  has been intimated as Rs. 
1,57,681.00 crs.  
 Further it is also important to mention here that pension being an obligatory 
expenditure, any additional amount sought under this grant in any particular Financial 
Year is forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration.   
 
SPARSH-System For Pension Administration (RAKSHA) 
Recommendation No. 27 
 The Committee learn that System for Pension Administration (Raksha) (SPARSH) 
is being implemented for meeting the pension sanction and disbursement requirements 
for Armed Forces viz. Army, Navy, Air Force and Defence Civilians. This Pensioner Portal 
provides a single window for the pensioners to avail the pension related services such as 
facility to view the forms etc. The Committee appreciate that a total of 28.24 lakh Defence 
Pensioners have been migrated to SPARSH. The Committee, in this regard, recommend 
that migration process of the remaining Defence pensioners be expedited and the 
Committee be apprised accordingly. 
 
 
 

73 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In light of the significant inconsistencies in the Data provided by the erstwhile 
Pension Disbursing Agencies/Banks and its cascading impact on SPARSH system due to 
increasing grievances, a calibrated approach will be undertaken to migrate balance of 
2,54,692 cases to ensure flawless migration of balance legacy pensioners. Proactive 
measures are being undertaken to facilitate accurate data updation and conversion, 
thereby ensuring a seamless migration process and minimizing errors in pensioners 
records post-migration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

75 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

76 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
05 August, 2025 Chairperson 
14 Sravana 1947 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Defence 
  

77 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1600 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 1, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
        
Lok Sabha 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
5 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
6 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
7 Ms. S. Jothimani 
8 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
9 Shri Shashank Mani 
10 Shri Lumba Ram 
11 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
12 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
13 Shri Virendra Singh 
14 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
15 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
16 Shri Naresh Bansal 
17 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
18 Shri Muzibulla Khan 
19 Shri Praful Patel 
20 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
21 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

78 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar    - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the 
draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2024-25 and briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the 
subject ‘Consolidation of Defence lands by Defence Estates Organization and working 
of Cantonment Boards’.  
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex Servicemen and Defence 
Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’;  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff 
and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 

79 
 
contained in the Fourth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 20 and 21). 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him.  
 
5. ***********         ***********        **********      ******   ******** 
 
 
 
 
 
               The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****Does not pertain to the Reports 

80 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT (18TH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2024-25 ON ‘GENERAL 
DEFENCE BUDGET, BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION, INDIAN COAST GUARD, 
DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANISATION, DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR 
UNDERTAKINGS, WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN AND DEFENCE PENSION 
(DEMAND NOS. 19 AND 22)’. 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             27 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
 Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16, 17,18,19, 
20,21,22,23,24,25,26 and 27.         
   Total  : 27 
 
Percentage:100% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 Nil  
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 