i 
 
15 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on `General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare 
of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 
19, 20 and 21)’] 
 
 
  
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
  


ii 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on `General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare 
of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 
19, 20 and 21)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.12.2025 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025 / Agrahayana 1947 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)……………………....…. iv 
 
 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…......... vi 
  
 
CHAPTER  I Report…………………………………………………………….. 1 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted  7 
 by the Government 
   
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 23 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 24 
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/recommendations in respect of which final  25 
  replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Defence  27 
 (2025-26) held on 4th December, 2025 
30 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on `General Defence 
Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence 
Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’. 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
SHRI RADHA MOHAN SINGH  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Dr. Rajeev Bharadwaj  
3 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
4 Shri  Lumbaram Choudhary 
5 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
6 Captain Viriato Fernandes 
7 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
9 Shri S. Jagathratchakan 
10 Ms. S. Jothimani 
11 Shri Ravindra Shukla Alias Ravi Kishan 
12 Shri Shashank Mani 
13 Smt. Mahua Moitra  
14 Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
15 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16 Shri Jagadish Shettar 
17 Shri Virendra Singh 
18 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
19 Dr. Thirumaavalavan Tholkappiyan 
20 Com. Selvaraj V. 
21 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
22 Shri Naresh Bansal  
23 Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
24 Shri  Shaktisinh Gohil 
25 Shri   Prem Chand Gupta 
26 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
27 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
28 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
29 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
30 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
31 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Juby Amar   - Director  
3.  Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Preeti Negi   - Committee Officer  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2025-26), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates 
Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 21)’ 
2.  The Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2025. The Report contained 18 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in June,  2025. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 4th December, 2025. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 December, 2025 Chairperson 
13 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 

vii 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report of Standing Committee on Defence (18th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-26 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 
20 and 21)’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 March, 
2025.  
  
2.        The Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 18 
Observations/ Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
  
Para No.             Subject 
General Defence Budget 
1 Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
2 Defence Budget 2025-26 
3 Utilization of Defence Budget 2024-25 
4 Modernisation budget for the Defence Services 
5 Modern warfare 
Border Roads Organisation 
6 Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
7 Special Recruitment Drive for BRO 
Indian Coast Guard 
8 Budget 2025-26 
Defence Estates Organisation 
9 Budgetary provision 
10 Excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with 
adjoining municipalities 
11 Civil Population in Cantonment Areas 
12 Civic and welfare facilities in the Cantonment Areas 
13 ‘Bhoomi Raksha’ Module 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
14 Budget 
15 Welfare of ESM 
Defence Research and Development Organisation 
16 Budget 2025-26 
17 Achievements of DRDO 
18 Collaboration with Industry and Academia 

2 
 
 3.        The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect 
of all Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) in June, 2025. Replies to these Observations/Recommendations have been 
examined and categorized as follows:- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18 
  
 (Total - 17) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government 
(Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   Nil 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration (Chapter IV): 
  
Para No. Nil 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iv)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
                        Para No.  10 
 (Total - 1) 
   
4.        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
of the Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation 
of this Report.   
  
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Seventh Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
  

3 
 
GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET 
 
A.        Utilization of Defence Budget 2024-25 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
  
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Committee, on detailed analysis of the budgetary documents furnished 
by the Ministry of Defence, note that out of the amount of ₹ 6,41,060 crore 
allocated for total Defence Budget at Revised Estimates 2024-25 stage, the 
actual expenditure incurred upto December 2024 is ₹ 4,53,010.39 crore i.e. 
approximately 71 percent. The Committee, in this context, desire that concrete 
and concerted efforts be taken by the Ministry of Defence to achieve complete 
utilization of funds for FY 2024-25 to avoid surrendering of funds after the end 
of current Financial Year.” 
  
 7.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “This Ministry made all possible efforts like timely review of progress of 
expenditure, issuance of necessary instructions for compliance with financial 
propriety norms etc. to achieve complete utilization of the funds allocated in FY 
2024-25. Consequently, this Ministry was able to utilize more than 99% of MA 
2024-25 by 31st March, 2025 (as per Supplementary-I).” 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
8.        The Committee in their original Report had desired that concrete and 
concerted efforts be taken by the Ministry of Defence to achieve complete 
utilization of funds earmarked for FY 2024-25. The Committee are pleased to 
learn from the Ministry’s Action Taken Reply that more than 99% of Modified 
Appropriation (MA) 2024-25 by 31st March, 2025 was utilized by the Ministry. 
The Committee hope that this trend of maximum and efficient  utilization of 
allocated funds by the Ministry would continue unabated so that capital and 
revenue requirements of the Armed Forces are optimally fulfilled, which is vital 
for maintaining national security. 
  
  
 

4 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION 
  
B.        Budget 2025-26 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
  
9.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
  “The Committee find that for BE 2025-26, an amount of ₹ 26,816.82 crore has 
been allocated to Defence Research & Development (R&D), which is 5.45 
percent of the Defence Services Estimates for 2025-26 and 12.41 percent higher 
than the BE of 2024-25. Further, out of this amount of ₹ 26,816.82 crore allotted 
to Defence R&D, 55.65% has been allotted to Capital head and 44.35% to 
Revenue Head. Also, in Defence R&D Budget for 2025-26, provision of ₹ 7,025 
crore has been made for R&D projects and ₹ 1,756.25 crore for Industry, 
Startups and Academia. The Committee have been informed that a major 
amount of the budget allocated to R&D goes towards expenses towards 
Strategic schemes and Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) Projects/ 
Programmes, pay & allowances and other non-salary revenue expenditure. 
 
The Committee note that subsequent to the announcement in the Union 
Budget 2025 to promote deep tech innovation in India, Technology Development 
Fund (TDF) Policy in DRDO is being modified to support Deep Tech Technology 
Project. These projects are aimed to be undertaken for Defence applications and 
the DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) and as well as 
Research Boards who are prioritizing Deep Tech & Intelligence surveillance and 
Reconnaissance (DT & ISR). The Committee also note that with both these 
schemes, about ₹ 2,000 crore is being spent from the available R&D Budget of 
DRDO. Keeping in view the key role of DRDO in developing critical, advanced 
and futuristic technologies and systems for empowering the Nation and our 
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that requisite funds be provided to 
DRDO at all stages of budgetary exercise. The Committee also desire that 
details of budget classified for existing technologies and research and 
development in emerging technologies such as quantum computing, genome 
sequencing, space technology etc. be furnished to the Committee while 
submitting Action Taken Replies.” 
 
10.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
 
 “DRDO has Grant-in-Aid (GIA) schemes to promote research for self-reliance in 
next generation defence technologies and for achieving the S&T superiority by 
collaborative efforts with academia, R&D centers and Industries. The GIA 

5 
 
schemes include Directorate of Technology Development Fund (DTDF), 
Directorate of Extramural and Intellectual Property Rights (DER&IPR) and 
Directorate of Futuristic Technology Management (DFTM). 
 
2. All these directorates are prioritizing the projects in various critical 
technologies of Deep Tech & Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
(DT&ISR) areas like Directed Energy Weapons (Laser/HPM), Advance 
Materials, AI, Quantum Technologies, Hypersonic, Space, ISR, THz 
Devices/Application, Compound Semiconductor, Autonomous System, Drone 
Technology etc. 
 
3. Directorate of ER&IPR including four Research Boards has already spent 
₹ 1.28 crore and committed to spend approx. ₹ 20 crore during F.Y. 2025-26 in 
DT&ISR projects. Similarly, Directorate of Futuristic Technology and 
Management (DFTM) has already spent ₹ 44.23 crore and committed to spend 
approx ₹ 45 crore through 15 DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence 
(DIA-CoEs) in DT&ISR projects during F.Y. 2025-26. 
 
4. Under Technology Development Fund (TDF), an additional grant / corpus 
of ₹ 500 crore has been approved by Hon’ble RM to cater for DEEP-tech and 
cutting edge projects as separate verticals under TDF scheme. The process of 
the selection and identification of Deep Tech projects has been initiated. 
Currently, 09 projects are launched under this initiative. The quantum of funding 
under the TDF scheme has been increased from ₹ 10 crore to ₹ 50 crore per 
project by Hon’ble RM. The TDF SOP has been amended accordingly to simplify 
the existing process to make it more effective and efficient to deal with high risk 
projects. Moreover, all funding will be sought after current corpus finishes. 
During F.Y. 2025-26, Directorate of TDF is committed to spend approx. ₹ 60 
crore in Deep Tech & ISR projects awarded to various Indian Industries for 
development of various Deep Tech Technologies.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
  
11.      The Committee keeping in view the key role of Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO) in developing critical, advanced and futuristic 
technologies and systems for empowering the Nation and our Armed Forces, 
had recommended that requisite funds be provided to DRDO at all stages of 
budgetary exercise. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted that 
DRDO has Grant-in-Aid (GIA) schemes to promote research for self-reliance in 
next generation defence technologies and for achieving Science & Technology 

6 
 
superiority by collaborative efforts with academia, R&D centers and Industries. 
The GIA schemes include Directorate of Technology Development Fund (DTDF), 
Directorate of Extramural and Intellectual Property Rights (DER&IPR) and 
Directorate of Futuristic Technology Management (DFTM). Directorate of ER&IPR 
including four Research Boards has already spent ₹ 1.28 crore and committed to 
spend approximately ₹ 20 crore during F.Y. 2025-26 in DEEP Tech & Intelligence 
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (DT&ISR) projects. Similarly, Directorate of 
Futuristic Technology and Management (DFTM) has already spent ₹ 44.23 crore 
and committed to spend approximately ₹ 45 crore through 15 DRDO-Industry-
Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) in DT&ISR projects during F.Y. 2025-
26. It has been further informed by the Ministry that under Technology 
Development Fund (TDF), an additional grant / corpus of ₹ 500 crore has been 
approved to cater for DEEP-tech and cutting edge projects as separate verticals 
under TDF scheme. During F.Y. 2025-26, Directorate of TDF is committed to 
spend approximately ₹ 60 crore in DEEP Tech & ISR projects awarded to various 
Indian Industries for development of various DEEP Tech Technologies. The 
Committee infer from the Ministry’s reply that efforts are being made by DRDO to 
fulfill the commitment of utilisation of funds for research in the field of futuristic 
defence technologies. In this regard, the Committee desire that achievements as 
well as challenges being encountered by DRDO due to various factors in 
development of such next-generation technologies and systems and the 
measures being taken by the Ministry to overcome them be furnished to the 
Committee at the stage of submitting Action Taken Statement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2025-26: A bird’s eye view: 
  
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note that the Defence Budget is categorised/grouped under four 
Demands for Grants viz. Demand No. 19 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Demand No. 20 – 
Defence Services (Revenue), Demand No. 21 – Capital Outlay on Defence Services 
and Demand No. 22 – Defence Pension. They also note that the requirements for the 
Civil expenditure of the Ministry of Defence Secretariat, Defence Accounts Department, 
Canteen Stores Department, Defence Estates Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, 
Jammu & Kashmir Light Infantry (J&K LI), Border Roads Organization and Armed 
Forces Tribunal are provided for in Demand No. 19- MoD(Civil). The Defence Services 
Estimates (DSE) reflects the detailed estimates for the Defence Services and 
Organizations/Services covered under Grant Number 20 and 21 of the Ministry of 
Defence.  
The Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army (including 
National Cadet Corps, Director General Quality Assurance and Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air Force, Defence Research 
and Development Organization (DRDO) and Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination & 
Services). Grant Number 20 caters to revenue expenditure which includes expenditure 
on pay & allowances, transportation, revenue stores (like ordnance stores, ration, petrol, 
oil and lubricants, spares, maintenance of various platforms / equipment etc), revenue 
works (which include maintenance of buildings, water and electricity charges, rents, 
rates and taxes, etc.) and other miscellaneous expenditure. Grant Number 21 caters to 
Capital expenditure which includes expenditure on land, construction works, plant and 
machinery, equipment, heavy and medium vehicles, Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aero 
engines, Dockyards, etc. 
 Demand No. 22 provides for Pensionary charges (Service pension, gratuity, 
family pension, disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc.) 
in respect of the retired Defence personnel (including Defence civilian employees) of the 
three Services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and employees of erstwhile Ordnance 
Factories. 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
This is factual information, hence no comments are offered. 
Defence Budget 2025-26 
Recommendation No. 2 
During examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 2025-
26, the Committee note that out of the total allocated budget for the Ministry of Defence 
for Financial Year 2025-26 i.e. ₹ 6,81,210.27 crore, largest share of 72.19 percent, i.e. ₹ 
4,91,732.30 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (Grant Number 
20 and 21). An amount of ₹ 3,11,732.30 crore has been allocated to Defence Services 
Revenue (Grant Number 20). The Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Grant number 
21) has been allocated an amount of ₹ 1,80,000 crore. Defence Pension (Grant Number 
22) has secured 23.60 percent of the total Defence budget i.e. ₹ 1,60,795 crore. 4.21 
percent (₹ 28,682.97 crore) of the total Defence budget has been allocated to the 
Ministry of Defence (Civil) (Grant Number 19).  
The Committee learn that the total Defence Budget is approximately 13.45 
percent of total Central Government Expenditure for the year 2025-26. Further, total 
outlay for the Defence budget in Budget Estimates (BE) 2025-26 has shown an 
increase of ₹ 59,269.42 crore i.e. 9.53 percent in comparison to Budget Estimates in 
2024-25 and an increase of ₹ 40,150.27 crore i.e. 6.26 percent in comparison to 
Revised Estimates in 2024-25. The Committee also note the Ministry’s submission that 
Defence Budget has increased at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 7.94% 
from FY 2020-21 to FY 2025- 26 which is greater than the inflation rate in each year. 
Also, growth of Defence Budget in 2025-26 adjusting inflation rate (Consumer Price 
Index) of 4.90 percent tantamount to 6.16 percent, which shows a marked improvement 
when compared to this growth rate in fiscal year 2024-25. The Committee, taking into 
account competent growth of Defence Budget in the recent years, recommend that, if 
needed, the Ministry of Defence may be allocated additional funds at Revised Estimates 
stage so that combat preparedness of our Forces constantly remain at an optimum 
level. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Defence takes the recommendation of the Committee into 
consideration and assures the Committee that, if need be, this Ministry will seek 
additional funds at Supplementary, RE or MA stage to maintain an optimum level of 
combat preparedness. 
  

9 
 
Utilization of Defence Budget 2024-25 
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee, on detailed analysis of the budgetary documents furnished by 
the Ministry of Defence, note that out of the amount of ₹ 6,41,060 crore allocated for 
total Defence Budget at Revised Estimates 2024-25 stage, the actual expenditure 
incurred upto December 2024 is ₹ 4,53,010.39 crore i.e. approximately 71 percent. The 
Committee, in this context, desire that concrete and concerted efforts be taken by the 
Ministry of Defence to achieve complete utilization of funds for FY 2024-25 to avoid 
surrendering of funds after the end of current Financial Year.  
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry made all possible efforts like timely review of progress of 
expenditure, issuance of necessary instructions for compliance with financial propriety 
norms etc. to achieve complete utilization of the funds allocated in FY 2024-25. 
Consequently, this Ministry was able to utilize more than 99% of MA 2024-25 by              
31st March, 2025 (as per Supplementary-I). 
Modernisation budget for the Defence Services 
Recommendation No. 4 
On scrutiny of the documents provided by the Ministry of Defence in connection 
with examination of Demands for Grants for the year 2025-26, the Committee  find that 
in comparison to the Budget Estimates 2024-25 and Revised Estimates 2024-25, there 
has been an increase of 4 percent and 13.44 percent, respectively, in Capital budget 
allocation for the three Services in Budget Estimates 2025-26. With regard to Revenue 
expenditure under Defence Services Estimates for the three Services, there has been 
an increase of 10.19 percent and 4.77 percent, respectively, when compared to that of 
BE and RE 2024-25. The Committee note from the submission of the Defence 
Secretary during deliberation on DFG 2025-26 that there is adequate money available 
for the Capital budget for the Forces. However, the limiting factors are the ability to sign 
contracts quickly and thereafter ensuring timely delivery of supplies. Certain geopolitical 
factors have also contributed to the challenge of timely procurement of 
equipment/weapon systems for the Forces. The Committee  also learn that 75 percent 
of the modernisation budget has been earmarked for procurement from indigenous 
sources, and as such foreign exchange risk does not play a major part in allocation of 
capital acquisition budget for the Forces. In this regard, the Committee desire the 
measures instituted/being contemplated by the Ministry to overcome the challenges of 

10 
 
timely award and fulfilment of contracts for procurement of equipment/weapon 
systems/platforms for the Forces ensuring complete utilization of modernisation budget 
be intimated to them at the time of furnishing Action Taken Replies. The Committee also 
recommend that budget as per the projections made by the Forces may be provided at 
RE stage of the Financial Year 2025-26 based on their functional and other 
requirements so that the operational preparedness of the Forces is not hampered. 
Reply of the Government 
   
I. All endeavours are being made at the Ministry/SHQ level to process the 
procurement cases expeditiously. Implementation of projects is being/will be 
monitored throughout the project management cycle to avoid undue delays 
of their execution and completion. 
II. In order to reduce the timelines and refine procedures required at various 
stages to make the acquisitions cycle more efficient, ‘Guidelines for 
Compressing Timelines of Defence Procurement Procedure at all stages of 
procurement have been promulgated with the approval of Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC).  
III. With a view to reduce foreign dependency and make India self-reliant in the 
Defence Sector, Ministry of Defence has aligned its acquisition process with 
Atmanirbhar Bharat Vision and it is focused towards enhancing self reliance 
in defence production and the Indigenisation of spares.  
IV. The Defence Acquisition Procedure has been suitably revised from time to 
time to make the acquisition process inclusive, simple and faster.  
V. In addition to the above mentioned initiatives to overcome the challenge of 
timely award of the contracts, it is further stated that if required, additional 
funds may be sought at RE 2025-26 stage based on the projections made 
by the Services and trend of expenditure among others so that operational 
preparedness of the Armed Forces is not hampered.  
Modern warfare 
Recommendation No.5 
 The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the budget to be spent on 
modernization cannot be predicted to a large extent, and accordingly they feel that it is 
crucial to have intensive study and knowledge of emerging trends in technology that will 
have an impact on war and the art of warfare. Three such emerging sectors, as 

11 
 
informed by the Ministry, are robotics automation, velocity (which uses hypersonic 
drones, etc.) and intelligence warfare (includes artificial intelligence, data analytics and 
machine learning). The Committee also learn from the Ministry’s submission that a 
Future Warfare Fund has also been set up within the Armed Forces. A Future Analysis 
Group, for studying future technologies and their impact, is also proposed to be set up. 
The Committee appreciate the proactive efforts of the Ministry in analysing, recognizing 
and adopting emerging technologies of warfare and recommend that adequate 
budgetary provisions for Research and Development in this direction be made available 
to the Armed Forces. 
Reply of the Government 
Details of allocations in respect of the Department of Defence, R&D for last five years 
are as under: 
                        (Rs. in Crores) 
Year Budget Estimate 
2021-22 20,457.44 
2022-23 21,330.20 
2023-24 23,263.89 
2024-25 23,855.61 
2025-26 26,816.82 
 
It may be highlighted that DRDO has been allocated an amount of Rs. 26,816.82 Crore 
in BE 2025-26 which is an increase of Rs. 2,961.21 Crore over BE 2024-25 allocations. 
2. Further, the government has established Technology Development Fund (TDF) 
Scheme under Ministry of Defence and executed by DRDO to bring together public and 
private sector industries specially MSMEs and startups for development of emerging 
technologies. An additional grant/corpus of Rs 500 Crore has been approved by Hon’ble 
RM to cater for Deep-tech and cutting edge projects as separate verticals under TDF 
scheme. The quantum of funding under the TDF scheme has been increased from Rs 
10 Crore to Rs 50 Crore per project with the approval of Hon’ble RM. The TDF SOP has 
been amended accordingly to simplify the existing process to make it more effective and 
efficient to deal with high risk projects. A total 12 projects of an amount approx. Rs 

12 
 
23.61 Crore have been sanctioned under the TDF scheme in the field of emerging 
technologies such as quantum computing, AI and robotics in the last three years.  
3. DRDO has established 15 DRDO Industry Academia Centre of Excellence (DIA – 
CoEs) at IITs, IISc and Central and State Universities across the country to encourage 
directed research in the 82 identified research verticals and thrust areas as per the 
futuristic requirement for defence and security of Nation. Grants-in-Aid Projects are 
sanctioned after the recommendations of DRDO stake holding labs and research 
targeted through DIA-CoEs is being taken up for futuristic requirement of DRDO labs to 
develop weapon system. 
4. Since, these are the academia driven projects thus may not feed to the current 
warfare technologies but it is planned that their outcomes will be utilized in the 
upcoming research/project of DRDO. 285 projects of fund Rs. 1,037.48 Crore has been 
sanctioned by DRDO as Grant-in-Aid to institutes all over the country through DIA-
CoEs. 
5. DRDO, through DIA-CoEs has identified research verticals focusing on emerging 
sector like Advanced Material, Hypersonic, Drones/UAVs, Directed laser and AI. 
Following are the projects sanctioned in emerging sector: 
I. Advanced Material: 39 Nos. 
II. Hypersonic: 13 Nos. 
III. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: 3 Nos. 
IV. Drones: 7 Nos. 
V. Directed Laser: 5 Nos. 
VI. Artificial Intelligence (AI): 8 Nos.  
 
6. DRDO has also identified 8 deep technology areas like Artificial Intelligence, 
Cognitive technology, Quantum technology, Neuromorphic Computing, Military Cyber 
Technology, Advanced Materials and Compound Semiconductor. The research verticals 
of established DIA-CoEs have been mapped to these identified deep technology areas 
for taking up long term research programs. 
7. It is assured that adequate budgetary support will be provided in consultation 
with MoF at BE/RE or at supplementary stage to the Armed Forces and DRDO for 
Research & Development in the Defence Sector. 
 
 

13 
 
BORDER ROADS ORGANIZATION (BRO) 
Recommendation No. 06: 
The Committee note that for BE 2025-26, under MoD (Civil), the total allocation 
to BRO is ₹ 12,493 crore; allocation under Revenue head is ₹ 5,694 crore and Capital 
head is ₹ 7,514 crore. This allocation for BE 2025-26 to BRO is approximately 95 
percent of the projected amount i.e. Rs. 13,208 crore. Further, the expenditure incurred 
by BRO in FY 2024-25 (upto December 2024) is ₹ 9,151.59 crore out of Rs. 12,098.91 
crore allotted under RE 2024-25. The Committee, taking note of the submission of the 
representative of BRO regarding adequate allocation of funds and commensurate 
utilization by BRO, express satisfaction at the budgetary allocation to BRO for BE 2025-
26. 
Reply of the Government 
 The budget provision in respect of Border Roads Organisation for Revised 
Estimates 2024-25 was Rs. 5721.91 crore in Revenue Section and Rs. 6622.00 crore in 
Capital Section. The actual expenditure incurred by Border Roads Organisation in FY- 
2024-25 is Rs. 5982.18 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 6636.87 crore under 
Capital Section. Now, the budget provision for Budget Estimates 2025-26 is   Rs. 
5346.00 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 7262.00 crore under Capital Section. 
2.  The Committee is assured that the fulfilment of the mandate given to Border 
Roads Organisation is one of the priority areas of this Ministry and their critical 
requirements will not be compromised due to want of funds. Additional funds 
requirement of BRO, for the current Financial Year, will be considered on the basis of 
their absorption capacity and pace of expenditure and will be taken up with Ministry of 
Finance at Supplementary / RE stage. 
Special Recruitment Drive for BRO  
Recommendation No. 07: 
The Committee learn that Officers are selected in BRO through examination 
conducted by the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). However, as per the 
submission of the Director General Border Roads, due to inclement nature of working 
conditions in BRO, it is not a preferred organization for these Officers. The Committee 
also note that in order to address the issue of critical deficiency of Assistant Executive 
Engineers, a proposal to conduct Special recruitment drive has been initiated and 
concurrence of Department of Personnel and Training has been obtained. Further, they 
learn that requisition is being placed to UPSC to carry out the Special Recruitment 

14 
 
Drive. The Committee opine that optimum strength of manpower is crucial for a labour-
intensive organization like BRO which works amidst harsh climatic and geographical 
conditions. In this context, the Committee recommend that the process of this special 
recruitment drive for BRO may be expedited and its status may be furnished to the 
Committee at the time of submitting Action Taken Replies. 
Reply of the Government 
  Following steps/actions have been taken by MoD / BRO for early finalization of 
Special Recruitment Drive (SRD) : - 
 A proposal for SRD to fill up 42 posts of AEE (Civ) and 05 posts of AEE (E&M) of 
Border Roads Engineering Service (BRES) cadre through Direct Recruitment by 
UPSC was forwarded by Dte. General Border Roads (DGBR). 
 The proposal was concurred by DoP&T and subsequently submitted to UPSC 
(Through Single Window System) on 17.03.2025. 
 Co-ordination meetings with UPSC have been held to sensitize the importance of 
issue and to expedite the subject matter. 
 UPSC vide Note dated 21.05.2025 returned the subject proposal with some 
observations. 
 Clarification has been sought from Dte. GBR pursuant to which the proposal will 
be re-submitted to UPSC. 
 
INDIAN COAST GUARDBudget 2025-26 
Recommendation No. 08 
The Committee learn that the amount allocated under Capital and Revenue 
heads to Indian Coast Guard Organisation (ICG) in Budget Estimates (BE) 2025-26 is ₹ 
5,000 crore and ₹ 4676.70 crore, respectively. The Committee note that the Capital 
allocation to Coast Guard in BE 2025-26 has seen an increase of approximately 43 
percent compared to allocation in BE 2024-25. The reason for this significant increase 
in allocation for Capital expenditure, as adduced by the Ministry of Defence, is large-
scale acquisition plan for Coast Guard comprising 2 Pollution Control Vehicles, 8 Fast-
Patrol Vessels, 12 New Generation Offshore Patrol Vessels, 6 Air Cushion Vehicles, 22 
interceptor boats, helicopters, etc. in the immediate future. The Committee appreciate 
that significant financial provision, double the Capital allocation of BE 2019-20, has 
been made in this budget for capital budget for Coast Guard which will be a step further 
in the direction of strengthening our maritime and coastal security. The Committee 
recommend that the additional budget be optimally utilized for strengthening the coastal 
security preparedness of the Coast Guard. 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
 This is factual information and the Committee may be assured that all efforts will 
be made to obtain additional funds projected by Indian Coast Guard at Supplementary / 
RE stage under Revenue and Capital head. Further, the allocated funds will be 
optimally utilized towards operational activities. If required, the schemes will be 
reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any 
compromise to operational preparedness. 
DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANIZATION 
Budgetary provision 
Recommendation No. 09: 
The Committee learn that for Directorate General Defence Estates (DGDE), 
under Budget Estimates 2025-26, ₹ 654.45 crore and ₹ 32.34 crore have been allocated 
under Revenue and Capital Head, respectively. They also learn that the Ministry of 
Defence (MoD) provides financial assistance to Cantonment Boards in the form of 
ordinary Grant-in-Aid to balance their budget. The Committee find that for BE 2025-26, 
the total Grant-in-Aid to the Cantonments amounts to ₹ 451.82 crore compared to 
amount of Rs. 519.69 crore provided in BE 2024-25. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that if required, additional funds commensurate with pace of expenditure 
and prioritization of critical works should be allocated to the Cantonments at Revised 
Estimates stage. 
Reply of the Government 
 This is factual information and the Committee may be assured that the request of 
additional funds for Defence Estates Organization will be considered on the basis of 
their absorption capacity and pace of expenditure and will be forwarded / recommended 
to Ministry of Finance for consideration at RE 2025-26 / Supplementary stage. The 
Committee is assured that various welfare initiative taken by Cantonment Boards in 
their areas will not be hampered for want of funds. 
Civil Population in Cantonment Areas  
Recommendation No. 11 
During discussion on Demands for Grants 2025-26, the Committee raised certain 
issues being faced by the civilians residing in the Cantonment areas i.e. for instance 

16 
 
handing over of certain Defence land not being used by Army to civilian population for 
their welfare. In this regard, the Committee understand from the submission of the 
Ministry of Defence that certain vacant lands in the Cantonment areas cannot be parted 
away as they are reserved for future uses of Army and the Ministry is interested in 
giving the civilian areas which are fully occupied alongwith their services to the adjoining 
municipality. Hence, the Committee consider it imperative that the process of excision of 
civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining municipalities being 
currently undertaken by the Ministry of Defence reaches its final stage at the earliest 
with priority being accorded to safety and security considerations of the Local Military 
Authorities; nevertheless, amicably and in a timely fashion. The Committee in this 
regard also desire that Local Military authorities of the Cantonments work in tandem 
with the local civil representatives to offer relaxations for civil dispensation contingent 
upon safety and security considerations such as removing of movement restrictions on 
roads for general public placed due to COVID, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 As regards closure of roads, MoD had issued instructions on 04.09.2018 
outlining the procedure to be adopted for closure of roads in Cantonments under 
Section 258 of Cantonments Act, 2006. Further, a Committee has been constituted by 
MoD to look into the issue of closure of roads. The Committee has been tasked to 
assess the need for closure of roads based on threat perception and to make suitable 
recommendations to the Competent Authority. 
Civic and welfare facilities in the Cantonment Areas 
Recommendation No.12 
The Committee learn that main duties and discretionary functions of the 
Cantonment Boards include Sanitation, Water supply, Education, Health facilities, Birth 
and Death registration, regulation of building construction etc. The Committee, in this 
context, recommend that regular monitoring of quality of welfare and civic amenities 
being provided in the Cantonment areas in the country be taken up by the Ministry and 
shortcomings, if any, may urgently be addressed. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Cantonment Boards are committed to resolve the problems faced by the 
civilian population residing in the Cantonments. The Chief Executive Officer and staff of 
the Cantonment Boards are available to the general public for reporting grievances and 
their redressal. Further, for solving specific problems of civilian population related to 

17 
 
Sanitation, Water Supply, Education, Health facilities, Birth and Death registration and 
online approval of building plan, an online 24x7 platform, e-Chhawani Portal has been 
introduced. With regard to the review of the functioning of Cantonment Boards, it is 
stated that Annual Inspection of Cantonment Boards as per inspection calendar is 
regularly carried out by the Directorate of Defence Estates and necessary follow up 
action is taken. 
Bhoomi Raksha Module  
Recommendation No. 13: 
 The Committee learn that ‘Bhoomi Raksha’, an IT Module, has been launched on 
16.12.2022 wherein eviction proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 can be initiated and progressed online. This 
module has been introduced by the Ministry of Defence with a view to infuse efficiency 
and bring transparency in the process of removal of encroachments as well as conduct 
of eviction proceedings. The Committee desire that details of the eviction proceedings 
initiated and being monitored using ‘Bhoomi Raksha’ module after its introduction in 
2022 may be intimated to the Committee at the stage of furnishing Action Taken Replies 
by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
 A total of 9506 action items (9114 Notices and 392 Orders) under the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971, have been generated 
through the System and issued through the Raksha Bhoomi Module, as on 01.04.2025. 
WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN: Budget 
Recommendation No. 14: 
 The Committee learn that an amount of ₹ 54.80 crore and ₹ 8,317 crore has 
been allocated to Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) and Ex-servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), respectively, for Budget Estimates 2025-26. 
Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) Secretariat and Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare 
(DESW) have been allocated sum of ₹ 404.30 crore and ₹ 11.97 crore, respectively. 
The Committee, on analysing the data for budgetary allocation for 
Organisations/Divisions looking after welfare of Ex-Servicemen for 2023-24, 2024-25 
and 2025-26, note that the funds provided to DGR, DESW and KSB, remained static for 
two financial years in 2023-24 and 2024-25 and have now shown increasing trend in BE 
2025-26. In the Committee’s considered view, this increase in BE 2025-26 in 

18 
 
comparison with BE 2024-25 and 2023-24, will help DGR, DESW and KSB to counter 
vagaries of inflation and fulfil their mandated tasks of welfare of Ex-Servicemen. 
Reply of the Government 
  This is factual information, hence no comments are offered. 
Welfare of ESM 
Recommendation No. 15: 
 The Committee have been given to understand that no new demands of Ex-
servicemen are under consideration of the Ministry. However, the Ministry reviews its 
various welfare schemes to enhance the grant amount and also launch new initiatives 
based on the feedback and inputs from Ex-Servicemen and the environment. The 
Committee desire that a comprehensive study may be taken by the Department of Ex-
Servicemen Welfare in consultation with other stakeholders to increase avenues for 
welfare of children/wards/widows of Armed Forces Personnel such as exploring 
feasibility of increasing reservation for children/wards of Defence Personnel in 
Professional Colleges in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) through its Armed Forces Flag Day Fund regularly 
review various schemes and grant amount besides launching new initiatives for the 
welfare of Ex-Servicemen and their dependents. The point regarding undertaking a 
comprehensive study in consultation with the other stakeholders to increase avenues 
for welfare of children/ wards/ widows has been noted. 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION: Budget 2025-26 
Recommendation No. 16: 
 The Committee find that for BE 2025-26, an amount of ₹ 26,816.82 crore has 
been allocated to Defence Research & Development (R&D), which is 5.45 percent of 
the Defence Services Estimates for 2025-26 and 12.41 percent higher than the BE of 
2024-25. Further, out of this amount of ₹ 26,816.82 crore allotted to Defence R&D, 
55.65% has been allotted to Capital head and 44.35% to Revenue Head. Also, in 
Defence R&D Budget for 2025-26, provision of ₹ 7,025 crore has been made for R&D 
projects and ₹ 1,756.25 crore for Industry, Startups and Academia. The Committee 
have been informed that a major amount of the budget allocated to R&D goes towards 

19 
 
expenses towards Strategic schemes and Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) 
Projects/ Programmes, pay & allowances and other non-salary revenue expenditure. 
The Committee note that subsequent to the announcement in the Union Budget 
2025 to promote deep tech innovation in India, Technology Development Fund (TDF) 
Policy in DRDO is being modified to support Deep Tech Technology Project. These 
projects are aimed to be undertaken for Defence applications and the DRDO-Industry-
Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) and as well as Research Boards who are 
prioritizing Deep Tech & Intelligence surveillance and Reconnaissance (DT & ISR). The 
Committee also note that with both these schemes, about ₹ 2,000 crore is being spent 
from the available R&D Budget of DRDO. Keeping in view the key role of DRDO in 
developing critical, advanced and futuristic technologies and systems for empowering 
the Nation and our Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that requisite funds be 
provided to DRDO at all stages of budgetary exercise. The Committee also desire that 
details of budget classified for existing technologies and research and development in 
emerging technologies such as quantum computing, genome sequencing, space 
technology etc. be furnished to the Committee while submitting Action Taken Replies. 
Reply of the Government 
 DRDO has Grant-in-Aid (GIA) schemes to promote research for self-reliance in 
next generation defence technologies and for achieving the S&T superiority by 
collaborative efforts with academia, R&D centers and Industries. The GIA schemes 
include Directorate of Technology Development Fund (DTDF), Directorate of Extramural 
and Intellectual Property Rights (DER&IPR) and Directorate of Futuristic Technology 
Management (DFTM). 
2. All these directorates are prioritizing the projects in various critical technologies 
of Deep Tech & Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (DT&ISR) areas like 
Directed Energy Weapons (Laser/HPM), Advance Materials, AI, Quantum 
Technologies, Hypersonic, Space, ISR, THz Devices/Application, Compound 
Semiconductor, Autonomous System, Drone Technology etc. 
3. Directorate of ER&IPR including four Research Boards has already spent        
Rs. 1.28 crore and committed to spend approx. Rs. 20 crore during F.Y. 2025-26 in 
DT&ISR projects. Similarly, Directorate of Futuristic Technology and Management 
(DFTM) has already spent Rs. 44.23 crore and committed to spend approx.                 
Rs. 45 crore through 15 DRDO-Industry-Academia Centers of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) in 
DT&ISR projects during F.Y. 2025-26. 

20 
 
4. Under Technology Development Fund (TDF), an additional grant / corpus of Rs. 
500 crore has been approved by Hon’ble RM to cater for DEEP-tech and cutting edge 
projects as separate verticals under TDF scheme. The process of the selection and 
identification of Deep Tech projects has been initiated. Currently, 09 projects are 
launched under this initiative. The quantum of funding under the TDF scheme has been 
increased from Rs 10 crore to Rs 50 crore per project by Hon’ble RM. The TDF SOP 
has been amended accordingly to simplify the existing process to make it more effective 
and efficient to deal with high risk projects. Moreover all funding will be sought after 
current corpus finishes. During F.Y. 2025-26, Dte. of TDF is committed to spend approx. 
Rs. 60 crore in Deep Tech & ISR projects awarded to various Indian Industries for 
development of various Deep Tech Technologies. 
Achievements of DRDO 
Recommendation No. 17: 
 The Committee, with glee take note of the fact that in the past and current year, 
crucial milestones in developing next-generation hypersonic technologies and missiles 
have been achieved by DRDO. The Committee have also been apprised that DRDO 
has been able to save an amount of ₹ 2,64,156 crore because of its own indigenous 
research during the last five years. The Committee congratulate DRDO for its various 
feats and have every reason to believe that armed with adequate fiduciary support and 
skilled manpower, DRDO will continue its successful stride in the fields of various 
complex and critical technologies to strengthen indigenous Defence Research and 
Development capabilities of our country. 
Reply of the Government 
 Achievements of DRDO 
 First Long Range Hypersonic Anti-Ship missile has been successfully flight 
tested in Nov, 2024. 
 In March, 2024, DRDO has successfully tested its first Multiple Independently 
Targetable Re-entry Vehicle (MIRV) technology using Agni Ballistic missile. This 
technology enables a single missile to carry and deploy multiple warheads to 
different targets. 
 Very Short Range Air Defence System (VSHORADS) has been indigenously 
developed and successfully flight tested. This missile can neutralize low altitude 
aerial threats at short ranges including UAVs and Drones. 
 Man-Portable Anti-Tank Guided Missile (MP-ATGM) has successfully completed 
PSQR validation trials of Indian Army. 

21 
 
Collaboration with Industry and Academia 
Recommendation No. 18: 
 The Committee note that DRDO has various schemes for collaborating with 
academic institutes and providing skills in the youth in the field of Defence Research 
and Technology. Some of these schemes are as under:  
(i) Five Research Boards working on research areas in Aeronautics, 
Armaments, Life Sciences, Naval and Electronics & Communication System; 
(ii)  (ii) DRDO Industry Academia Centres of Excellence (DIA-CoEs) established 
by DRDO at premier and capable academic Institutes and Universities in the 
country to build Directed Research Eco-system through collaboration among 
DRDO labs, Academia and Startups/Industries; and 
(iii) Imparting skills to youth for preparing them for Defence Research and 
Industries through introduction of M.Tech in Defence Technologies in 40 
universities/academic institutions through All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) , introduction of elective subjects (Defence technology) in 
B.Tech curriculum through AICTE, extending opportunities to B.Tech and 
M.Tech students through 8,000 internships every year and PhD Program in 
Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT) for scholars to work on 
Defence Technology.  
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by DRDO for assisting the academic 
institutions in the field of Defence Research and Technology and desire that feasibility 
of designing courses in Defence Research, Technology and Production Industry for 
inclusion in curriculum of B.Tech as well as senior secondary classes in collaboration 
with various Education Boards in the country be explored so that the scientific 
aspiration, skills and aptitude required in this field is inculcated in the youth at an early 
level of education. 
Reply of the Government 
(i)  The five research boards are striving hard to promote the basic research in areas 
of Aeronautics, Armaments, Life Sciences, Naval and Electronics & Communication 
System. The existing Extramural Research (ER) scheme is now focusing the academia 
led basic research in the areas of electronics and computational systems including deep 
tech areas like – Artificial Intelligence (AI), Cognitive Technologies, Neuromorphic 

22 
 
Computing, Quantum Technologies, Advanced Materials, Compound Semiconductor 
and Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) etc. 
(ii) & (iii)  15 DIA-CoEs have been established at premier academic institutes like 
IISc Bangalore, IITs and Central/State Universities in the country which are steering 
translational research activities in nearly 82 identified research verticals. In the year 
2024, 82 Grants-in-Aid projects were sanctioned with a total cost of Rs. 301.88 crore. 
Till March, 2025, a total of 281 projects at total cost of Rs. 1029.89 crore were 
sanctioned under the Grants-in-Aid scheme by DRDO. 
 It is intimated that DRDO is in the process of introducing specialized training 
program in defence technologies at DIAT, Pune as deemed university under DRDO. 
 DRDO offers an internship program to students pursuing their graduation / post-
graduation in relevant disciplines of engineering and sciences. This initiative offers 
unique opportunity to aspiring professionals to work on high-impact defence projects 
alongside some of the country’s brightest minds. This practical experience strengthens 
the technical knowledge of students for future roles in advanced research & engineering 
within defence technology. 
 In order to attract / support young talent and innovation in Defence R&D, DRDO 
has launched JOIN DRDO campaign on its website highlighting the opportunities 
available in DRDO for young scientists. DRDO is also conducting outreach programmes 
to attract young talents by participating in job fairs, exhibition etc. in various states in 
collaboration with State Government authorities and encourage them to join DRDO. 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

24 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 

25 
 
 CHAPTER - V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
Excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining 
municipalities  
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee, during examination of Demands for Grants for 2024-25, were 
informed that in order to move away from the Cantonment concept and bring uniformity 
in municipal laws governing civil areas of Cantonments and adjoining State Municipal 
areas, it was decided to consider excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and 
merge them with adjoining municipalities. The Committee learn that subsequently 
Cantonment-wise Committees in respect of 36 Cantonments have been constituted by 
the Ministry of Defence to look into the details of proposed modalities in terms of 
transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, Cantonment Board employees, pensioners 
and other related issues. Also, notifications have been issued inviting 
objections/suggestions concerning de-notification or excision of civil areas as the case 
may be, in respect of 10 Cantonment Boards namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, 
Clement Town, Dehradun, Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjanpur. The views / 
comments from the State Governments are still awaited. The Committee understand 
that excision of civil areas of select Cantonments and their merger with adjoining 
municipalities is a complex process involving many stakeholders such as military 
authorities, employees of Cantonment Boards civilians, State Governments etc., an in 
this regard, recommend that priority may be accorded to accomplish this task at the 
earliest so that challenges faced by civilians in Cantonment Boards are resolved to a 
large extent. 
Reply of the Government 
 In light of in-principle decision taken to excise civil areas of Select Cantonments, 
broad modalities/ guiding principles for excision of Cantonments have been shared with 
the concerned State Governments for their views/comments. 
 
2. MoD has already constituted Cantonment-wise Committees consisting of all 
stakeholders in respect of 36 Cantonments to look into the details of proposed 
modalities in terms of transfer/retention of assets and liabilities, Cantonment Board 
employees, pensioners and other issues for excision of civil areas of Cantonments and 
their merger with adjoining State Municipalities. After detailed deliberations, 
comprehensive proposals in respect of 34 Cantonments have already been sent to 
respective State Governments and their response is awaited. 

26 
 
3. Gazette notifications have been issued for inviting public objections/ suggestions 
concerning de-notification or excision of civil areas as the case may be, in respect of 10 
Cantonments namely Ajmer, Babina, Deolali, Nasirabad, Clement Town, Dehradun, 
Fatehgarh, Mathura, Ramgarh & Shahjahanpur. The views/ comments from the State 
Governments are still awaited. The matter is under consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH 
04 December, 2025 Chairperson 
13 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 

27 
 
 
Confidential  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th December, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Committee Room D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh- Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
2 Shri Karti P Chidambaram 
3 Shri Ranjit Dutta 
4 Shri Mohmad Haneefa 
5 Ms. S. Jothimani 
6 Shri Shashank Mani 
7 Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
8 Shri Virendra Singh 
9 Shri Kesineni Sivanath 
10 Shri Richard Vanlalhmangaiha 
Rajya Sabha 
11 Shri Naresh Bansal  
12 Shri  Kamal Haasan 
13 Shri  Muzibulla Khan 
14 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
15 Shri  Ujjwal Deorao Nikam 
16 Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil 
17 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

28 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   - Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Prasad  - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting i.e. consideration and adoption of the 
draft Action Taken Reports on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
7th , 8th , 9th  and 10th  Reports on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year  2025-26. 
 
3. The Committee then took up the following four draft Reports for consideration: 
 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 19, 20 and 
21)’; 
 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Army, Air Force, Navy, Joint Staff, Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme and Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services 
(Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on ‘Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Defence Planning, Procurement 
Policy and Defence Pensions (Demand No. 21 and 22)’; and 

29 
 
 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2025-
26 on `Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services)– New DPSUs, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance, Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance and 
National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’. 
 
 
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Report and present the same to the Parliament on a date convenient to him. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2025-26 ON 
‘GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET, BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION, INDIAN 
COAST GUARD, DEFENCE ESTATES ORGANISATION, WELFARE OF EX-
SERVICEMEN AND DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
(DEMAND NOS. 19, 20 AND 21)’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             18 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
  
Recommendation Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, 11,12,13,14,15,16, 17,  
and 18,           
   Total  : 17 
 
Percentage:94.44% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
          
   Recommendation Para Nos.  -Nil- 
 
Total : 00 
Percentage:00 % 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
  Recommendation Para Nos.   -Nil- 
 Total : 00 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
Recommendation Para No.  10                                                      Total : 01 
Percentage:5.56% 