REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
In August, 1951, the Reserve Bank of India had appointed a
Committee of Directors for conducting an All India rural credit survey.
One of the important recommendations propounded by the Committee
appointed by the Reserve Bank was the setting up of a State Bank of
India (SBI) as one strong integrated State-partnered commercial banking
institution with an effective machinery of branches spread over the whole
country for stimulating banking development by providing vastly
extended remittance facilities for co-operative and other banks and
following a policy which would be in effective consonance with national
policies adopted by the Government without departing from the canons
of sound business. Such a Bank was envisaged to come into being by
the amalgamation of the Imperial Bank of India with certain “State-
associated” banks. On the 28th December, 1954, the Government
announced that they accepted in principle this recommendation of the
Committee and that they had decided as a first step towards the setting
up of such an institution, to assume effective control over the Imperial
Bank.
2. Subsequently, the State Bank of India Bill, 1955 was formulated
under which suitable provisions were made relative to the acquisition
of the undertaking of the Imperial Bank, taking over of its business and
staff, payment of compensation to shareholders, setting up of an
appropriate machinery for the governance of the Bank, the business
which the Bank may and may not transact etc. It was contemplated that
the Reserve Bank would always hold a minimum shareholding of
55 per cent in the paid up capital of the State Bank. Upon being passed
by both the Houses of Parliament, and receiving the assent of the
President on 8 May, 1955, the legislation came into force on 1 July, 1955
as the State Bank of India Act, 1955.
3. The State Bank of India Act, 1955 was last amended in 1993
to enable the bank to access the capital market. The following were the

2
important amendments carried out in the year 1993, for enabling SBI to
access the capital market:
A. Section 4 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 which
provides for an authorized capital of twenty crores of rupees
to be divided into twenty lakh of fully paid up shares of
one hundred rupees each, was amended and twenty lakh
of fully paid up shares of one hundred rupees each was
substituted by two crores of fully paid up shares of ten
rupees each.
B. Section 11 which deals with restrictions on individual
holdings was substituted with a new section providing for
restriction on voting rights whereby a shareholder other
than RBI is not entitled to exercise voting rights in respect
of any shares held by him in excess of ten per cent of the
issued capital.
C. Section 13 of the Act which provides for the ‘principal
register of shareholders’ was substituted by a new section
providing for ‘register of shareholders’ at the Central Office
and in computer floppies  or diskettes.
4. While the autorised capital of the State Bank of India in terms
of Section 4 of the SBI Act is Rs. 20 crores, the current position of the
authorised capital of the bank as notified in terms of Notification No.
14(3) 89/Accts. dated 28th June 1990 of Banking Division, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India is Rs. 1000 crore. The issued/paid-up
capital of the bank as on March 31, 2006 is Rs. 526.30 crore. The
distribution of shareholdings of the State Bank, as on 31.3.2007 is as
under:
Distribution of Shareholdings (as on 31.3.2007)
Shareholders % of shares held
12
Reserve Bank of India 59.73%
GDRs 7.88%

3
12
Non-residents (FIs/OCBs/NRIs) 11.95%
Financial Institutions including Insurance 5.28%
Companies/Banks
Mutual Funds/UTI 6.92%
Domestic Companies/Private Corp. Bodies/Trusts 2.28%
Others including Resident Individuals 5.96%
100.00%
5. The Basel Capital Accord, the current international framework
on Capital Adequacy, was adopted in the year 1988 by many banks
worldwide and by India in the year 1992. Thereupon, the Reserve Bank
of India had introduced a set of norms for income recognition,
provisioning and also for capital adequacy in relation to risk weighted
assets. These norms were designed to put the financial accounting and
prudential standards of Indian banks on a sound footing in line with
current international practices. The Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision has worked on a new framework for international
convergence on capital standards and in June, 2004 released the new
capital adequacy framework known as Basel II.
6. As indicated in the background information furnished to the
Committee, the introduction of Basel II norms, would require all the
public sector banks including the State Bank of India and its subsidiary
banks to increase their capital base to meet the minimum requirements.
Achievement of the capital adequacy norms under Basel II is expected
to improve the basic financial health of the banking system and thus
improve its international credibility, since banks in many countries are
also in the process of adopting these standards.
7. While, under the existing provisions, the State Bank can access
the capital market by issuing equity shares or bonds, or by issue of both
equity shares and bonds, there is no express provision under the SBI Act,
1955 to enable the bank to issue preference shares and also bonus shares.

4
8. The State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2006 and referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance by the Hon’ble Speaker on 19 December, 2006 for
examination and report thereon. The Bill seeks to amend the SBI Act, 1955
to provide, inter-alia, for enhancement of the capital of the State Bank
by issue of preference shares, to enable the Bank to raise resources from
the market by public issue or preferential allotment or private placement
on lines similar to the proposals made/approved or effected for private
sector banks as well as the nationalised banks and the subsidiary banks
of SBI vide amendments in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, Bank
Nationalisation Acts, 1970/1980 and the Subsidiary Banks Laws. The Bill
also aims to provide flexibility in the management of the bank.
9. As indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons
appended, the Bill proposes to amend the SBI Act, 1955, inter-alia, (i) to
increase the authorised capital of State Bank of India to rupees five
thousand crores divided into shares of ten rupees each or of such
denomination as may be decided by the Central Board, with the
approval of the Reserve Bank and also enable the Central Government
to increase or reduce the authorized capital in consultation with the
Reserve Bank;
(ii) allow the issued capital of the State Bank to be raised by
preferential allotment of shares or private placement or public issue in
accordance with the procedures as may be prescribed by regulations with
the previous approval of the Reserve Bank and the Central Government,
and the preference shares may be issued in accordance with guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank;
(iii) allow the State Bank to issue bonus shares to the existing
equity shareholders with the direction of the Reserve Bank and with the
approval of the Central Government;
(iv) allow reduction of Reserve Bank’s shareholding from fifty-five
per cent to fifty-one per cent consisting of the equity shares of the issued
capital;
(v) allow the State Bank to accept share monies in instalments,
make calls and forfeiture of unpaid shares and their re-issue;

5
(vi) provide for nomination facility in respect of shares held by
individual or joint shareholders;
(vii) restrict the voting rights of preference shareholders of the
State Bank only to resolutions directly affecting their rights and also
restrict the preference shareholders to exercise voting rights in respect
of preference shares held by him to a ceiling of ten per cent of the
total voting rights of all the shareholders holding preference share capital
only;
(viii) allow the Central Government to appoint not more than four
Managing Directors in consultation with the Reserve Bank;
(ix) abolish the post of Vice-Chairman;
(x) enable a sole shareholder or a first named holders of shares
(when held jointly) of a nominal value of at least Rs. 5000/- to contest
the election for the directorship of State Bank;
(xi) specify the qualifications for election of directors of the State
Bank and to confer powers upon Reserve Bank to notify eligibility criteria
for such directors;
(xii) allow the Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors as and
when considered necessary in the interest of banking policy and
depositors’ interest;
(xiii) Confer power upon the Central Government to supersede the
Central Board in certain cases on the recommendations of the Reserve
Bank and to appoint an administrator for the period during which the
Central Board stands superseded;
(xiv) allow the State Bank to hold Central Board meetings through
video conferencing or such other electronic means as may be prescribed
by regulations;
(xv) allow transfer of unpaid or unclaimed dividend of the State
Bank up to thirty days to ‘unpaid dividend account’ and after seven years
to the ‘Investor Education and Protection Fund’ established under Section
205C of the Companies Act, 1956;

6
(xvi) entitle the shareholders’ present in an annual general meeting
to ‘adopt’ the balance sheet.
10. The amendments proposed to the SBI Act as listed above,
which pertain to enabling the SBI to raise capital by preferential
allotment/ private placement, issuing of preference shares; qualifications
and criteria for election of directors; appointment of additional directors
and supersession of the Board in certain conditions; transferring
unclaimed dividend of over seven years to the Investor Education and
Protection Fund etc., are, as brought out above, aimed at maintaining
uniformity among the various banking statutes and are identical to the
proposals made for private sector banks vide the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005, which is yet to be enacted, the public sector
banks vide the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005
and the Subsidiary Banks of the SBI vide the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006.
11. While the proposal to enable for reducing the capping on the
minimum of RBI’s shareholding in SBI from the existing level of 55%
to 51% is at par with the capping of the Government’s shareholding in
nationalized banks; and that of the currently applicable minimum
holding of SBI in the subsidiary/associate banks, the amendment
proposals relating to abolition of the post of Vice-Chairman, President
of the Local Boards and increasing the number of Managing Directors
on the Board etc., are specific to the State Bank of India.
Transfer of RBI’s equity holding in SBI to Central Government
12. Apart from the amendment proposals of the Bill per se which,
as per the information furnished by the Government, are intended, inter
alia, to enhance the capital raising options of SBI and bring in uniformity
in the banking statutes governing the nationalized banks, private sector
banks and the subsidiary banks to SBI, the Committee felt it to be
imperative to take cognizance of the Budget announcement (2007-08) of
the Finance Minister regarding the provisioning proposed for the ‘deficit
neutral’ transfer/acquisition of RBI’s equity holding in SBI by the
Government.

7
13. The relevant announcement, as made in the Budget, 2007-08
reads as follows:
“Government proposes to acquire RBI’s equity holding in State
Bank of India. I have provided a sum of Rs. 40,000 crore for
this purpose, but the transaction will be deficit neutral to the
Government.”
14. Questioned as to why the amendments required to be carried
out in the SBI Act, 1955 for effecting the proposed transfer of
shareholding, as announced in the Budget 2007, were not proposed in
the State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, the Ministry of Finance, in
a written reply submitted as follows:
“When the current Bill to amend State Bank of India Act, 1955
was moved in 2006, the issue regarding transfer of shareholding
had not fructified. Government approved the proposal of the
Reserve Bank of India to transfer the ownership in February,
2007. Therefore, the relevant amendments to facilitate the
transfer of shares in favour of the Central Government, were
not proposed in this Bill.”
15. In response to a further query on the basis or rationale for
proposing divestment/transfer of RBI’s equity holding in SBI to the
Government, the Ministry of Finance, inter alia , cited the relevant
observation/recommendations made in the Report of the Committee on
Banking Sector Reforms (Narsimhan Committee; April, 1998), which
reads as follow:
“At present, the laws stipulate that not less than 51% of the
share capital of public sector banks should be vested with the
Government and similarly not less than 55% of the share
capital of the State Bank of India should be held by the
Reserve Bank of India. The Committee believes that these
minimum stipulations should be reviewed. It would suggest
that the Minimum share holding by Government/Reserve
Bank in the equity of the nationalised banks and the State

8
Bank should be  brought down to 33%. The Reserve Bank as
a regulator of the monetary system should not be also the
owner of a bank in view of the potential for possible conflict
of interest.....”
16. On the proposal of the Government to acquire RBI’s equity
holding in SBI, the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
(Tarapore Committee) had observed inter alia : ‘If this transfer
materializes, the share of nationalised banks in the banking system,
will increase from around 50 per cent to around 75 per cent. The SBI,
at present, has a greater degree of functional autonomy than the
nationalised banks and bringing it under the category of nationalised
banks would be a retrograde step.... Given the imperative need for
strengthening the capital of banks in the context of Basel-II and FCAC,
this transfer should be put on hold. This way the increased capital
requirement for a sizeable segment of the banking sector would be met
for the ensuing period’.
17. When asked to give the Government’s perception on the
observations of Tarapore Committee on the proposed transfer of equity
holding to the Government — with particular reference to the likely
adverse effect on the managerial autonomy and the distinctive legacy the
SBI holds, as pointed out by the Tarapore Committee — the Ministry of
Finance,  in a written reply, inter alia , stated as follows:
“....today, the Public Sector Banks have been given total
managerial autonomy. So also the SBI.  Public Sector Banks
are owned by the Government. So, if SBI begins to do it, then
there will be no difference vis-à-vis any other public sector
banks. The same managerial autonomy which has been given
to public sector banks will be applicable to SBI also. So,
powers, autonomy, managerial exercise of power will be the
same and we are reasonably certain that there will be no
restriction in the autonomy of the bank.”
18. Responding to a specific query on the likely impact on the
managerial/functional autonomy of SBI, the transfer of equity holding,

9
as proposed in the Budget would have, the Secretary, Financial Sector
stated as under while tendering evidence:
“I want to assure you that there would be absolutely no change
in the financial autonomy that is available to the State Bank
of India when the stakes change because the managerial
autonomy has been given to all the public sector banks. Each
of them is on uniform turf. So, whether the RBI holds the
stakes or the Government holds the stakes, there is absolutely
no change in the financial autonomy because the financial
autonomy, guidelines and the parameters apply equally to the
State Bank of India as they apply to other banks.”
19. Questioned on the ways and means of effecting the transfer
of shareholding from RBI to the Government, which would be ‘deficit
neutral’, as per the Budget stipulations, the Ministry of Finance, in a
written reply, inter alia, stated:
“As SBI is a listed entity, and its stocks are widely traded,
RBI’s shareholding in SBI may be transferred against cash
payment of the valuation amount to be determined based on
market price in accordance with SEBI guidelines. As per SEBI
guidelines, the valuation is done at the higher of the average
of weekly high — low of closing price for the last 26 weeks
and the average of daily high — low price for the last two
weeks.
The transfer of ownership can be done against cash payment
by the Government of India. Since a substantial part of the
premium to be paid by Government of India to RBI is expected
to be transferred back to Government of India as part of RBI’s
Annual Transfer of Surplus (ATOS), in effect, the stake will
be transferred at RBI’s book value. Thus, except to the extent
of the book value, the transfer would be fiscally neutral. The
Government of India will be required to fund this acquisition
out of its own funds during the interim period, that is, between
the date of transfer of stake, to mid-August when the ATOS
takes place after the finalization of RBI’s accounts. In order

10
to reduce the period during which Government would need
to fund the acquisition, RBI has proposed that such transfer
of ownership be done on the day of closure of annual accounts
of RBI i.e. 30th June.”
20. It was also added in the reply of the Ministry that a proposal
to issue an Ordinance to make necessary amendments in SBI Act for
facilitating the transfer of shares held by RBI to the government was
under consideration.
21. While responding to a query, inter alia , on the need and
appropriateness of the proposal to issue an Ordinance for effecting the
transfer of equity holding to the Government, the Secretary, Financial
Sector, stated as under while tendering evidence:
“.....Firstly, a clarification had been sought by the hon.
Committee as to how the transfer was going to take place
because in the Bill, there is no mention about the transfer of
stakes of the RBI in to the SBI being transferred to the
Government. Sir, we had clarified that it was not in the Bill
because at the time when the Bill was being discussed in the
Parliament, the proposals had not fructified. We had clarified
this, in writing also. I had mentioned in my evidence then that
the Government proposed to undertake transfer by bringing
an Ordinance. It has been prepared. We are hoping to
undertake the transfer before the 30th of June, 2007.
We had explained the mechanics of how the transfer would
take place. The Reserve Bank of India has followed the
financial year of July to June. So, by the end of June, the
Government would be giving the amount, which would be
required in that take over of the equity stakes of the SBI to
the RBI. The RBI closes its accounts on 30th June. It will
incorporate that into their receipts. After they have audited it
by the end of July or beginning of August when it transfers
its surplus minus expenditure to the Government, this amount

11
would be transferred back. So, it would be cash neutral as far
as the Budget is concerned. That is how the transfer would
take place. That is how we have worked it out.”
22. When asked to detail the government’s perception on the
purported averment of the Chairman of the Committee on Fuller Capital
Accountability that the spirit of the recommendation of the Committee
on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimhan Committee) was not that ‘one
regulator should transfer ownership of SBI to an even bigger regulator’,
the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply stated:
“RBI should not be an owner of a bank, as being a regulator
of the banking system it would result in conflict of interest.”
23. It was also, inter alia , added as follows in reply:
“.....Narasimhan Committee has neither recommended nor
commented adversely against RBI’s divestment of its
shareholding in SBI to Government of India. Transfer of
ownership from RBI to Government would address the issue
of possible conflict of interest mentioned by the Narasimhan
Committee.”
24. While the changes required/contemplated in the State Bank of
India Act, 1955 for enabling the Government to acquire RBI’s
shareholding in SBI as well as other related changes proposed in the Act,
were informed about to the Committee by the Ministry of Finance vide
communication dated the 13th June, 2007, on 21st June, 2007, the
Government issued an Ordinance making necessary changes to the SBI
Act, 1955 for facilitating the transfer of RBI’s shares in SBI to the
Government.
25. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Bill from: (i) Reserve Bank of India (ii) State
Bank of India (iii) Indian Banks’ Association (iv) All India Bank Officers
Association, (v) All India Bank Officer’s Confederation (vi) All India
State Bank Officers’ Federation/All India State Bank of India Staff
Federation, (vii) Bank Employees Federation of India (viii) ASSOCHAM
and (ix) Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry. The Committee

12
also had personal hearings of the views of the representatives of the
Reserve Bank, the State Bank, the Indian Banks’ Association and the
representatives of the Bank Officers and Employees Unions and
Associations.
26. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to further
enlighten themselves on various aspects of the proposed legislation.
27. While the representatives of the Reserve Bank of India, Indian
Banks’ Association and the management of the State Bank have, in
general, welcomed and expressed support to the amendment proposals
of the Bill, the representatives of the Bank Officers and Employees
Unions have expressed reservations on certain of the provisions, which
include, inter alia, the proposal for enabling reduction of RBI’s equity
holding in SBI from 55% to 51%; and providing space for SBI to raise
preference capital etc. to meet the enhanced capital requirements of the
future.
28. The Committee, upon examining the State Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 express agreement in general with the
objective of enhancing the capital raising options of the State Bank
to meet the regulatory capital requirements of the New Capital
Adequacy Framework envisaged by the Reserve Bank in line with
Basel-II guidelines; and provide for flexibility in the management
of the bank inter alia by enabling for appointment of a maximum
of four managing directors on the Board in place of two at present
etc. The provisions seeking to enable the State Bank to raise capital
by means of private placement of equity/issue of preference shares
etc. are in line with the amendments proposed/effected in the
banking statutes governing the private sector banks, public sector
banks as well as the subsidiary banks of SBI. These were examined
and reported upon by the Committee in the related reports viz.,
the 26th Report on the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005,
the 34th Report on the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer
of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005 and the 50th Report on the State Bank of India (Subsidiary

13
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. While recognizing the need to
address the issue of increasing capital requirement of the banking
system, especially of the State Bank of India, the Committee,
nevertheless, cannot also help taking note of the fact that the State
Bank of India in general holds a distinctive legacy in the banking
system and in expanding the banking network in rural areas and
advancing credit to the weaker sections in particular. The Committee,
hence, desire that the objectives and goals that aim for endeavouring
for the upliftment of the downtrodden and the deprived which were
envisaged during the yester years may not be lost sight of by the
bank while coping with the pressures of the new capital adequacy
framework and the changing business requirements of the banking
system.
29. The significant amendment proposals of the Bill, the
observations/recommendations of the Committee thereon, as well as
certain inconsistencies that came to notice in the provisions, which
the Government have sought to rectify, are dealt with in the later
part of the report.
30. The examination of the proposals of the State Bank of
India (Amendment) Bill, 2006 apart, the Committee are inclined to
note with serious concern the fact that the Government have, on
21st June, 2007, issued an Ordinance effecting changes to the SBI
Act, 1955 for facilitating the transfer of RBI’s shareholding in SBI
to the Government — a policy measure announced and provisioned
for in the Budget, 2007. As informed to the Committee, the
amendment proposals required for effecting the transfer of
shareholding, have not been included in the Bill under consideration
viz. the State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006, ostensibly
because the proposal was approved by the Government only in
February, 2007. The Committee note that the proposal for transferring
RBI’s shareholding in the bank to the Government has been on the
anvil since the making of the related recommendations way back
in 1998 by the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Narsimhan
Committee) and the policy measures contemplated to this effect by
the Government have been considered and commented upon by yet

14
another RBI appointed Committee viz., the Committee on Fuller
Capital Account Convertibility (Tarapore Committee; 2006). With
specific reference to the issue of transfer of shareholding of RBI
to the Government, the Committee note that while the Tarapore
Committee has perceived this move to be a retrograde step, which
would, inter alia, impact the financial autonomy the SBI presently
exercises, the Government have been categorical in assuring that the
change of stakes from the Reserve Bank to the Government would
not, in anyway, impact the financial/managerial autonomy of the
bank. The Committee find the clarification given by the Ministry
of Finance for non-inclusion of the amendments required for
facilitating the transfer of RBI’s equity holding in SBI to the Central
Government in the current Bill to be not at all acceptable. The
Government knew before hand that the Ordiance route was to be
pursued for effecting this proposal, even while various related aspects
as contained in the Bill referred were being examined. While taking
exception to and expressing their displeasure on the Government’s
approach of bypassing the scrutiny of important issues, the
Committee also emphasise that, as assured by the Government, it
should be ensured that the likely adverse implications of the ‘transfer
of stakes’ in SBI from the RBI to the Government, as expressed
by the Tarapore Committee do not, in anyway, prove to come true.

15
Clause 3 — Substitution of new Section for Section 4 and
Clause 4 — amendment of Section 5 (Share Capital of
State Bank of India)
31. Clauses 3 and 4 deal with provisions relating to the
authorized and issued capital respectively of the State Bank of India.
32. Clause 3 relating to substitution of Section 4 of the Principal
Act on the authorized capital of the State Bank reads as under:–
“For Section 4 of the Principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted namely:–
subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorized capital
of the State Bank shall be five thousand crores of rupees
divided into five hundred crores of fully paid-up shares of
ten rupees each:
Provided that the Central Board may reduce the nominal
or face value of the shares, and divide the authorized capital
into such denomination as it may decide with the approval
of the Reserve Bank:
Provided further that the Central Government may in
consultation with the Reserve Bank increase or reduce the
authorized capital so however that the shares in all cases shall
be fully paid-up shares.”
33. Clause 4 relating to amendment of Section 5 of the Principal
Act on the issued capital of the State Bank reads as under:–
“In section 5 of the principal Act,–
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:–
(2) The issued capital of the State Bank shall consist of equity
shares or equity and preference shares:
15

16
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue
of each class of such preference shares (whether perpetual or
irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be
issued:
Provided further that the Central Board may from time to
time increase, with the previous approved of the Reserve Bank
and the Central Government, whether by public issue of
preferential allotment or private placement, in accordance with
the procedure as may be prescribed, the issued capital by the
issue of equity or preference shares:
Provided also that the Reserve Bank shall, at all times, hold
not less than fifty-one per cent of the issued capital consisting
of equity shares of the State Bank.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be
inserted, namely:–
“(4) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the
Central Board may increase from time to time, by way of
issuing bonus shares to existing equity shareholders, the
issued capital in such manner as the Reserve Bank may, with
the approval of the Central Government, direct.
(5) The State Bank may, accept the money in respect of shares
issued towards increase in the issued capital in installments,
make calls, forfeit unpaid shares and re-issue them, in such
manner as may be prescribed.”
(a) Authorized Capital (Clause 3):
34. The existing provisions of Section 4 of the State Bank of India
Act, 1955 provide that the authorized capital of the State Bank of India
shall be Rs. 20 crores. The existing statutory stipulation of authorized
capital notwithstanding, the Central Government may increase the

17
authorized capital ‘as it thinks fit’. Consequently, the authorized capital
of the Bank was increased to Rs. 1000 crore in terms of Notification
No. 14(3)89/Accts. dated 28th June 1990 of the Banking Division,
Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
35. The proposal to increase the authorized capital from the
existing position of Rs. 20 crore to Rs. 5000 crore is expected to take care
of future needs of the bank.
36. Expressing concurrence with the proposal to increase the
Authorised Capital of State Bank of India to Rs. 5000 crore, the Reserve
Bank, in their Memorandum submitted to the Committee, inter-alia,
submitted as follows:–
“Following the introduction of the Capital adequacy norms
and the proposed requirement under Basel II recommenda-
tions, all the public sector banks, including State Bank of
India, will have to build up their capital base urgently.
Achievement of the prescribed capital adequacy norms is
essential for the basic financial health of the banking system.
It is also essential for its international credibility since banks
all over the world are adopting these standards.”
(b) Issued Capital (Clause 4):
(i) Amendment proposals vis-a-vis provisions proposed/
applicable to private sector and nationalized banks
37. The proposed substitution of sub-section (2) of Section 5 of
the Principal Act in terms of the amendment proposals of Clause 4
provides that the Central Board of State Bank may, with the previous
approval of the Reserve Bank and the Central Government, increase by
way of public issue or preferential allotment or private placement, the
Bank’s issued capital by issue of equity or preference shares. The issue
of preference shares is to be in accordance with the guidelines framed
by the Reserve Bank specifying the class and the terms and conditions
of issue. This is in line with the amendments proposed for private sector
banks in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and as already made
applicable for natinalised banks in the Banking Companies (Acquisition

18
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 as well as the subsidiary
banks in the Subsidiary Banks Laws.
38. The existing provisions of Section 5 of the State Bank of India
Act, 1955 provide that no increase or decrease in the issued capital of
the Bank shall be made in a manner such that the Reserve Bank
holds, at any time, less than 55% of the issued capital of the State Bank.
This section has been proposed to be amended by inserting a provision
in the new section to provide that State Bank’s holding (statutory
minimum) — which would now be applicable to the Central Government
in view of the transfer of shares to them — may be reduced from the
existing 55% to 51% of the issued capital consisting of equity shares of
that Bank.
39. The proposed new section also enables the State Bank to issue
bonus shares as per the guidelines framed by RBI with the prior approval
of the Central Government.
40. In regards the matter of enabling private sector banks to issue
preference shares for meeting the regulatory capital requirements, the
relevant provision proposed in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which
has been examined and endorsed by the Committee in the related report
(26th Report) provides, inter-alia, as follows:—
“The Capital of such banking company consists of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares, and
(b) preference shares issued in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class of, and the
terms and conditions subject to which, the preference shares
may be issued.”
41. Similarly, the amendments already carried out in the Bank
Nationalisation Acts, 1970/1980 (as endorsed by the Committee in their
report on the related Bill viz. 34th Report), inter-alia, provide that the paid
up capital of the Nationalised Banks can be increased by:—
“(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the correspond-
ing new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank

19
and with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
raise whether by public issue or preferential allotment or
private placement, of equity shares or preference shares in
accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed, so,
however that the Central Government shall, at all times hold
not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid up capital consisting
of equity shares of each corresponding new bank:
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue
of each class of such preference shares (whether perpetual or
irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be
issued:
Provided that the shareholder holding any preference
share capital in the corresponding new bank shall, in respect
of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions placed
before such corresponding new bank which directly affects the
rights attached to his preference shares”
42. On similar lines, the amendments effected to the laws
applicable to the subsidiary banks of SBI, which were examined and
reported upon by the Committee (in their 50th Report) provide that the
issued capital of a subsidiary bank shall consist of equity shares or
equity and preference shares. The relevant provision in regard to issue
of preference shares as incorporated in the subsidiary banks laws,
inter-alia, reads:
“Provide that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue
of each class of such preference shares (whether perpetual or
irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be
issued.”;

20
(ii) Shareholding of RBI/Government in SBI
43. On the specific issue of enabling for reduction of the
statutorily prescribed minimum equity holding of the Reserve Bank in
SBI from 55% to 51% — which would now be applicable to the Central
Government — a representative of All India State Bank Officers
Federation stated as under while tendering evidence:–
“.....We are of the view that at present, the Government’s
holding in the State Bank of India is more than 55 per cent,
and through this amendment, there is a proposal to bring it
down to 51 per cent. Technically, it will not affect the public
sector character but it would affect the image of the bank as
a Government Bank, though everybody considers the SBI as
a Government Bank.
About recepitalizing through reduction of Government’s
shares and going to the public, our opinion is that the
State Bank of India is also following the capital equity norms.
We feel that there is no need to reduce the Government equity
from 55 per cent to 51 per cent. Instead, we could welcome
if it is enhanced from 55 per cent to 60 per cent or 65 per cent.”
44. While responding to a related query on the proposal to enable
for dilution of the RBI/Government’s equity holding in the Bank, the
CMD, SBI, while tendering evidence, pointed out as follows:–
“.....there is a fear that by diluting stake of the RBI or the
Government of India to 51 per cent, it is apprehended whether
it is creeping privatization. To the best of my understanding
dilution would not be by way of disinvestment of the existing
shares. Dilution would be by issue of fresh shares. Currently,
if about 4.5 crore additional shares are issued then the dilution
will take place from 59 per cent to 55 per cent. Roughly similar
amount would take it further down from 55 per cent to
51 per cent. So, this issue of additional shares will give
State Bank of India an additional capital without reducing the
capital in the hands of Reserve Bank of India or the

21
Government of India. But since additional shares would have
been issued and on that count additional capital and premium
received by the State Bank of India, therefore, the percentage
holding of the Government or the Reserve Bank of India would
go down to either 55 per cent or 51 per cent as the case may
be.”
45. On the enabling provision for reducing the statutorily
prescribed minimum holding of the Government/RBI in SBI, the
Secretary, Financial Sector, stated, inter alia, as follows:—
“.....The RBI today owns 59.73 per cent of the shares of the
SBI. We are seeking to bring it down to minimum 51 per cent,
in line with all other public sector banks, to ensure that public
sector characteristic of the bank is preserved and, at the same
time, that it provides a certain amount of flexibility to raise
additional capital.”
(iii) Capital requirements of SBI
46. The Committee desired to know whether any estimation/
evaluation has been made of the additional capital requirements of SBI
to meet the capital adequacy norms/requirements of the future as well
as business needs. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance, in a written
reply, informed as under:—
The present level of the capital funds of the SBI, as on
March 31, 2007 was Rs. 46,934 crore. The bank’s capital
requirements are estimated to be around Rs. 1,93,172 crore on
the basis of certain assumptions regarding business growth
and Basel II impact by March 31, 2013 as indicated below.
(Rs. Crore)
Capital Item 31.03.2007 31.03.2013
(Projected)
 12 3
Paid up equity share capital, 28,729 86,221
Reserves and surplus

22
 12 3
Preference shares 25,756
Innovative Perpetual Debt 1,739 16,804
Instruments eligible for
inclusion in Tier 1 capital
Upper Tier 2 instruments and 13,073 60,998
Subordinate debt instruments
Other Tier 2 elements 3,393 3,393
Total 46,934 1,93,172
47. In the context of the issue of the additional capital
requirements of the bank to meet the Basel II requirements, anticipated
business growth of the bank etc., the Ministry also added as under in
their reply:
(a) If preference shares are not allowed to be raised, the bank will
not be able to meet its capital requirements without
Government or RBI making any contribution to the equity
share capital even for the financial year ending March 31,
2008.
(b) If preference shares are allowed, the bank will be able to meet
its capital requirement for the year ending March 31, 2008,
when the Govt./RBI’s minimum shareholding is 55% and for
the year ending March 31, 2009, when the Govt./RBI’s
minimum shareholding is 51%.
(c) Any further capital requirements of the SBI will have to
be met by the Government/RBI in proportion to their
shareholding to enable the bank to maintain its business
growth and retain the capital adequacy ratio of 12% (with a
Tier 1 ratio of 8%).
48. The Ministry also pointed out that Banks, such as SBI, with
international presence would be required to target a higher capital

23
adequacy ratio for which the following reasons would be relevant: (i) to
support the large number of both banking and non-banking
subsidiaries/associates both in India and abroad; (ii) to meet the
anticipated business growth without the need to access market for capital
every year, (iii) to qualify for regulatory autonomy for undertaking certain
types of activities  (iv) to have greater freedom to declare a higher level
of dividend, (v) to secure a higher credit rating from the credit rating
agencies (which help in reducing the cost of raising capital) etc.
49. On the amendment proposals of the Bill for enhancing the
capital raising options of SBI by way of private placement, issue of
preference shares etc., the Secretary, Financial Sector stated inter alia as
follows while deposing before the Committee:
“.....There are certain international banking standards. Any
bank which is proposing to have global operations normally
if it conforms to international standards, it evokes a certain
element of comfort among its international clients if the bank
conforms to international standards. “....today the capital
adequacy of SBI is only about 11 per cent and nine per cent
is as prescribed by the RBI today. But when the Basel-II norms
start applying, this 11 per cent will decline very rapidly
because capital will have to be provided for market and
operational risks also. That is why, when the State Bank of
India is seen in comparison with any other foreign institution
it will not be able to withstand that kind of economic
scrutiny.”
(iv) Norms for issue of preference shares
50. In terms of amended Bank Nationalisation Acts, 1970 & 1980
and the Subsidiary Banks Laws, nationalised banks as well as the
subsidiary banks of SBI are now enabled to issue preference shares for
meeting regulatory capital requirements. A similar proposal for the
private sector banks incorporated vide the Banking Regulation (Amend-
ment) Bill, 2005 and endorsed by this Committee vide their 26th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) remains to be brought before Parliament. As informed
to the Committee in a written reply, the guidelines for issue of preference
shares are at an advanced stage of finalisation.

24
51. On the matter of formulation of guidelines for issue of
preference shares by Banks, the Deputy Governor, RBI stated, inter alia,
as under, while tendering evidence:
“I would say that the guidelines that we would issue in respect
of preference shares as to how much a bank can raise and
what are limits, and the terms and conditions would be in line
with the best international practices. What our banks will be
able to do would be the same as what other country banks
would also be able to do. We are in line with the international
standards in this regard.”
52. While responding to a question on the stipulations for
enabling SBI/other Banks to issue preference shares vis-à-vis the related
provisions on preference shares, as applicable under the Companies Act
and the possible dichotomy in the provisions as contained in the Banking
Statutes and the Companies Act, the Deputy Governor, RBI inter alia
stated:
“...The State Bank of India is not subject to the Companies Act
because the State Bank of India has a separate statute.
The provisions of the Companies Act do not apply to the
State Bank of India. Similar is the situation for even the
nationalised banks and the subsidiaries of the State Bank of
India where the same amendments have been made. There
would not be any legal conflict. Of course, from the point of
view of policy one might argue this point, but legally there
would not be any conflict with the provisions of the
Companies Act.”
53. Asked to highlight the disinctive aspects of the preference
capital/shares that Banks may be required to issue for raising
capital vis-à-vis the norms/stipulations applicable in this regard to
companies under the Companies Act, the Deputy Governor added as
under:
“.....in the banking sector we need to have both perpetual
preference shares as well as preference shares with certain

25
maturity. It is because the perpetual preference shares are
given the status of tier I capital; whereas preference shares
with the certain maturity of minimum 15 years are given
the benefit of tier II capital. This kind of distinction in the
banking sector is because we have our capital requirements.
We have redeemable as well as irredeemable preference
shares. The irredeemable preference shares are also
called perpetual preference shares. Currently it is not provided
in the Companies Act, but we are providing for it in this
Act.”
54. In terms of the amendment proposals of the Bill (Clause 7:
amendment of section 11), the voting rights of preference shareholding
are to be restricted to apply only on resolutions placed before the State
Bank which directly affect the rights attached to the preference shares.
Further, the entitlement of voting rights of preference shareholders is to
be capped at a maximum of ten per cent of total voting rights of all
shareholders holding preference share capital.
55. As per section 87(2)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956, any
resolution for winding up of the company or for the reduction or
repayment of the share capital are deemed to affect directly the rights
attached to preference shares. In case of the nationalised banks, the
General Regulations provide the meaning of preference share capital
which reads as follows:–
(i) Preference share capital means that part of share capital which
fulfils both the following conditions:
(A) that as respects dividends, it carries a preferential right to
be paid a fixed amount or an amount calculated at fixed
rate, which may be either free of or subject to income tax,
and
(B) that as respect capital, it carries or will carry, on winding
up or repayment of capital, a preferential right to be repaid
the amount of the capital paid-up or deemed to have been

26
paid-up, whether or not there is preferential right to the
payment of either or both of the following amounts,
namely:–
(a) any money remaining unpaid, in respect of the
amounts specified in clause (A), upto the date of
winding up or repayment of capital; and
(b) any fixed premium or premium on any fixed scale,
specified by the Board with the previous consent of
the Central Government.
56. The Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, informed the
Committee that in the case of State Bank of India, matters relating to
these issues viz., dividend payments etc. on which preference share-
holders could exercise voting rights would be “covered under the
guidelines/regulations to be framed for this purpose.”
57. From the information furnished, the Committee note that
the capital funds of SBI, as on March 31, 2007 stood at Rs. 46,934
crore — which include paid up equity capital, reserves and surplus,
perpetual debt instruments qualifying for inclusion in Tier-I capital,
subordinate debt instruments qualifying for Tier-II capital etc. The
projected capital requirement of the Bank by March 31, 2013 is
estimated at 1,93,172 crore. Of the projected capital requirement of
Rs. 1,93,172 crore, an amount of Rs. 25,756 crore is expected to be
raised by the Bank by issue of preference shares, which the Bank
would be able to issue as per the provisions of the Bill. The
amendment proposals envisaged under clause 3 (Substitution of
Section 4; authorised capital) and Clause 4 (amendment of Section
5; share capital of State Bank) for meeting the higher capital
requirement of the future are at par with the provisions already made
and/or given effect to for private sector banks, public sector banks
as well as subsidiary banks of SBI.
58. The proposals envisaged, which, inter alia , enable for
reducing the statutorily prescribed minimum shareholding of RBI in
SBI from 55% to 51% — which would now be applicable to the

27
Central Government in view of the transfer of shares from RBI to
them — and provide for the bank to issue preference shares etc.
are expected to provide substantial leverage to the SBI in meeting
the capital  requirements of the future from the market in a cost
effective manner. While the Committee, recognize the need for
enhancing the capital raising options of the bank, however, they
cannot also help taking cognizance of the apprehensions expressed
in certain quarters, that the proposal to enable for dilution of the
Government’s/RBI’s holding in the Bank from 55% to 51% in
particular, would leave the possibility of affecting the ‘State owned
character’ of the bank and tantamount to ‘creeping privatisation’ of
the Bank. From the point of view of the Government as well as
the management of SBI, however, this policy measure would be at
par with the capping of 51% on the minimum shareholding of the
Government in the nationalised banks/that of the SBI in the
subsidiary banks, and would, alongwith the proposal for enabling
raising of capital by issue of preference shares etc. help the bank
in conforming to the international norms on capital adequacy. Mainly
in view of the apprehensions expressed on this count, the Committee
feel it essential to emphasize on ensuring that the amendment
proposals envisaged in terms of the provisions under Clauses 3 and
4, which are intended to give head room to the bank for raising
capital from the market, do not, in anyway dilute the ‘state owned’
character of the State Bank.
59. With specific reference to the proposal for enabling the
State Bank to issue preference shares, the Committee recall that
while considering the related proposal as made for public sector
banks, and the subsidiary banks of SBI, they had, inter-alia,
recommended that the guidelines to be framed for issue of such
shares conform to international standards and ensure a level playing
field for the public sector banks/subsidiary banks vis-a-vis the private
sector banks. While the proposal to enable banks to issue preference
shares was mooted in 2005 in the amendments proposed to the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and has already been given effect
to in the case of nationalised banks/subsidiary banks of SBI, the

28
Committee note that the policy guidelines specifying the terms and
conditions for issue of such shares remain to be finalized and issued
by the Reserve Bank. From the deposition of the Deputy Governor
of Reserve Bank in particular, the Committee note that the policy
guidelines for issue of preference shares which are in an advanced
stage of finalisation, are intended to be in line with international
norms, and designed to meet the specific requirements of the
banking sector. The Committee while endorsing the amendment
proposals under Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill enabling for reduction
of the statutorily prescribed minimum equity holding of RBI (now
Central Government) in SBI from 55% to 51% and infusion of capital
by way of private placement, issue of preference shares, etc., reiterate
the need for ensuring that the related guidelines are in line with
international standards and adaptable to local requirements. They
also feel it necessary to emphasize on ensuring fairness and
transparency in the terms and conditions for issue of preference
shares. The Committee also expect that, as agreed to, the meaning
as well as the nature of rights exercisable by preference shareholders,
are clearly defined in the general regulations applicable to the State
Bank so as to leave no scope for ambiguity on the rights exercisable
by preference shareholders vis-à-vis the rights of equity shareholders
of the bank or, any possible dichotomy with the provisions/
regulations relating to issue of preference shares in terms of the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.

29
Clause 11 — Insertion of new Section 19 (A) (2) : Qualifications
for Election of Director/Appointment of Additional Directors
60. Clause 11 relating to amendment of Section 19 A (Qualifica-
tions for election of directors) and section 19(B) (power of Reserve Bank
to appoint Additional Directors) read as follows:
“19 A. (1) The directors elected under clause (c) of section 19 shall–
(a) have special knowledge or experience in respect of one or more
of the following areas, namely:–
(i) agriculture and rural economy,
(ii) banking,
(iii) co-operation,
(iv) economics,
(v) finance,
(vi) law,
(vii) small-scale industry,
(viii) any other area the special knowledge of, and experience
in, which in the opinion of the Reserve Bank shall be
useful to the State Bank;
(b) represent the interests of depositors; or
(c) represent the interests of farmers, workers and artisans.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Reserve Bank may from time to time notify any additional criteria
for persons to be elected as director under clause (c) of section 19.
(3) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that any director of
the State Bank elected under clause (c) of section 19 does not fulfil
the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2), it may, after giving to
such director and the State Bank a reasonable opportunity of being
heard, by order, remove such director.
29

30
(4) On the removal of a director under sub-section (3), the Central
Board shall co-opt any other persons fulfilling the requirements of
sub-sections (1) and (2), as a director in place of the person so
removed, till a director is duly elected by the shareholders of the
State Bank in the next annual general meeting; and the person so
co-opted shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the
shareholders of the State Bank as a director.
19B. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that in the interest
of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the
State Bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may, from
time to time and by order in writing appoint, with effect from such
date as may be specified in the order, one or more persons as
additional directors of the State Bank.
(2) Any person appointed as additional director under sub-section
(1) shall,–
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve Bank and
subject thereto for a period not exceeding three years or such
further periods not exceeding three years at a time as the
Reserve Bank may, by order, specify;
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being
an additional director or for anything done or omitted to be
done in a good faith in the execution of the duties of his office
or in relation thereto; and
(c) not be required to hold qualification shares in the State Bank.
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total
number of directors of the State Bank, any additional director
appointed under this section shall not be taken into account.”
A. Qualifications for Election of Directors
61. Presently, no qualification has been prescribed in the SBI Act,
1955 as has been prescribed in Section 10A of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 for private sector banks for the members of Board of Directors
and for elected directors in nationalised banks as per section 9 (3A) of

31
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970/1980. The Bill, therefore, proposes to insert a new Section 19A in
the Act specifying the qualifications for directors to be elected under
Section 19(C) of the Act.
62. While the amendments proposed to section 19(B) under clause
11 provide for making provisions empowering the Reserve Bank to lay
down additional criteria for elected directors and remove elected directors
who do not fulfil the requirements, these do not provide that the Reserve
Bank would specify such ‘fit and proper’ criteria for ‘elected directors’
on the lines of amendments made to the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 and the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. The Reserve Bank proposes to prescribe
‘fit and proper’ criteria for the elected directors of natioalised banks/
subsidiary banks of SBI/State Bank of India on lines similar to the criteria
prescribed for ‘directors’ on the boards of private sector banks vide
circular dated January 25, 2004, which provide, inter-alia, for signing of
‘covenants’, and furnishing of ‘declarations’.
63. Accordingly, with a view to maintain uniformity across the
banking statutes, the Reserve Bank has proposed that the following sub-
section may substitute the proposed sub-section(2) of section 19A of the
Bill:
Amendment proposed Changes proposed
in the Bill
12
“(2) Without prejudice to the provisions
to sub-section (1) and notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in
this Act or in any other law for the time
being in force, no person shall be eligible
to be  elected as director under clause (c)
of Section 19 unless he is a person
having fit and proper status based upon
track record, integrity and such other
Section 19A
(2)  Without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-section (1),
the Reserve Bank may from
time to time notify any addi-
tional criteria for persons to
be elected as director under
clasue (c) of section 19.

32
12
criteria as the Reserve Bank may notify
from time to time in this regard. The
Reserve Bank may also specify in the
notification issued under this sub-sec-
tion, the authority to determine the fit
and proper status, the manner of such
determination, the procedure to be fol-
lowed for such determinations and such
other matters as may be considered
necessary or incidental thereto.”
64. Asked whether the above-mentioned change proposed in the
provisions of the Bill by the Reserve Bank in Section 19A was agreeable
to be carried out, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, stated as
follows:–
“Yes, for maintaining uniformity across the banking statutes, the
sub-section may be substituted as proposed by the Reserve
Bank.”
B. Appointment of Additional Directors
65. The proposed incorporation of the new section 19B seeks to
empower the Reserve Bank of India to appoint Additional Directors, if
the Bank is of the opinion that in the interest of banking policy or in
the public interest or in the interest of State Bank of India or its depositors,
it is necessary to do so.
66. As far as the private sector banks are concerned, the RBI has
the power under section 36 AB of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to
appoint Additional Directors on the boards of such banks whenever the
situation so warrants. Similar amendments have been made in the case
of Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970/1980 applicable to the nationalised banks and the State Bank  of
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 applicable to the subsidiary banks
of SBI.

33
67. On the rationale for enabling for nomination of additional
directors on the Boards of Banks, the Ministry of Finance had, when the
Committee considered the related Bill proposing to amend the subsidiary
banks laws, informed, inter-alia, as under:
“As far as the private sector banks are concerned, the RBI has the
power under Section 36 AB of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
to appoint additional directors on the boards of such banks
whenever the situation so warrants. It would be desirable to
incorporate a similar provision in this Act also to provide for
nomination of director by RBI as considered necessary in the interest
of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interest of the
subsidiary banks or its depositors........Under normal circumstances,
the presence of RBI’s nominee might lead to conflict of interest.
However, in situation where the bank’s undergoing stress, presence
of RBI’s nominee is necessary to enable RBI to closely monitor the
bank with a view to protect the depositors’ interest. This also brings
the provisions in line with the enabling powers of the Reserve Bank
in relation to the private sector banks. This will enable adoption
of selective approach in the case of nomination of a director by the
Reserve Bank.”
68. In terms of the existing provisions of the SBI Act, 1955, a
nominee of the Reserve Bank serves on the Board of the Bank
(Clause f of Section 19). In the case of the nationalised banks and the
subsidiary banks of SBI, the amendment proposals to the relevant
statutes as recommended upon by the Committee and enacted, provide
for doing away with the nomination of the Reserve Bank’s official on
the Boards of the Banks’, in lieu of which one person possessing
necessary expertise and experience in matters relating to regulation or
supervision of commercial banks is to be nominated as Director on the
Boards by the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Reserve
Bank.
69. On the issue of desirability of the Reserve Bank’s nominee,
serving on the Board of SBI and simultaneously providing for nomination
of Additional Director(s) on the board by RBI, if the situation so warrants,

34
a representative of Indian Banks’ Association, stated, inter-alia, as under
while tendering evidence:
“There is a thinking that RBI should withdraw its nominee
from the Board because there is likelihood of a conflict of
interest. This proposed amendment was already introduced in
the amendments to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, and the Subsidiary Banks Act.
When these were considered by this Hon’ble Committee, it was
suggested that it is not advisable to totally withdraw the RBI
nominees and the provision be replaced by “any person
having experience in the banking supervision may be
appointed as Director on the bank”. Not a working employee
or officer of the bank but somebody who is experienced in
the banking supervision may be appointed. In pursuant to the
said recommendation of the Committee, those two Acts were
amended accordingly by the government and subsequently
passed by the Parliament. Eventually this may have to be done
in case of State Bank of India also.”
70. Questioned whether it would not be desirable to pursue a
similar proposal — as followed in the case of nationalised banks and
the subsidiary banks of SBI vide the amendments carried out in the
Bank Nationalization Acts 1970/1980 and  SBI (Subsidiary Banks)
Act, 1959 — of doing away with the nomination of an RBI
official on the SBI Board and instead provide for a RBI recommended
official to be nominated by the Central Government to serve on the Board
of SBI, the Ministry of Finance in a written submission stated as
follows:—
“Yes, it is proposed to replace clause (f) of section 19 (RBI
nominee director) with the following:
“one director, possessing necessary expertise and experience
in matters relating to regulation or supervision of commercial
banks, to be nominated by the Central Government on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank.”

35
71. Clause (f) of Section 19 of the Principal Act reads as
under:—
“(f) one director to be nominated by the Reserve Bank”.
72. The Committee observe that while the amendments
proposed to Section 19A in terms of the provisions of Clause 11
seek to specify the qualifications for elected Directors on the SBI
Board in terms of Section 19 (c) of the SBI Act, they do not, however,
enable the Reserve Bank to prescribe/lay down the criteria for
determining the ‘fit and proper’ status of the Directors in line with
the amendments made to the Banks Nationalization Acts, 1970/1980
and the Subsidiary Banks Laws. The Committee understand that
the Reserve Bank proposes to prescribe ‘fit and proper’ criteria for
the elected Directors of State Bank of India as well, on lines similar
to the criteria prescribed for ‘Directors’ on the Boards of private sector
banks, which include, inter-alia, the ‘manner’ and ‘procedure’ for
determination of ‘fit and proper’ status of the Directors.
Consequently, the Government have expressed concurrence with the
proposal placed before the Committee by the Reserve Bank for
substituting the sub-section (2) of Section 19A, as proposed in the
Bill, with a new sub-section, enabling the Reserve Bank to prescribe
the ‘criteria’ for determining ‘fit and proper’ status of the elected
directors. The changes proposed in the sub-section by the Reserve
Bank, and agreed to by Government, being in line with the proposals
made in the other banking statutes, the Committee recommend that
the same be carried out in the Bill.
73. The Committee also note that while the proposed
incorporation of the new section 19B, which seeks to empower the
Reserve Bank to appoint Additional Directors on the Board of SBI,
‘in the interest of banking policy or in the public interest’ is in line
with the proposal as made applicable to the nationalized banks and
the subsidiary banks of SBI, the provisions of the Bill, as
introduced, do not propose to do away with the nomination of an
official from the RBI on the SBI Board, as provided for in terms
of Section 19 (f). In response to the questioning on the rationale

36
for continuing with the nomination of an RBI official on the Board,
while proposing to enable for appointment of Additional Directors
too by the RBI, the Government have agreed to replace Clause (f)
with a new proviso providing for nomination of an official with
‘experience and expertise in regulation or supervision of commercial
banks’ on the Board by the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank. The proposal for replacing
the existing section 19 (f) (RBI Nominee Director) to provide for
nomination of an official ‘with experience and expertise in banking
supervision’ being in conformity with the proposals pertaining to the
nationalized banks and the subsidiary banks of SBI, the Committee
recommend the same for being carried out.

37
Clause 23 — Amendment of Section 31: Holding Board MeetingClause 23 — Amendment of Section 31: Holding Board MeetingClause 23 — Amendment of Section 31: Holding Board MeetingClause 23 — Amendment of Section 31: Holding Board MeetingClause 23 — Amendment of Section 31: Holding Board Meeting
through Video Conferencing-extending the applicability of thisthrough Video Conferencing-extending the applicability of thisthrough Video Conferencing-extending the applicability of thisthrough Video Conferencing-extending the applicability of thisthrough Video Conferencing-extending the applicability of this
provision to all nationalised banksprovision to all nationalised banksprovision to all nationalised banksprovision to all nationalised banksprovision to all nationalised banks
74. Clause 23 reads as under:—
“In section 31 of the Principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1) and (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Board shall meet at such time and place and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed;
and the meeting of the Central Board may be held by
participation of the directors of the Central Board through
video-conferencing or such other electronic means, as may be
prescribed, which are capable of recording and recognizing the
participation of the directors and the proceedings of such
meetings are capable of being recorded and stored:
Provided that the Central Government may in consultation
with the Reserve Bank, by a notification in the Official Gazette,
specify the matters which shall not be discussed in a meeting
of the Central Board held through video-conferencing or such
other electronic means.
(2) All questions at the meeting shall be decided by a
majority of the votes of the directors present in the meeting
or through video-conferencing or such other electronic means
and in the case of equality of votes the Chairman or, in his
absence, the Managing Director authorized by the Chairman
shall have a second or casting vote.
(b) in sub-section (4), for the word “vice-chairman”, the
words “managing director authorized by the chairman” shall
be substituted.”
37

38
75. The proposed amendment to Section 31 of the SBI Act would
enable the bank to hold Board meetings through video conferencing or
any other electronic means subject to the condition that the Central
Government may in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by a notification
in the Official Gazette, specify the powers which shall not be exercised
in a meeting of the Board of Directors held through video conferencing
or such other electronic means.
76. The Reserve Bank of India had, in their memorandum
submitted to the Committee earlier on the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006, indicated that the suggestion for
enabling for holding Board meetings through video conferencing had
come from the State Bank. Making out a case for enabling Subsidiary
Banks of SBI too to hold Board meetings through video conferencing, the
Reserve Bank had then submitted inter-alia as under:
“We have examined the suggestion and advised Government
of India to consider the same subject to the condition that the
Central Government may in consultation with the Reserve
Bank, by a notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
powers which shall not be exercised in a meeting of the Board
of Directors held through video conferencing or such other
electronic means. This is in line with the provisions contained
in section 90(1)(B) of the preliminary draft of Companies Bill,
2006 seeking amendment to Companies Act, 1956. It is,
therefore, proposed that similar amendment to section 34 of
the State Bank of India (subsidiary banks) Act, 1959 may also
be made to enable them to hold Board meetings through video
conferencing or any other electronic means subject to aforesaid
condition.”
77. The proposed amendment to section 31 of the State Bank of
India Act, 1955, enabling the SBI to hold Board meetings through video
conferencing or any other electronic means, is similar to the proposal
made in respect of the subsidiary banks of SBI, and is also to be akin
to the provisions proposed in respect of private sector banks, which, if

39
passed, would enable the private sector banks also to hold Board meeting
through video conferencing.
78. In regard to this specific amendment proposal, a representative
of All India State Bank Officers’ Federation, however, stated as under
during oral evidence:—
“Though the video conferencing may reduce the travelling
cost, but it would have its own negative points. Like we are
talking face to face here. But if this meeting is conducted
through video conferencing, it would not be that effective.”
79. The representative also added as follows in this regard:
“.........Like in a witness, you see not only the word spoken but
also the body language and other things, which may not be
possible in the video conferencing and the seriousness also
may not be there. This is our opinion. The only advantage is
that it may reduce the cost to some extent. But in view of the
decisions taken, which are involving crores and crores of
rupees, I think, the present position is working well, and it
may be continued.”
80. Since only the nationalised banks may be left out of the
enabling measure of holding Board meetings through video conferencing,
the Reserve Bank have, in their memorandum, suggested that a
consequential amendment to this effect may be made to the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/1980
which may be proposed as a part of the State Bank of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2006.
81. Asked whether the Government concurs with the proposal of
the Reserve Bank for enabling nationalised banks also to hold Board
meetings through video conferencing, the Ministry of Finance, in a written
reply, stated as follows:
“Yes, the Government concurs with the above mentioned
proposal of the Reserve Bank which could enable the
nationalised banks also to hold board meetings through

40
video conferencing as proposed for the SBI, private sector
banks, and as already approved for the subsidiary banks of
SBI.”
82. The proposal for amending section 31 of the SBI Act with
the view to enable the State Bank to hold Board meetings through
video conferencing or such other electronic means is in line with
the proposal accepted for incorporation in the SBI subsidiary banks
laws. The Committee note that the Government have now expressed
concurrence with the proposal placed before them by the Reserve
Bank for extending the facility of holding Board meetings through
video conferencing to the nationalized banks as well by proposing
a consequential amendment to this effect in the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/1980, as a part
of the State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Committee
recall that while considering the related proposal in respect of the
subsidiary banks of SBI, they had inter alia  opined that enabling
the Boards of the banks to hold meetings through video conferencing
would provide ‘a cost effective and time saving means of decision
making process’. The Committee express agreement with the
proposed amendment of section 31 for enabling the State Bank to
hold Board meetings through video conferencing, and also extending
this provision to the nationalized banks, as proposed by the Reserve
Bank, and concurred with by the Government. The Committee,
nevertheless, also feel the need to ensure that the general regulations
applicable to the State Bank, as well as the nationalized banks,
clearly detail the procedure/manner of conduct of such meetings, as
well as the powers that can, and cannot, be exercised in the meetings
held through video conferencing etc. The Committee also desire that
issues of secrecy and confidentiality of the proceedings of the
meetings held through video conferencing also be vouchsafed and
necessary provisions/regulations to this effect incorporated.

41
Clause 25 — Insertion of new Section 38A — Transfer of
unpaid or unclaimed Dividend to Unpaid Dividend Account.
83. Clause 25 – New Section 38A regarding transfer of unpaid or
unclaimed dividend reads as follows:—
“After section 38 of the Principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“38A. (1) Where, after the commencement of the State Bank
of India (Amendment) Act, 2006, a dividend has been declared
by State Bank but which has not been paid to a shareholder
or claimed by any shareholder entitled to it, within thirty days
from the date of declaration, the State Bank shall, within seven
days from the date of expiry of the said period of thirty days,
transfer the total amount of dividend which remains unpaid,
or unclaimed, to a special account to be named, the “unpaid
dividend account” maintained by it.
Explanation – In this sub-section, the expression “dividend
which remains unpaid” means any dividend the warrant in
respect thereof has not been encashed or which has otherwise
not been paid or claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared
by the State Bank before the commencement of the State Bank
of India (Amendment) Act, 2006, remains unpaid at such
commencement, the State Bank shall, within a period of six
months from such commencement, transfer such unpaid
amount to the account referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid dividend account
of the State Bank, in pursuance of this section which remains
unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date
of such transfer shall be transferred by the State Bank to the
Investor Education and Protection Fund established under
41

42
sub-section (1) of section 205(C) of the Companies Act, 1956
for being utilised for the purpose and in the manner specified
in that section.”
84. Presently, there is no provision in the SBI Act to deal with
unclaimed or unpaid dividend on the books of the SBI. The proposed
incorporation of the new Section 38A seeks to enable the SBI to transfer
such dividend within seven days from the expiry of the 30 days from
the date of declaration, which remains unpaid or unclaimed, to a special
account to be named ‘Unpaid Dividend Account’ and to the ‘Investor
Education and Protection Fund’ after a period of 7 years from the date
of transfer to the ‘Special Dividend Account’. The amendment proposal
is in line with the amendments made to the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/1980 and the SBI
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
85. Expressing concurrence with the proposed insertion of
section 38A to the SBI Act, the RBI in a written submission stated as
follows:—
“The Bill proposed to incorporate a new section 38A with
regard to transfer of unclaimed or unpaid dividends on the
lines of section 205A of the Companies Act, 1956.
This is in line with amendments made to Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/98 and
aimed at bringing uniformity among all the banks with
respect to transfer of unclaimed dividend. As such, we concur
with the proposed amendments.”
86. The Committee had, while examining the related proposals for
the nationalised banks, vide the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws Amendment
Bill, 2005 and the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws)
Amendment Bill, 2006, noted that in terms of the explanation under
section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956 — which would apply to
transferred unclaimed dividend amounts — ‘no claim shall lie against
the funds or the company in respect of individual amounts which were

43
unclaimed and unpaid for a period of seven years from the date that
they became due for payment and no payment shall be made in respect
of any such claims’.
87. On the specific aspect of the prohibition placed on the
shareholders to stake claim on unpaid dividends after the lapse of the
seven years period, the Indian Banks’ Association, has, in line with the
suggestions made earlier during the consideration of the related Bills by
the Committee, expressed their view point as under:—
“In regard to the amendments for payment of unpaid and
unclaimed dividends to the Investor Education and Protection Fund,
we suggest that a provision may be made enabling any person
entitled to such dividend to make a claim after the unclaimed
dividend is transferred to the Fund. Under the provisions of the
explanation below sub-section (2) of section 205C of the Companies
Act, no claim shall lie against the Fund or the company in respect
of individual amounts which were unclaimed and unpaid for a
period of seven years from the date that it first became due for
payment and no payment shall be made in respect of any such
claims. After the amendments proposed to the SBI Act, unclaimed
dividends of the shareholders of SBI can be transferred to the
Investor Education and Protection Fund and such shareholder
cannot make a claim in respect of such dividend. We had earlier
suggested that a bar on making a claim is unreasonable and
provision needs to be made for permitting the investor to make a
claim for such dividend and payment of the same to such investor.
We wish to add that we had made similar suggestion in regard to
the proposed amendments to the SBI Subsidiary Banks Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 as also the Banking Companies (Acquisi-
tion and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendments Bill.”
88. Asked whether it was not necessary to provide legitimate space
to the bona fide shareholders to stake claims on unclaimed dividend, the
Ministry of Finance had, in respect of the provisions pertaining to
nationalised banks, informed that the Government agreed to the
suggestion. With regard to the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks

44
Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006, the Committee were, inter-alia, informed
that the preliminary draft Bill relating to the amendment to the
Companies Act, 1956 [section 68 (4)] provide for entitling the claimants
to apply to the ‘fund’ for refund of the amounts subject to the conditions
to be stipulated.
89. Asked once again, to furnish the Government’s perception on
the suggestion made by IBA to enable bona fide claimants to stake claim
on the unpaid dividend account even after the ‘seven years stipulation’,
the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply stated as follows:—
“Sub-section (4) of section 68 of the Preliminary Draft (The
Companies Act, 1956) provides that any person claiming to
be entitled to any money transferred to the Fund may apply
to the Fund and the fund, if satisfied and subject to such
conditions as the Central Government may prescribe in this
regard, make payment to that person or any other person
entitled thereto.”
90. The Ministry also added in this regard that the Bill to amend
the Companies Act, 1956 is yet to be finalized.
91. The Committee note that the proposed incorporation of
Section 38A providing for transfer of unclaimed and unpaid dividend
amounts on the books of the State Bank of India to the Investor
Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) is in conformity with the
provisions relating to management of unclaimed/unpaid dividend
amounts, as made for the nationalized banks/subsidiary banks of
SBI. The Committee recall that while considering the related proposal
on the earlier occasion, they had, inter alia,  taken note of the fact
that in terms of the existing provisions of section 205C of the
Companies Act, 1956 — which would apply to the unclaimed
amounts transferred to the ‘IEPF’ — the amounts will cease to be
payable after the lapse of seven years from the dates they first
became due for payment. In response to the need felt by the
Committee, and also as expressed by the Indian Banks’ Association
for providing legitimate space to bona fide claimants to make claim
on unpaid dividend amounts even after the end of the seven years

45
stipulation, the Government had then, inter alia, informed that
enabling provisions to this effect were proposed for incorporation
in the preliminary draft of the revised Companies Act, 1956.
92. The Committee note from the information now furnished
by the Government that the relevant provisions to this effect, as
proposed in the preliminary draft of the revised Companies Act
provide inter alia that, “any person claiming to be entitled to any
money transferred to the Fund may apply to the Fund and the Fund,
if satisfied and subject to such conditions as the Central Government
may prescribe in this regard, make payment”. The Committee, being
convinced of the need for ensuring that legitimate claimants to the
unpaid amounts are not deprived of the rightful dues even after
the seven years’ stipulation, as applicable at present, reiterate the
need for ensuring that the enabling provision to this effect, as
proposed, is necessarily incorporated in the revised Companies Act.

46
Clause 31 — Amendment of Section 50 (Power of Central
Board to make regulations)
93. Clause 31 reads as under:—
“In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(aa) procedure for increasing issued capital by the issue
of equity or preference shares under sub-section (2); the
manner of accepting money for issued capital, forfeiture
and re-issue of shares under sub-section (5) of section 5;
(ab) the manner of nominating an individual by one
individual jointly under sub-sections (1) and (2); manner
of nominating a minor under sub-section (4); and the
manner of varying or cancellation of nomination under
sub-section (3) of section 10A;”;
(ii) In cl ause (b), for the words “floppies of diskettes”, the
words “floppies or diskettes or any other electronic form”
shall be substituted;
(iii) In clause (i), after the words “meetings shall be
convened”, the words “and the participation through
such other electronic means.” shall be inserted.”
94. While the amendments proposed under clause 23 seek to
amend Section 31 of SBI Act, 1955 (Meetings of the Central Board) for
enabling the SBI to hold Central Board Meetings through video
conferencing or any other electronic media, the proposed amendment to
section 50 (iii) of the Act under clause 31 seeks to enable the Board of
SBI to make regulations for holding Annual General Meetings through
video conferencing, which according to RBI is contrary to the intended
objectives of the Bill.
46

47
95. The Reserve Bank of India has, therefore, suggested as under
in this regard:–
“The amendments proposed in clause (i) of sub-section (2) of
section 50 may be dropped.”
96. Questioned in this regard, the Ministry of Finance, in a written
reply, informed as under:—
“Amendments have been proposed to section 31 to enable the
Central Board of the State Bank to hold Board meeting through
video conferencing or any other electronic media. Relevant
changes to the State Bank of India General Regulation, 1955
will be carried out for this purpose which is covered under
clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 50 of the Act.
Provisions relating to annual general meeting are provided in
section 42 where no such enabling amendment has been
proposed in the Bill. Government therefore, agree to drop
amendment to clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 50.”
97. The Committee note that the Government have agreed to
drop the proposal for amendment of clause (i) of sub-clause 2 of
Section 50 of the SBI Act, which would have enabled the Central
Board of the Bank to frame regulations for holding Annual General
Meetings through video conferencing, or any other electronic means.
The intended objective of the proposals under Clause 23 of the Bill
seeking to amend Section 31 of the Act (Meetings of the Central
Board) is to enable the SBI to hold Central Board meetings through
video conferencing, and does not cover Annual General Meetings.
The Committee, therefore, expect that, as agreed to, the amendments
proposed in Clause (i) of sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Act
are dropped, and instead relevant changes carried out in Clause (f)
of sub-section (2) of Section 50 which covers ‘Central Board meetings’
for the purpose of framing of the related regulations.
 N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
24 August , 2007 Chairman,
2 Bhadrapada , 1929  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

48
NOTES OF DISSENT
Submitted by S/Shri Rupchand Pal, Lakshman Seth, M.Ps.
In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the State Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, it is stated that the Bill seeks amendment of the SBI
Act, 1955 to provide for enhancement of the capital of State Bank by issue
of preference share to enable the Bank to raise resources from the market
by public issue or preferential allotment or private placement on lines
similar to the proposals made/approved or effected for private sector
banks as well as nationalized banks and the subsidiary banks of SBI.
I have serious objections to this proposed amendment on the following
grounds:–
1. Putting the SBI at par with other banks including private sector
banks will be a retrograde step and the special position of the
SBI which it has been holding and the special social
obligations it has been fulfilling to our countrymen, will be
to a large extent diluted as a result of the proposed amendment
of the SBI Act, 1955.
2. It is a step towards privatization of this major public sector
bank. The proposed step to bring down RBI/Government
equity from 59.73% now in the hands of RBI (now transferred
to Central Government) to 55% and then to 51% under Central
Govt. control is indicative of the direction towards privatization
which the Govt. has preferred as it has chosen path for
financial sector reforms.
3. When the Govt. advocates policy, financial inclusion and its
commitment to financial inclusion is reiterated by the Hon’ble
Prime Minister, by the Hon’ble Finance Minister through
Budget speech and on other occasions and bringing down the
Govt.’s share in SBI to 51% at the same time contradicts
Government’s commitment to strengthen the role of state sector
48

49
in banking particularly the State Bank of India with a view
to provide better service to the poor and the unprivileged and
large sections of the population having no access to the
banking system at all.
4. If the SBI is put at par with private sector banks as is
proposed through the present amendment it will hardly be
able to fulfill its social obligation and simultaneously
maintain its competitive edge vis-a-vis the private sector banks
who have virtually little or no social obligation as can be seen
from the experience of the past few years. The SBI has already
satisfactory level of capital adequacy (11%) and capital can
be mobilized by the SBI without bringing down Government
share in various ways.
5. The private placement of SBI equity will be detrimental to this
great institution which has grown on its own and has a larger
number of branches and has the capacity for capital
mobilization in various innovative ways.
6. The transfer of RBI equity holding to Central Govt. through
Ordinance was a step not acceptable at all. Because while the
comprehensive SBI (Amendment) Bill is under the consider-
ation of Standing Committee on Finance, it is unfortunate that
the Government could not wait a little while for the report of
the Standing Committee making no reference to the Standing
Committee on Finance which has been engaged in examining
various aspects of the proposed SBI (Amendment) Bill.
I have serious concern for such practice of ignoring the
Standing Committee in such a manner by piecemeal
finalization of the governmental proposal by promulgating
ordinance while the major part of the amendment of the Bill
is under the consideration of the concerned Standing
Committee.
Although the transfer of RBI equity to Central Govt. was
a prime measure in relation to the proposed amendment, the

50
Government’s impatience to proceed with the ordinance of that
part which is internally related to the proposed amendment
is unfortunate and unacceptable.
7. In sum, I suspect that it is one of the key steps towards
privatization of the great institution of SBI and this proposed
steps will do no good to countrymen, it will rather weaken
the major public sector giant called SBI.
I would request the Chairman to kindly take note of my Note of
Dissent and incorporate the same as part of the Report.
I would like to add that although the draft Report has “taken
congnizance of the apprehensions” expressed in certain quarters that the
proposal to enable dilution of the Government’s/RBI’s holding in the
Bank from 55% to 51% in particular would leave the possibility of
affecting the State owned character of the bank and tantamount to
creeping privatization of the Bank it has proceeded with the point of view
of the Govt. as well as the management of SBI only.
But even after taking cognizance of the apprehension the Report
should have strongly disapproved of the step which has not been done
in the Report. Hence my Note of Dissent.
Sd/- Sd/-
(Shri Lakshman Seth) (Shri Rupchand Pal)

51
NOTE OF DISSENT
Submitted by Shri Moinul Hassan, MP
This is to express my opposition to the recommendation contained in
Clause 59 of the Draft Report of the Standing Committee on the State
Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006, which says:–
“The Committee while endorsing the amendment proposals under
Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill enabling for a reduction of the statutorily
prescribed minimum equity holding of RBI (now Central Govern-
ment) in SBI from 55% to 51% and infusion of capital by way of
private placement, issue of preference shares etc.....”
While the Standing Committee Report in Clause 58 has taken into account
the objections raised by the officers and employees of the SBI to this
amendment, because it amounts to ‘creeping privatisation’ and would
dilute the ‘State owned character’ of the SBI, it has chosen to endorse
the Government’s position on the matter. I am not in agreement with this
view.
Sd/-
(Shri Moinul Hassan)
51

52
52
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 15 May, 2007 from 1600 to
1710 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab— Acting Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Rupchand Pal
13. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
18. Shri Vijay J. Darda
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Division)
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Secretary (Financial Sector)
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BO&A)

53
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab to act as Chairman for the sitting under
Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha.
3. At the outset, the Acting Chairman welcomed the representa-
tives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs –
Banking Division) and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs – Banking Division) briefed the
Committee on the various provisions of the ‘State Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
5. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied
to by the representatives. The Acting Chairman, then, directed the
representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them may be furnished
to the Committee later on, viz., on the capital requirements of the State
Bank of India in the future, changes proposed in the Bill for enabling
transfer of RBI’s stake in SBI, and the extent to which the amendment
proposals would help in strengthening and improving the functioning
of State Bank of India.
6. The briefing was concluded.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

54
54
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 31 May, 2007 from 1100 to
1225 hrs. and 1500 to 1725 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
13. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
15. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
16. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
18. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
19. Shri Santosh Bargodia
10. Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri S. Anbalagan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary

55
Part-I
(1100 to 1225 hours)
WITNESSES
1. All India Bank Officers’ Association
(i) Shri N.S. Virk, Organising Secretary
(ii) Shri Shisodia, State Secretary
2. All India Bank Officers’ Confederation and All India State Bank
Officers’ Federation
(i) Shri Amar Pal, President
(ii) Shri G.D. Nadaf, General Secretary
(iii) Shri T.N. Goyal, Vice President
3. All India State Bank of India Staff Federation
(i) Shri Umesh P. Naik, President
(ii) Shri V.K. Gupta, Sr. Vice President
4. Bank Employees Federation of India
Shri M.L. Malkotia, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
(i) All India Bank Officers’ Association, (ii) All India Banks Officers’
Confederation, (iii) All India State Bank Officers’ Federation, and
(iv) Bank Employees Federation of India to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of (i) All India Bank Officers’ Assocation, (ii) All India Banks Officers’
Confederation, (iii) All India State Bank Officers’ Federation, and
(iv) Bank Employees Federation of India on the State Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives.

56
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives to
furnish notes on certain points raised by the Members to which replies
were not readily available with them during the discussion.
5. The main issues that were discussed pertain to (i) capital
adequacy norms, (ii) issue of preference shares, (iii) authorised capital
of SBI, (iv) RBI’s shareholding (v) voting rights, (vi) appointment of
Directors and (vii) video conferencing.
6. The evidence was concluded.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
Part-II
(1500 to 1725 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
1. State Bank of India
(i) Shri O.P. Bhatt, Chairman
(ii) Shri Mohandas, DGM (Law)
(iii) Shri S.S. Ranjan, CGM (Financial Controller)
2. Indian Banks’ Association
Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Advisor-Legal
8. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
State Bank of India and Indian Banks’ Association to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
9. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the State Bank of India and India Banks’ Association on the various

57
provisions contained in the State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the
information with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily
available with them might be furnished to the Committee later on.
10. The main issues discussed during the meeting were (i) capital
adequacy norms under Basel II, (ii) preference shares, (iii) to increase
authorised capital of SBI, (iv) RBI’s shareholding, (v) voting rights,
(vi) appointment of MDs and Directors, (vii) abolition of post of Vice-
Chairman, (viii) video conferencing and (ix) unpaid/unclaimed dividend
etc.
11. The evidence was concluded.
12. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adourned.

58
58
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th June, 2007 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Vijoy Krishna
14. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
15. Shri Rupchand Pal
16. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
18. Shri Raashid Alvi
19. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Vijay J. Darda
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary

59
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Secretary, Financial Sector
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BO&A)
Reserve Bank of India
1. Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor
2. Shri Prashant Saran, Chief General Manager
3. Shri Subrata Das, Deputy General Manager
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs – Banking
Division) and RBI to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by
the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs - Banking
Division) and RBI on the various provisions contained in the State Bank
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives that the information with regard to
queries of the Members which was not readily available with them might
be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The main issues discussed during the meeting related to deficit
neutral transfer of shares held by RBI to the Government of India;
nomination of an executive of RBI on the board of SBI; allotment of
preference shares and voting rights; necessity of reducing the RBI’s
shareholding and perceived clash of interest between the provisions of
the Bill with that of the provisions of the Companies Act.
5. The evidence was concluded
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
60
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22nd August, 2007 from
1700 hrs. to 1745 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
15. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
16. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
17. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
18. Shri Rupchand Pal
19. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
10. Shri K.S. Rao
11. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
12. Shri Lakshman Seth
13. Shri A.R. Shaheen
14. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
15. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Vijay J. Darda
19. Shri Moinul Hassan

61
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and
congratulated them on their nomination to the Committee for the year
2007-08.
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** **
5. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the
draft report on the State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The
Committee, after deliberation, adopted the draft report with the
modifications/amendments shown in the Annexure.
6. As some members did not agree with some of the provisions
of the Bill, they desired to submit their notes of dissent. The Chairman
informed them that they could send the notes of dissent by 23 August,
2007.
7. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report in the light of the suggestions received from the Members and
factual verification by the Ministry and also to make consequential verbal
changes and present the report to Parliament.
The Committee then adourned.

62
62
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 22 AUGUST, 2007]
Page Para Line Amendment/Modification
1 2 3            4
51 09 After
‘Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2005,
Insert
‘which is get to be enacted,’
11 28 19 For
‘...the State bank per se holds a
distinctive legacy in the Country’s
banking system. The Committee, there-
fore, trust and hope that the pressures
of the new capital adequacy frame-
work and the changing business
requirements of the banking system,
do not, in anyway, undermine or
reorient the distinctive position and
role played by the State Bank in the
Banking System.”
Read
‘.....the State Bank of India in general
holds a distinctive legacy in the
banking system and in expanding the
banking network in rural areas and
advancing credit to the weaker
sections in particular. The Committee,
hence, desire that the objectives and

63
1 2 3            4
goals that aim for endeavouring for
the upliftment of the downtrodden
and the deprived which were envis-
aged during the yester years may not
be lost sight of by the bank while
coping with the pressures of the new
capital adequacy framework and the
changing business requirements of
the banking system.”
13 30 3 For
‘Though the Committee endorse the
perception of the Government regard-
ing transfer of ownership from RBI to
the Government, they cannot help
point out that the approval for effect-
ing the proposed transfer of
shareholding in SBI could very well
have been obtained beforehand and
the consequential amendments re-
quired in the SBI Act, 1955, incorpo-
rated as a part of the current Bill
referred to them instead of issuing an
Ordinance effecting changes in the
SBI Act. The Committee would also
emphasize that, as assured by the
Government, it should be ensured that
the likely adverse implications of the
‘transfer of stakes’ in SBI from the
RBI to the Government, as expressed
by the Tarapore Committee do not, in
anyway, prove to come true.’

64
1 2 3            4
Read
‘The Committee find the clarification
given by the Ministry of Finance for
non-inclusion of the amendments
required for facilitating the transfer of
RBI’s equity holding in SBI to the
Central Government in the current Bill
to be not at all acceptable. The
Government knew beforehand that
the Ordinance route was to be pur-
sued for effecting this proposal, even
while various related aspects as con-
tained in the Bill referred were being
examined. While taking exception to
and expressing their displeasure on
the Government’s approach of by-
passing the scrutiny of important
issues, the Committee also emphasise
that, as assured by the Government, it
should be ensured that the likely
adverse implications of the ‘transfer
of stakes’ in SBI from the RBI to the
Government, as expressed by the
Tarapore Committee do not, in any-
way, prove to come true.
37 82 Last After
Line ‘......video conferencing etc.’
Insert
‘The Committee also desire that issues
of secrecy and confidentiality of the
proceedings of the meetings held
through video conferencing also be
vouchsafed and necessary provisions/
regulations to this effect incorpo-
rated.’

65
APPENDIX-II
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 99 of 2006
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the State
Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be ap-
pointed for different provisions of this Act and any
reference in any such provision to the commence-
ment of this Act shall be construed as a reference
to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
65
on
18 December, 2006

66
2. In section 2 of the State Bank of India
Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the principle
Act), clause (i) shall be omitted.
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“4. Subject to the provisions of this
Act, the authorised capital of the State Bank shall
be five thousand crores of rupees divided into five
hundred crores of fully paid-up shares of ten rupees
each:
Provided that the Central Board may
reduce the nominal or face value of the shares, and
divide the authorised capital into such denomina-
tion as it may decide with the approval of the
Reserve Bank:
Provided further that the Central Govern-
ment may in consultation with the Reserve Bank
increase or reduce the authorised capital so however
that the shares in all cases shall be fully paid-up
shares.”.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The issued capital of the State Bank
shall consist of equity shares or equity and
preference shares:
Provided that the issue of preference
shares shall be in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class of
preference shares, the extent of issue of each class
of such preference shares (whether perpetual or
irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and
Amendment of
section 2.
23 of 1955.
Substitution of
section 4.
Authorised
capital.
Amendment of
section 5.

67
conditions subject to which, each class of prefer-
ence shares may be issued:
Provided further that the Central Board may
from time to time increase, with the previous
approval of the Reserve Bank and the Central
Government, whether by public issue or
preferential allotment or private placement, in
accordance with the procedure as may be pre-
scribed, the issued capital by the issue of equity or
preference shares:
Provided also that the Reserve Bank shall, at
all times, hold not less than fifty-one per cent. of
the issued capital consisting of equity shares of the
State Bank.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Subject to the provisions contained in
sub-section (2), the Central Board may increase
from time to time, by way of issuing bonus
shares to existing equity shareholders, the issued
capital in such manner as the Reserve Bank
may, with the approval of the Central Government,
direct.
(5) The State Bank may, accept the
money in respect of shares issued towards increase
in the issued capital in instalments, make calls,
forfeit unpaid shares and re-issue them, in such
manner as may be prescribed.”.
5. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), for the words “fifty-five per cent. of the
issued capital”, the words “fifty-one per cent. of the
issued capital consisting of equity shares,”, shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 10.

68
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. (1) Every individual registered share-
holder may, at any time, nominate, in the
prescribed manner, an individual to whom all his
rights in the shares shall vest in the event of his
death.
(2) Where the shares are registered in the
name of more than one individual jointly, the joint
holders may together nominate in the prescribed
manner, an individual to whom all their rights in
the shares shall vest in the event of the death of all
the joint holders.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in any
disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise,
where a nomination in respect of shares is made
in the prescribed manner and which purports
to confer on the nominee the right to vest the
shares, the nominee shall, on the death of the
shareholder or, as the case may be, on the death
of all the joint holders, become entitled to all the
rights of the shareholder or, as the case may be, of
all the joint holders, in relation to such shares and
all other persons shall be excluded unless the
nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed
manner.
(4) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall
be lawful for the individual registered holder of the
shares to make nomination to appoint, in the
prescribed manner, any person to become entitlted
to the shares in the event of his death during the
minority of the nominee.”.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Right of
registered
shareholders
to nominate.

69
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, after
the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that the shareholder
holding any preference share capital in the State
Bank shall, in respect of such capital, have a right
to vote only on resolutions placed before the State
Bank which directly affect the rights attached to his
preference shares:
Provided also that no preference share-
holder shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by him in excess
of ten per cent. of total voting rights of all
the shareholders holding preference share capital
only.”.
8. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), for the words “in computer floppies or
diskets”, the words “in computer floppies or
diskettes or any other electronic form” shall be
substituted.
9. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) In sub-section (1), for the words
“Bombay, the words “Mumbai, and shall also be
known as Corporate Centre” shall be substituted;
(b) In sub-section (2), for the word
“Bombay”, Calcutta and Madras”, the words
“Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai” shall be substi-
tuted;
10. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (a), the words “and a vice-
chairman” shall be omitted;
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 19.

70
(b) for clause (b), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) Such number of managing
directors not exceeding four, as may be appointed
by the Central Government in consultation with the
Reserve Bank;”;
(c) clause (bb) shall be omitted.
11. After section 19 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“19A. (1) The directors elected under
clause (c) of section 19 shall—
(a) have special knowledge or experi-
ence in respect of one or more of the following
areas, namely:—
(i) agriculture and rural economy,
(ii) banking,
(iii) co-operation,
(iv) economics,
(v) finance,
(vi) law,
(vii) small-scale industry,
(viii) any other area the special knowl-
edge of, and experience in, which in the opinion of
the Reserve Bank shall be useful to the State Bank;
(b) represent the interests of deposi-
tors; or
(c) represent the interests of farmers,
workers and artisans.
Insertion of
new sections
19A and 19B.
Qualifications
for elections
as directors.

71
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may from time
to time notify any additional criteria for persons
to be elected as director under clause (c) of section
19.
(3) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion
that any director of the State Bank elected under
clause (c) of section 19 does not fulfill the
requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2), it may,
after giving to such director and the State Bank a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order,
remove such director.
(4) On the removal of a director under sub-
section (3), the Central Board shall co-opt any other
person fulfilling the requirements of sub-sections
(1) and (2), as a director in place of the person so
removed, till a director is duly elected by the
shareholders of the State Bank in the next annual
general meeting; and the person so co-opted shall
be deemed to have been duly elected by the
shareholders of the State Bank as a director.
19B. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of the
opinion that in the interest of banking policy or in
the public interest or in the interests of the State
Bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it
may, from time to time and by order in writing
appoint, with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order, one or more persons as
additional directors of the State Bank.
(2) Any person appointed as additional
director under sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the
Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not
Power of Re-
serve Bank to
appoint addi-
tional direc-
tors.

72
exceeding three years or such further periods not
exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve Bank
may, by order, specify.
(b) not incur any obligation or liability
by reason only of his being an additional director
or for anything done or omitted to be done in good
faith in the execution of the duties of his office or
in relation thereto; and
(c) not be required to hold qualifica-
tion shares in the State Bank.
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any propor-
tion of the total number of directors of the State
Bank, any additional director appointed under this
section shall not be taken into account.”.
12. In section 20 of the principle Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the words “the
vice-chairman” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (1A), the word
“vice-chairman”, occurring at both the places,
shall be omitted.
13. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), for clause (a), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the chairman, ex officio  or
the managing director nominated by the
chairman;”.
14. For section 21B of the principle Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“21B. In respect of the area falling within the
jurisdiction of the local head office for which the
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 21.
Substituion of
new section
for section
21B.
Powers of
Local Board.

73
Local Board has been constituted, a Local Board
shall, subject to such general or special direction as
the Central Board may give from time to time,
exercise such powers and perform such duties and
functions as may be entrusted or delegated to it by
the Central Board.”.
15. In section 21C of the principal Act, for
sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) The chairman or the managing director
nominated by him shall be an ex officio  member
of every such Local Committee.”.
16. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub
section (1),—
(a) in clause (d), the word “vice-chairman”
shall be omitted;
(b) for clause (h), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(h) in the case of an elected director, he is
not registered as a holder in his own right of
unencumbered shares in the State Bank, either as
sole holder or as first named holder when jointly
held, of a nominal value of at least five thousand
rupees:”.
17. In section 23 of the principal Act, in
clause (b), the word “vice-chairman” shall be
omitted.
18. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), the word “vice-chairman” shall be
omitted.
Amendment
of section
21C.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 24.

74
19. After section 24 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“24A. (1) Where the Central Government, on
the recommendation of the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing
the affairs of the State Bank being conducted in a
manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors
or the State Bank or for securing the proper
management of the State Bank, it is necessary so
to do, the Central Government may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the
Central Board for a period not exceeding six months
as may be specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the
Central Board may be extended from time to time,
so, however, that total period shall not exceed
twelve months.
(2) The Central Government may, in consul-
tation with the Reserve Bank, on supersession of the
Central Board under sub-section (1), appoint an
Administrator (not being an officer of the
Central Government or a State Government) who
has experience in law, finance, banking, economics
or accountancy, for such period as it may deter-
mine.
(3) The Central Government may issue such
directions to the Administrator as it may consider
necessary and the Administrator shall be bound to
follow such directions.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act, upon making the order of supersession of
the Central Board—
(a) the chairman, managing director and
other directors shall, as from the date of superses-
sion, vacate their offices as such;
Insertion
of new
section 24A.
Supersession
of Board in
certain cases.

75
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of this Act
or any other law for the time being in force, be
exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the
Central Board, or by a resolution passed in the
general meeting of the State Bank, shall, until the
Central Board is reconstituted, be exercised and
discharged by the Administrator appointed under
sub-section (2):
Provided that the powers exercised by the
Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that
such power is also exercisable by a resolution
passed in the general meeting of the State Bank.
(5) The Central Government may, in consul-
tation with the Reserve Bank, constitute a committee
of three or more persons who have experience in
law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to
assist the Administrator in the discharge of his
duties.
(6) The Committee shall meet at such
times and places and observe such rules of
procedure as may be specified by the rules made
under this Act.
(7) The salary and allowances of the Ad-
ministrator and the members of the committee shall
be such as may be specified by the rules made
under this Act and be payable by the State Bank.
(8) On and before the expiration of two
months before the expiry of the period of superses-
sion of the Central Board, the Administrator of the
State Bank shall call the general meeting of the State
Bank to elect new directors and re-constitute the
said Board.

76
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in any
contract, no person shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the loss or termination of his
office on supersession of the Central Board.
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub-
section (2) shall vacate office immediately after the
re-constitution of the Central Board.”.
20. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-
sections (1) and (2), the word “vice-chairman”
occurring at both the places shall be omitted.
21. Section 28 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
22. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1),—
(a) in clause (a), the word “and” shall be
omitted;
(b) in clause (b),—
(i) the words “and the vice-chairman”
shall be omitted;
(ii) at the end, the word “and” shall be
inserted;
(c) after clause (b), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) when authorised by the chairman,
shall preside at the meetings of the Central Board
in his absence.”.
23. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the
Amendment
of section 25.
Omission of
section 28.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 31.

77
following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The Central Board shall meet at such
time and place and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings as may be prescribed; and the
meeting of the Central Board may be held by
participation of the directors of the Central
Board through video-conferencing or such other
electronic means, as may be prescribed, which
are capable of recording and recognizing the
participation of the directors and the proceedings
of such meetings are capable of being recorded and
stored:
Provided that the Central Government may in
consultation with Reserve Bank, by a notification
in the Official Gazette, specify the matters
which shall not be discussed in a meeting of
the Central Board held through video-conferencing
or such other electronic means.
(2) All questions at the meeting shall
be decided by a majority of the votes of the directors
present in the meeting or through video conferencing
or such other electronic means and in the case of
equality of votes the Chairman or, in his absence,
the Managing Director authorised by the Chairman
shall have a second or casting vote.”;
(b) in sub-section (4), for the word
“vice-chairman”, the words “managing director
authorised by the chairman” shall be substituted.
24. In section 31A of the principal Act, in
sub-section (5), for the words “the vice-chairman if
he is a member of the Local Board”, the words “the
Amendment
of section 31A.

78
managing director authorised by the chairman”
shall be substituted.
25. After section 38 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘38A. (1) Where, after the commencement of
the State Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2006, a
dividend has been declared by the State Bank but
which has not been paid to a shareholder or
claimed by any shareholder entitled to it, within
thirty days from the date of declaration, the State
Bank shall, within seven days from the date of
expiry of the said period of thirty days, transfer the
total amount of dividend which remains unpaid, or
unclaimed, to a special account to be named, the
“unpaid dividend account” maintained by it.
Explanation.—  In this sub-section, the expres-
sion “dividend which remains unpaid” means any
dividend the warrant in respect thereof has not been
encashed or which has otherwise not been paid or
claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any
dividend, declared by the State Bank before the
commencement of the State Bank of India (Amend-
ment) Act, 2006, remains unpaid at such com-
mencement, the State bank shall, within a period
of six months from such commencement, transfer
such unpaid amount to the account referred to in
sub-section (1).
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid
dividend account of the State Bank, in pursuance
of this section which remains unpaid or unclaimed
for a period of seven years from the date of such
transfer shall be transferred by the State Bank to
Insertion of
new section
38A.
Transfer of
unpaid or
unclaimed
dividend.

79
the Investor Education and Protection Fund estab-
lished under sub-section (1) of section 205C of the
Companies Act, 1956 for being utilised for the
purpose and in the manner specified in that
section.”.
26. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the
word “December”, the word “March” shall be
substituted.
27. In section 40 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word
“December”, the word “March” shall be substi-
tuted;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The balance sheet and the profit
and loss account shall be signed by the Chairman,
managing directors and at least three other directors
of the Central Board.”.
28. For section 42 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“42. (1) An annual general meeting
shall be held in each financial year at the Corporate
Centre or at such other place in Mumbai other than
the Corporate Centre or at such other place in India
and at such time, as shall from time to time be
specified by the Central Board and a general
meeting other than an annual general meeting may
be convened by the State Bank at any other time
and at such place in India as shall from time to
time be specified by the Central Board:
Provided that such annual general meeting
shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from
Amendment
of section 39.
Amendment
of section 40.
Substituion of
new section
for section 42.
Balance sheet,
etc., of State
Bank may be
discussed at
general
meeting.
1 of 1956.

80
the date on which the balance sheet together with
the profit and loss account and auditors’ report,
under sub-section (1) of section 40, is forwarded to
the Central Government or to the Reserve Bank,
whichever date is earlier.
(2) The shareholders present at an annual
general meeting shall be entitlted to discuss and
adopt the balance sheet and the profit and loss
account of the State Bank made up to the previous
31st day of March or the date specified under
section 39, as the case may be, the report of the
Central Board on the working and activities of the
State Bank for the period covered by the accounts
and the auditors’ report on the balance sheet and
accounts.”.
29. In section 43 of the principal Act, sub-
section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2) The officers, advisers and employ-
ees of the State Bank shall individually or jointly
or with other officers, advisers and employees in a
Local Committee exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may by general or special order, be
entrusted or delegated to them by the Central Board
or its executive committee.”.
30. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) the time and place of meeting of the
Committee and the rules of procedure to be
observed by it under sub-section (6); the salary and
allowances of the Administrator and the members
of the committee under sub-section (7) of section
24A.”.
Amendment
of section 43.
Amendment
of section 49.

81
31. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) procedure for increasing issued
capital by the issue of equity or preference shares
under sub-section (2); the manner of accepting
money for issued capital, forfeiture and re-issue of
shares under sub-section (5) of section 5;
(ab) the manner of nominating an
individual by one individual jointly under sub-
sections (1) and (2); manner of nominating a minor
under sub-section (4); and the manner of varying
or cancellation of nomination under sub-section (3)
of section 10A;”;
(ii) in cl ause (b), for the words “floppies of
diskettes”, the words “floppies or diskettes or any
other electronic form” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (i), after the words “meetings
shall be convened”, the words “and the participa-
tion through such other electronic means,” shall be
inserted.
Amendment
of section 50.

82
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the SBI
Act) was last amended in 1993 to enable the State Bank of India to access
capital market. While State Bank of India can access capital market by
issuing equity shares or bonds, or by both equity share and bonds, there
is no express provision under the SBI Act to enable the State Bank to
issue preference shares and also bonus shares.
2. The Basel Capital Accord, the current international framework
on Capital Adequcy, was adopted in the year 1988 by many banks
worldwide and by India in the year 1992.
Thereupon the Reserve Bank of India had introduced a set of norms
for income recognition, provisioning and also for capital adequacy in
relation to risk weighted assets. These norms were designed to put the
financial accounting and prudential standards of Indian banks on a
sound footing in line with current international practices.
3. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has worked on
a new framwork for international convergence on capital standards and
in June, 2004 released the new capital adequacy framework known as
Basel II.
With the introduction of the Basel II, all the public sector banks
including the State Bank of India and its subsidiary banks could be
required to increase their capital base to meet the minimum requirements.
Achievement of the capital adequacy norms under Basel II will improve
the basic financial health of the banking system and thus improve its
international credibility, since banks in many countries are also in the
process of adopting these standards.
4. The State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006 seeks to provide
for enhancement of the capital of the State Bank by issue of preference
shares, to enable it to raise resources from the market by public issue
82

83
or preferential allotment or private placement. The Bill also aims to
provide for flexibility in the management of the bank. The Bill proposes
to amend the, SBI Act, inter alia, to—
(i) increase the authorised capital of State Bank of India to rupees
five thousand crores divided into shares of ten rupees each
or of such denomination as may be decided by the Central
Board, with the approval of the Reserve Bank and also enable
the Central Government to increase or reduce the authorised
capital in consultation with the Reserve Bank;
(ii) allow the issued capital of the State Bank to be raised by
preferential allotment of share or private placement or public
issue in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed
by regulations with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank
and the Central Government, and the preference shares may
be issued in accordance with guidelines framed by the Reserve
Bank;
(iii) allow the State Bank to issue bonus shares to the existing
equity shareholders with the direction of the Reserve Bank and
with the approval of the Central Government;
(iv) allow reduction of Reserve Bank’s shareholding from fifty-five
per cent to fifty-one per cent consisting of the equity shares
of the issued capital;
(v) allow the State Bank to accept share monies in instalments,
make calls and forfeiture of unpaid shares and their re-issue;
(vi) provide for nomination facility in respect of shares held by
individual or joint shareholders;
(vii) restrict the voting rights of preference shareholders of the State
Bank only to resolutions directly affecting their rights and also
restrict the preference shareholder to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by him to a ceiling of ten
per cent of total voting rights of all shareholders holding
preference share capital only;
(viii) allow the Central Government to appoint not more than four
Managing Directors in consultation with the Reserve Bank;

84
(ix) abolish the post of Vice-Chairman;
(x) enable a sole shareholder or a first named holder of
shares (when held jointly) of a nominal value of at least
Rs. 5000/- to contest the election for the directorship of State
Bank;
(xi) specify the qualifications for election of directors of the
State Bank and to confer powers upon Reserve Bank to notify
eligibility criteria for suchy directors;
(xii) allow the Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors as and
when considered necessary in the interest of banking policy
and depositors’ interest;
(xiii) confer power upon the Central Government to supersede the
Central Board in certain cases on the recommendations of the
Reserve Bank and to appoint an administrator for the period
during which the Central Board stands superseded;
(xiv) allow the State Bank to hold Central Board meetings through
video conferencing or such other electronic means as may be
prescribed by regulations;
(xv) allow trasnfer of unpaid or unclaimed dividend of the
State Bank upto thirty days to ‘unpaid dividend account’ and
after seven years to the ‘Investor Education and Protection
Fund’ established under section 205C of the Companies Act,
1956;
(xvi) entitle the shareholders present in an annual general meeting
to ‘adopt’ the balance sheet.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
  N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 6th December, 2006.

85
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2.— This clause seeks to omit clause (i) of section 2 of the
State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) as the
post of Vice-Chairman is proposed to be abolished.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to substitute section 4 of the Act for
enhancing the authorised capital of the State Bank from twenty crores
of rupees divided into two crores of fully paid-up shares of rupees ten
each, to five thousand crores of rupees divided into five hundred crores
of fully paid-up shares of ten rupees each.
It is also proposed to provide that the Central Board may reduce
the nominal or face value of the shares, and divide the authorised capital
into such denomination as it may decide with the approval of the
Reserve Bank.
It is further proposed to provide that the Central Government may
in consultation with the Reserve Bank increase or reduce the authorised
capital so however that the shares in all cases shall be fully paid-up
shares.
Clause 4.— This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Act relating
to the issued capital of the State Bank.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (2) of
section 5 of the Act, the Central Board may from time to time increase
the issued capital but no increase in the issued capital shall be made
in such a manner that the Reserve Bank holds at any time less than fifty-
five per cent. of the issued capital of the State Bank.
It is proposed to substitute sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Act
so as to incorporate a provision to enable the State Bank to issue, in
85

86
addition to equity shares, preference shares as per guidelines framed by
the Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of
issue of each class of preference shares (whether perpetual or irrdeemable
or redeemable) and the terms and conditions subject to which each class
of preference shares may be issued.
It is further proposed to enable the Central Board to increase the
issued capital by public issue or preferential allotment or private
placement by issue of equity or preference shares with the previous
approval of the Reserve Bank and the Central Government.
It is also proposed to provide that the Reserve Bank shall, at all
times, hold not less than fifty-one per cent of the issued capital consisting
of equity shares of the State Bank.
It is also proposed to insert a new sub-sections (4) and (5) to
section 5 of the Act so as to enable State Bank to issue bonus shares
to existing equity shareholders as per direction issued by Reserve Bank
with the approval of the Central Government; and also to enable the State
Bank to accept the money in respect of shares issued towards the increase
in the issued capital in instalments, make calls forfeit unpaid shares and
re-issue them in such manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 5.— This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Act relating
to the transferability of shares. It is proposed to amend sub-section (2)
of section 10 of the Act so as to reduce the Reserve Bank’s existing equity
shareholding from fifty-five per cent to fifty-one per cent of the issued
capital consisting of equity shares of the State Bank.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 10A in the Act
to enable an individual registered shareholder and individual joint
holders to nominate an individual to whom all his or their rights in the
shares shall vest in the event of the death of such individual or joint
holders. The nominee on the death of the shareholder or all joint
shareholders will become entitlted to all the rights of the shareholder or

87
joint holders as the case may be. It also contains provisions relating to
nominee who is a minor.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the Act relating
to restriction on exercise of voting rights by shareholders. It is proposed
to insert provisos so as to provide that a shareholder holding any
preference share capital shall have a right to vote only on resolutions
placed before the State Bank which directly affect the rights attached to
his preference shares and such preference shareholder shall not be
entitlted to exercise voting rights in respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of ten per cent. of the total voting rights of all the
shareholders holding preference share capital only.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of
section 13 of the Act so as to provide for maintenance of Register of share-
holders in any other electronic form in addition to computer floppies or
diskettes.
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Act to reflect
the change of name of Bombay to Mumbai, Calcutta to Kolkata and
Madras to Chennai and also to name Mumbai as State Bank Corporate
Centre.
Clause 10.— This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Act relating
to composition of the Central Board. It is proposed to amend clause (a)
of section 19 of the Act to indicate abolition of the post of Vice-Chairman.
Further, as per the existing provisions contained in clause (b) of
section 19 of the Act, there can be two managing directors. It is proposed
that there shall not be more than four managing directors as may be
appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the
Reserve Bank.
In the existing provisions of clause (bb) of section 19 of the Act,
the Central Board shall consist of the Presidents of the Local Boards

88
appointed under sub-section (5) of section 21 as ex-officio member.
Therefore, it is proposed to delete clause (bb) of section 19.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to insert in the Act a new
section 19A relating to qualification for elected director and also insert
a new section 19B relating to power of the Reserve Bank to appoint
additional directors.
The provisions contained in sub-section (1) of the said new section
19A, inter-alia, provide that the directors to be elected under clause (c)
of section 19 shall have special knowledge or experience in respect of
one or more of the areas, namely, agriculture and rural economy, banking,
co-operation, economics, finance, law, small-scale industry, any other
area the special knowledge of, and experience in which in the opinion
of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the State Bank and such elected directors
should represent the interest of the depositors; and represent the interest
of the farmers, workers and artisans.
The provisions contained in sub-section (2) of the said new
section 19A also provide that without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section (1), Reserve Bank may notify any additional criteria for
persons to be elected under clause (c) of section 19 of the Act.
The  provisions contained in sub-section (3) of the aforesaid new
section 19A provide that where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that
any director of the State Bank elected under clause (c) of section 19 does
not fulfill the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2) of the proposed
new section 19A, it may, after giving to such director and the
State Bank a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order, remove
such director.
The provisions contained in sub-section (4) of the aforesaid new
section 19A provide that on the removal of a director under
sub-section (3) of the proposed new section 19A, the Central Board shall
co-opt any other person fulfilling the requirements of the said

89
sub-sections as a director in place of the person so removed till a director
is duly elected by the shareholders of the State Bank in the next annual
general meeting and the person so co-opted shall be deemed to have been
duly elected by the shareholders of the State Bank as a director.
The provisions contained in sub-section (1) of the said new section
19B provide that if the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that in the interest
of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interest of the State
Bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may from time to time
and by order in writing appoint with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order, one or more persons to hold office as additional
directors of the State Bank.
The provisions contained in sub-section (2) of the aforesaid
new section 19B provide that any person appointed as additional
director in pursuance of this section shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not
exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve Bank may specify and shall
not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being an
additional director or for anything done or omitted to be done in
good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation
thereto and he shall not be required to hold qualification shares in the
State Bank.
The provisions contained in sub-section (3) of the aforesaid new
section 19B provide that for the purpose of reckoning any proportion of
the total number of directors of the State Bank, any additional director
appointed under this section shall not be taken into account.
Clause 12.— Consequent to the proposed abolition of the post of
the Vice Chairman, this clause seeks to delete the expression “Vice
Chairman” from section 20 of the Act.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to amend sectiion 21 of the Act
relating to composition of Local Boards.

90
The existing provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section ( 1)
of the said section provide that the Local Boards shall consist of
Chairman, ex officio member.
It is proposed to substitute the said clause so as to provide
that the Local Board shall consist of the Chairman, ex officio  or the
Managing Director nominated by the Chairman as a member of the Local
Boards.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to substitute the section 21B of the
Act to provide the rationalisation of the powers of the Local Boards by
empowering Local Boards to perform such duties and functions as may
be entrusted or delegated to it by the Central Board.
Clause 15.— This clause seeks to amend section 21C of the
Act.
It is proposed to substitute sub-section (2) of the aforesaid section
so as to provide that the Local Committee shall consist of the Chairman,
ex officio or the Managing Director, nominated by the Chairman as a
member of every such Local Committee.
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to amend clause (d) of sub-section
(1) of section 22 of the Act by deleting the word “vice chairman”
consequent upon the proposed abolition of the post of vice-chairman.
Further, clause (h) of sub section (1) of section 22 of the Act is
proposed to be substituted so that either a sole shareholder or a first
named holder of the shares when held jointly of a nominal value of at
least five thousand rupees can contest the election for directorship of the
State Bank pursuant to clause (c) of section 19 of the Act.
Clause 17 and 18.— This clause seeks to amend clause (b) of section
23 and sub-section ( 1) of section 24 of the Act by deleting the word
“vice chairman” consequent upon the post of vice-chairman being
abolished.

91
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 24A in the
Act relating to supersession of Central Board in certain cases.
The provisions contained in the said new section 24A, inter alia,
provide that where the Central Government, on the recommendation of
the Reserve Bank, is satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing
the affairs of the State Bank being conducted in a manner detrimental
to the interest of the depositors or the State Bank or for securing the proper
management of the State Bank, it is necessary so to do, the Central
Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order,
supersede the Central Board for a period not exceeding six months as
may be specified in the order. However, the period of supersession of
the Central Board may be extended from time to time so however that
the total period shall not exceed twelve months.
It further provides that the Central Government, in consultation with
the Reserve Bank may, on supersession of the Central Bank, appoint an
Administrator (not being an officer of the Central Government or a State
Government) who has experience in law, finance, banking, economics
or accountancy for such period as it may determine. The Central
Government may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may
consider necessary and the Administrator shall be bound to follow such
directions. The Administrator appointed shall vacate office immediately
after the Central Board has been reconstituted. The Central Government
may in consultation with the Reserve Bank, constitute a Committee to
assist the Administrator for managing the affairs of the State Bank during
the period of supersession.
It also contains provisions in connection with or arising out of
supersession of the Central Board.
Clause 20.— This clause seeks to amend sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)
of section 25 by deleting the word “vice chairman” occurring at both
the places, consequent upon the post of vice-chairman being
abolished.

92
Clause 21.— This clause seeks to delete section 28 of the Act relating
to powers and remuneration of vice chairman consequent upon the post
of vice-chairman being abolished.
Clause 22.— This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Act so
as to provide for powers of the Managing Director to preside in the
absence of the Chairman over the Central Board meetings when
authorised by the Chairman.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to amend section 31 of the Act relating
to meetings of the Central Board. It is proposed to substitute the said-
sub-section (1) so as to provide that the meetings of the Central Board
may be held by participation of the directors of the Central Board through
video conferencing or through such other electronic means as may be
prescribed, which are capable of recording and recognising the
participation of the directors and the proceedings of such meetings are
capable of being recorded and stored. Further, the Central Government
may in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by a notification in the
Official Gazette, specify the matter which shall not be discussed in a
meeting of the Central Board held through video conferencing or such
other electronic means.
It is further proposed to substitute sub-section (2) of the said section
31, so as to empower the directors present through video conferencing
or such other electronic means for the purpose of voting.
It is further proposed to amend sub-section (4) to substitute the
words ‘vice-chairman’ by the words ‘managing director authorised by
the Chairman’ due to abolition of the said post.
Clause 24.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section
31A of the Act so as to provide for powers of the Managing Director to
preside over the Central Board Meetings when authorised by the
Chairman.

93
Clause 25.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 38A in the
Act to provide for the State Bank to transfer the dividend which remains
unpaid or unclaimed, after seven days from the expiry of the period of
thirty days from the declaration of such dividend to a special account
to be named “unpaid dividend account” and after a period of seven years
from the date of such transfer, to the “Investor Education and Protection
Fund” established under sub-section (1) of section 205C of the Companies
Act, 1956 to be utilised for the purpose and in the manner specified in
that section.
Clause 26.— This clause seeks to change the present annual
closing date as March in place of December by amending section 39 of
the Act.
Clause 27.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section
40 of the Act to incorporate the present annual closing date as March
in place of December.
It is also proposed to amend sub-section (2) of section 40 of the
Act relating to signing of balance sheet and profit and loss account by
the vice chairman etc., by deleting the words “vice chairman” consequent
upon the post of vice chairman being abolished and also to provide that
the balance sheet and the profit and loss account shall be signed by the
Chairman, managing directors and at least three other directors of the
Central Board.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to amend section 42 of the Act relating
to Balance Sheet etc., to be discussed at general meetings.
The existing provisions contained in sub-section (1) of the said
section provides that a general meeting referred to as annual general
meeting shall be held at such time and place where there is local head
office of the State Bank, as shall from time to time be specified by the
Central Board and a general meeting be convened by the State Bank at
any other time.

94
It is proposed to provide that an annual general meeting shall be
held in each financial year at the Corporate Centre or at such other place
in Mumbai other than the Corporate centre or at such other place in India
at such time, as shall from time to tome be specified by the Central Board
and a general meeting other than an annual general meeting may
convened by the State Bank at any other time and at such place in India
as shall from time to time be specified by the Central Board.
Further, the existing provisions contained in sub-section (2) of the
said section provides that shareholders present at an annual general
meeting shall be entitled to discuss the balance sheet and profit and loss
account of the bank.
It is proposed to provide that shareholders present at the annual
general meeting shall be entitled to discuss and adopt the balance sheet
and profit and loss account.
Clause 29.— This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section
43 of the Act.
As per the existing provision the officers, advisers and employees
of the State Bank shall exercise such powers and perform such duties
as may by general or special order, be entrusted or delegated to them
by the Central Board.
It is proposed to amend the aforesaid section so as to provide that
the officers, advisers and employees of the State Bank shall individually
or jointly or with other officers, advisers and employees in a Local
Committee exercise such powers and perform such duties as may by
general or special order, be entrusted or delegated to them by the Central
Board or its executive committee.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to insert clause (d) after clause (c)
to sub-section (2) of section 49 of the Act, so as to provide for the time
and place of meeting of the Committee and the rules of procedure to  be
observed by it under sub-section (6) of the proposed new section 24A,

95
and the salary and allowances of the Administrator and the members
of the committee under sub-section (7) of the section 24A.
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to amend section 50 of the Act relating
to power of Central Board to make regulations.
It is proposed to insert clause (aa) after clause (a) of sub-section
(2) of section 50 of the Act, so as to provide that regulations may provide
for procedure for increasing issued capital by the issue of equity or
preference shares and the manner of accepting money for issued capital,
forfeiture and re-issue of shares under sub-sections (2) and (5) of
section 5.
It is further proposed to insert clause (ab) after clause (aa)
mentioned above, so as to provide for regulation for the manner of
nominating an individual by one individual or jointly, the manner of
nominating minor, the manner of varying or cancellation of nomination
under section 10A.
It is also proposed to amend clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 50, so as to provide for keeping the register of shareholders in
any other electronic form in addition to floppies or diskettes.

96
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED
LEGISLATION
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to amend section 50 of the State Bank
of India Act, 1955 which empowers the Central Board to make regulations
after having consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous
sanction of the Central Government. The matters on which regulations
may be made inter alia  relate to (a) procedure for increasing issued
capital by the issue of equity or preference shares under sub-section (2)
of section 5 and the manner of accepting money for issued capital,
forfeiture and re-issue of shares under sub-section (5) of section 5;
(b) the manner of nomination, the variation or cancellation of nomination
under section 10A; and (c) the maintenance of register of shareholders
in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form.
2. The regulations made under section 50 of the said Act shall
have to be laid, as soon as they are made, before both Houses of
Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which regulations may be made are
matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
96

97
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955.
(23 of 1955)
2. In this Act, unless the context other-
wise requires,—
******
(i) “vice-chairman” means the vice-chair-
man of the Central Board;
******
4. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
authorised capital of the State Bank shall be twenty
crores of rupees divided into two crores of fully
paid-up shares of ten rupees each:
Provided that the Central Government may
increase or reduce the authorised capital as it thinks
fit so however that the shares in all cases shall be
fully paid-up shares of ten rupees each.
5 .  ( 1 ) *****
  (2) The Central Board may from time to
tome increase the issued capital but no increase in
the issued capital shall be made in such a manner
that the Reserve Bank holds at any time less than
fifty-five per cent. of the issued capital of the State
Bank.
******
CHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IV
S
HARES
1 0 . ( 1 ) *****
97
Definitions.
Authorised
capital.
Issued
capital.
Transferabil-
ity of shares.

98
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1)
shall entitle the Reserve Bank to transfer any shares
held by it in the State bank if such transfer will
result in reducing the shares held by it to less than
fifty-five per cent. of the issued capital of the State
Bank.
11. No shareholder, other than the Reserve
Bank, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of any shares held by him in excess of ten
per cent. of the issued capital:
Provided that such shareholder shall be
entitled to exercise voting rights at such higher
percentage as the Central Government may, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank, specify.
1 3 . ( 1 ) *****
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the State Bank
to keep the register of shareholders in computer
floppies or diskettes subject to such safeguards as
may be prescribed.
******
CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
M
ANAGEMENT
16. (1) Unless otherwise provided by the
Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette, the central office of the State Bank shall be
at Bombay.
(2) The State bank shall have local head
offices in Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and at
Restrictions
on voting
rights.
Register of
sharehold-
ers.
Offices,
branches
and
agencies.

99
such other places in India as the Central Govern-
ment, in consultation with the Central Board, may
determine.
******
19. (1)The Central Board shall consist of the
following, namely:—
(a) a chairman and a vice-chairman to be
appointed by the Central Government in consulta-
tion with the Reserve Bank.
(b) not more than two managing directors,
if any, appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Reserve Bank;
(bb) the presidents of the Local Boards
appointed under sub-section (5) of section 21,
ex officio;
******
20. (1) The chairman, vice-chairman and
each managing director shall hold office for such
term, not exceeding five years, as the Central
Government may fix when appointing them and
shall be eligible for reappointment.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have
the right to terminate the term of office of the
chairman, vice-chairman or a managing director, as
the case may be, at any time before the expiry of
the term fixed under sub-section (1) by giving him
notice of not less than three months in writing or
three months salary and allowances in lieu of such
notice; and the chairman, vice-chairman or a
Composi-
tion of the
Central
Board.
Term of
office of
chairman,
managing
director,
etc.

100
managing director, as the case may be, shall also
have the right to relinquish his office at any time
before the expiry of the term so fixed by giving to
the Central Government notice of not less than three
months in writing.
******
21. (1) There shall be constituted at each
place where the State Bank has a local head office,
a Local Board which shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the chairman, ex officio ;
******
21B. Save as may otherwise be prescribed and
subject to any general or special directions which
the Central Board may give from time to time, a
Local Board, shall, in respect of the area fallings
within the jurisdiction of the local head office for
which the Board has been constituted, exercise all
powers and perform all functions and duties of the
State Bank in relation to the business of banking
and the forms of business set out in clauses (a), (b),
(e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (k) and (l) of sub-section (1) of
section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and
such other forms of business referred to in sub-
section (1) of the said section 6, as may be approved
by the Central Board in this behalf and shall also
exercise such other power and perform such other
functions and duties as may be conferred on or
assigned to it by the Central Board:
Provided that a Local Board shall transact
the businesses of borrowing of money and the
Local
Boards.
Powers
of Local
Board.
10 of 1949.

101
acquiring, holding, issuing on commission, under-
writing and dealing in stock, funds, shares, deben-
ture, debenture stock, bonds, obligations, securities
and investments, only if the Central Board approves
any of such business in this behalf and confers or
assigns any of such businesses to the Local Board.
21.C.(1) *****
(2) The Chairman shall an ex officio member
of every such Local Committee.
22.(1) No person shall be qualified to be a
director of the Central Board or a member of a Local
Board or of a Local Committee if—
******
(d) he holds any office of profit under the
State Bank other than the office of chairman,
vice-chairman, managing director, chief general
manager or legal or technical adviser, or
******
(h) in the case of an elected director, he is not
registered as a holder in his own right of
unencumbered shares in the State Bank of a
nominal value of at least five thousand rupees:
Provided that in the case of a director
appointed under clause (ca) or clause (cb) of
section 19, the disqualification mentioned in
clause (d) shall not operate.
******
23. If a director of the Central Board or a
member of a Local Board or a Local Committee—
******
Local
Committees.
Disqualifica-
tions for
directorship
of Central
Board or
membership
of Local
Boards or
Committees
Vacation of
office of
directors, etc.

102
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in
writing under his hand, in the case of the chairman,
vice-chairman and a managing director, to the
Central Government and in the case of other
directors or members of Local Boards or Commit-
tees, to the Central Board,  and the resignation is
accepted; or
******
24. (1) The Central Government may, after
consulting the Reserve Bank, remove from office of
the chairman, vice-chairman or a managing
director.
******
25. (1) If the chairman, vice-chairman or a
managing director is rendered incapable of dis-
charging his duties by reason of infirmity or
otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in
circumstances not involving the vacation of his
office, the Central Government may, in consultation
with the Reserve Bank, appoint  another person to
officiate in the vacancy.
(2) where any vacancy occurs before the
expiry of the term of office of a director, other
than the chairman, vice-chairman or a managing
director or a director appointed under clause (ca) or
clause (cb) of section 19 or of a member of a Local
Board other than the chief general manager, the
vacancy shall be filled—
(a) in the case of an elected director, by
election; and
(b) in the case of a director nominated under
clause (d) of section 19 or a member of a Local
Removal
from office
of direc-
tors, etc.
Casual
vacancies.

103
Board nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1)
of section 21, by nomination in consultation with
the Reserve Bank.
Provided that where the duration of the
vacancy in the office of an elected director is likely
to be less than six months, the vacancy may be
filled by the remaining directors.
28. (1) the vice-chairman shall preside at the
meetings of the Central Board in the absence of the
chairman and, subject to the general control of the
chairman, exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be entrusted or delegated to him by
the Central Board.
(2) The vice-chairman shall receive such
salary, fees, allowances and perquisities as may be
determined by the Central Government.
(3) The fact that the vice-chairman exercises
any of the powers and does any act or thing for or
on behalf of the State Bank shall be conclusive
proof of his authority to do so.
29. (1) A managing director—
(a) shall be a whole-time officer of the State
Bank; and
(b) subject to the general control of the
chairman and the vice-chairman, shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be
entrusted or delegated to him by the Central Board.
******
31. (1) The Central Board shall meet at such
time and place and shall observe such rules of
Powers and
remunera-
tion of vice-
chairman
Powers and
remunera-
tion of
managing
director.
Meetings of
the Central
Board.

104
procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings as may be prescribed.
(2) All questions at the meeting shall be
decided by a majority of the votes of the directors
present and in the case of equality of votes, the
chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman shall
have a second or casting vote.
******
3 1 A .  ( 1 ) *****
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section, the chairman shall preside at any
meeting of a Local Board at which he is present
and in the absence of the chairman, the vice-
chairman, if he is a member of the Local Board,
shall whenever he is present, preside at such
meeting.
******
39. The Central Board shall cause the books
of the State Bank to be closed and balanced as on
the 31st of December or such other date in each year
as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that with a view to facilitating
the transition from one period of accounting to
another period of accounting under this section,
the Central Government may, by order published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
as it considers necessary or expedient for the
closing and balancing of, or for other matters
relating to, the books in respect of the concerned
years.
Meetings of
Local Board.
Books to
be balanced
each year.

105
40. (1) The State Bank shall furnish to the
Central Government and to the Reserve Bank within
three months from the 31st day of December, or the
specified under section 39, as the case may be, as
on which its books are closed and balanced, its
balance-sheet, together with the profit and loss
account and the audior’s report and a report by the
Central Board on the working and activities of the
State Bank during the period covered by the
accounts:
Provided that the Central Government may,
after consultation with the Reserve Bank, extend the
said period of the three months by such further
period, not exceeding three months, as it may think
fit.
(2) The balance-sheet and the profit and loss
account shall be signed by the chairman, vice-
chairman, managing directors, if any, and a
majority of the other directors.
******
42. (1) A general meeting in this Act referred
to as an annual general meeting shall be held in
each year at such time and at such place where
there is a local head office of the State Bank, as shall
from time to time be specified by the Central Board
and a general meeting may be convened by the State
Bank at any other time:
Provided that such annual general meeting
shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from
the date on which the balance-sheet, together with
the profit and loss account and auditor’s report, is
under sub-section (1) of section 40, forwarded to the
Balance-sheet
etc., of
State Bank
may be
discussed at
general
meeting.
Returns.

106
Central Government or to the Reserve Bank,
whichever date is earlier.
(2) The shareholders present at an annual
general meeting shall be entitled to discuss the
balance-sheet and the profit and loss account of the
State Bank made up to the previous 31st day of
December or the date specified under section 39, as
the case may be, the report of the Central Board on
the working and activities  of the State Bank for the
period covered by the accounts and the auditors’
report on the balance-sheet and accounts.
CHAPTER VIIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER VIII
Miscellaneous
43. (1) *****
(2) The officers, advisers and employees of the
State Bank shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may, by general or special order,
be entrusted or deligated to them by the Central
Board.
49. (1) *****
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for—
******
50. (1) *****
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations
may provide for—
******
State Bank
may ap-
point offic-
ers and or
other em-
ployees.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Power of
Central
Board to
make
regulations.

107
(b) the maintenance of register of sharehold-
ers, and the particulars to be entered in such
register in addition to those specified in section 13,
the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance
of register of shareholders on computer floppies or
diskettes, the inspection and closure of the register
of shareholders and all other matters connected
therewith;
******
(i) the manner in which general meetings shall
be convened, the procedure to be followed thereat
and the manner in which voting rights may be
exercised;
******

LOK SABHA
_________
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955.
________
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
108

FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August, 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)

C.O.F. No. 57
Price : Rs. 115.00
© 2007 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
48
52
65
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .........................................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
REPORT........................................................................................................................
NOTES OF DISSENT.....................................................................................................
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
15th, 31st  May, 19th June and 22nd August, 2007....
II. The State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006.......
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty-seventh Report on the State Bank of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2006.
2. The State Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2006 introduced in
Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2006 was referred to the Committee on
19 December, 2006 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting
held on 15 May, 2007.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Reserve Bank of
India (RBI), Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), State Bank of India (SBI),
All India Bank Officers’ Association, All India Bank Officers’
Confederation, All India State Bank Officers’ Federation/All India State
Bank of India Staff Federation, Bank Employees Federation of India,
Bombay Chamber of Commerce & Industry and ASSOCHAM.
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 31 May, 2007 heard the
views of the representatives of Indian Banks’ Association, State Bank of
India, All India Bank Officers’ Association, All India Bank Officers’
Confederation, All India State Bank Officers Federation, All India State
Bank of India Staff Federation and Bank Employees Federation of India.
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the Reserve
Bank of India on 19 June, 2007.

 N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
22 August , 2007 Chairman,
31 Sravana , 1929  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
7. The Committee, at their sitting held on 22 August, 2007,
considered and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman
to finalize the same and present it to both Houses of Parliament.
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), representatives
of Reserve Bank of India, State Bank of India, All India Bank Officers’
and Employees’ Associations/Confederations/Unions etc. and other
individuals for their cooperation in placing before them their considered
views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing
written notes and information that the Committee had desired in
connection with the examination of the Bill.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type.
(vi)

116
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
5757575757
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
lR;eso t;rs
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORTFIFTY-SEVENTH REPORTFIFTY-SEVENTH REPORTFIFTY-SEVENTH REPORTFIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)