 1 
74 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2008-09)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)] 
 
SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


 2 
 
SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2008-09)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixty-Eighth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December,2008 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2008/ Agrahayana ,1930 (Saka)


 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
              PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………             (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………         (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   6 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations, which have been   14 
accepted by the Government ………………….. 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 23  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies …………………………………………… 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   25 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee …………………………………….  
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……..  28 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11 December, 2008……… 31 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixt y-Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of  
Finance (Department of Revenue)……       33 
           
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2008-2009    
 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
12. Shri R. Prabhu 
13. Shri K.S. Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Lakshman Seth 
16. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
19. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
20. Shri Ramakrishna Badiga 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Raashid Alvi 
23. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
24. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
25. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
26. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
27. Shri Vijay J. Darda 
28. Shri S. Anbalagan 
29. Shri Moinul Hassan 
30. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh    - Director 
3.   Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan - Deputy Secretary Gr-II 
                                                 
 Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008 
 Vacant w.e.f. 14.11.2008 on nomination of Shri Brajesh Pathak to Rajya Sabha  

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventy-fourth Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixty -Eighth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demand for Grants (2008 -2009) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
2. The Sixty-Eighth Report was p resented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. Replies indicating action taken on all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government 
on 28 August and 7 November, 2008. 
3. The Committee consi dered and adopted this Report at their sitting held 
on 11 December, 2008. 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference obser vations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       ANANTH KUMAR, 
11 December, 2008              Chairman, 
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
   

 6 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 
Sixty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -2009) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue), which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
16.4.2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.4.2008. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government 
in respect of all the 10 recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been analysed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6  & 8 
  
  (Total 5)  
 (Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of Government’s replies:  
 
Recommendation No.  9 
(Total 1)  
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Recommendation Nos. 3 and 4    
  (Total 2)  
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies by 
the Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Nos.  7 & 10 
 (Total 2)  
(Chapter V) 
 

 7 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations 
contained in Chapter I and V may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Timely Refunds 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
  5.  The Committee had expressed their dissatisfaction that the 
Department of Reven ue did not maintain any data with regard to delayed 
refunds, in which the Department had taken more than the stipulated time of four 
months.    The Committee had desired that such data should be maintained 
having regard to all details such as the amount in volved, causes of delay, break -
up of cases of more than one month, two months, etc. 
 
6.  The Government in their action taken reply have, inter alia stated 
as follows:- 
 
“The data relating to refunds, including pending refund claims is at present 
available in the various subordinate offices of CBDT and CBEC throughout 
the country, albeit in a disaggregated form.  It would have been difficult to 
collate such information from the large number of field offices manually and 
that was the reason why the collated data was not provided. The committee 
has now recommended that such data be maintained through 
computerization. The Department of Revenue accepts this recommendation. 
Computerization efforts have already been started and is well on its way in  
the various wings of the two Boards. The present position is as follows:- 
 
Central Excise and Service Tax  
 
       The CBEC has   consolidated its infrastructure and is moving towards 
creating a centralized database.  A new software application for automating 
Central Ex cise and Service Tax processes, called ACES [Automation in 
Central Excise and Service Tax], has been developed and will be deployed 
soon.  This software application has a specific refund module which will keep 
track of all refund claims filed by the assess ee.  There is also a separate 
dashboard in the application itself exclusively meant for use by the assessee 
to keep track of his refund claims online and also obtain the status of 
processing of his refund claims.  
 
 
 
 

 8 
Customs 
 
    The CBEC has also issued detailed instructions vide Customs Circular 
No.24/2007 dated 02.07.2007 for providing on -line data -base on the 
departmental website to enable any person, who had applied for refund with 
Customs to know the status of his refund application.     
 
Customs Drawback 
 
      The Citizens’ Charter of CBEC makes a commitment to pay any duty 
drawback within 48 hours of the export of the goods in case of electronic 
declarations and 15 days in case of paper declarations.  Normally, drawback 
claims are sanctioned within  the prescribed time limit except in cases where 
errors take place on account of EGM mismatch or queries raised by officers 
for deciding classification, production of CENVAT non -availment certificate 
or test report results etc. 
 
     It is mentioned that t he Indian Customs EDI System (ICES) is an 
automated workflow application and is currently functional at 40 locations. 
Out of these 40 locations, the facility for electronic credit of Duty Drawback is 
operational at 33 locations, which expedites the process  of grant of 
drawback.    
 
      When the custom modules are fully operational  (by 2009 -10), the full 
data on refund claims will be available on line.  
 
C.B.D.T. 
        As on date, Income Tax Offices in 440 cities are not working on the 
network and the pr ocessing of returns in these stations is done on stand 
alone computers. In the All India Income Tax Network that is expected to be 
fully operational by 2009 -2010, a provision has been made to generate the 
information relating to payment  of refunds.” 
 
7. The Committee had desired that the Department of Revenue should 
maintain comprehensive computerised data relating to delays in respect of 
refunds beyond the stipulated period of four months.  While accepting the 
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry  have stated that computerization 
efforts have already been started in the various wings of the two Boards (CBDT 
and CBEC) under the Department.  The Committee hope that the process of 
computerisation of refund records will be expedited so that the assesse es can 
access information on the status of their refund claims. 

 9 
 
Acquisition of anti-Smuggling Equipment 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
8. The Committee were informed that there was a huge shortfall in utilization 
of funds allotted for acquisition of anti smugglin g equipment, due to lack of decision 
about the type of scanners to be procured.  The Committee were of the view that due to 
Government’s indecision scarce resources should not be blocked year after year.  They 
expected that the decision on the type of scan ner to be procured should be taken 
without further loss of time and the funds allocated during 2008-09 be utilized fully. 
 
9.  The Government in their action taken reply have, inter alia stated as 
follows:- 
 “The decision regarding the type of scanner to b e procured was 
taken by the Department in 2005 and Committee on Non Plan 
Expenditure (CNE) approval obtained on 14.02.2006 for procurement 
of 4 fixed X -ray scanners and 3 mobile Gamma ray scanners.   
Subsequently, the proposal to procure 7 Truck / Containe r Scanners 
at an estimated cost of Rs. 172 crore was approved by the Cabinet 
Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 27.10.2006. 
          The Government will take every possible step to ensure that 
the funds allocated for the procurement of 7 Container Sc anners are 
fully utilized during 2008-09.” 
 
10.    However, d uring oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance, when a question 
was raised that every year higher Budget provision is kept for acquiring anti -smuggling 
equipment, which is reduced at the Revised Estimates and that too is not utilised fully, 
the representative of the Ministry replied as under :- 
 
“on the anti -smuggling equipment, whether it is laxity, whether it is 
design, let me assure you  that it is not by design.  It is not simple 
scanners.  We  are looking at x -ray scanners and gamma ray 
scanners; and this is the controversy, which has been raging. If I 
might confess with my experience in the Ministry of Home Affairs of 
the last few years, it is a controversy even raging between two of our 
public sector undertakings, namely BEL and ECIL. Each operational 
equipment can have its benefits but there is no clear identity to say 
which is better.  The IB, which is supposed to give advice as to which 
equipment should go, has not been able to  give advice .  
Nevertheless, we have initiated and we have taken a decision to go 
ahead with  purchase of scanning equipment in addition to what we 
have.  It is not that we do not have any. We are doing more.  We will 
move further forward in this process.  But why we were not able to 

 10 
utilise the Budget was essentially because of  an inability to decide 
which particular equipment you go through, and because of the 
confusion or lack of decision or indecision, which  prevailed in the 
security environment in this matter.  But let me assure you that it is 
not our design to fail”. 
 
11. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) were asked to explain 
the reasons for giving different versions in their deposition before the Committee and 
later in their Action Taken Replies with regard to the approval and procurement of anti -
smuggling equipment .  While regretting the misunderstanding that has been created, 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have clarified the points in detail as 
explained hereunder.    
12. The g lobal tender for procurement of mobile gamma -ray scanners was 
floated through DAVP on 16.12.2007 after being finally vetted by the Ministry of Law, 
inviting bids by 18.02.2008.  The bids were opened on the same date.  The IB was then 
requested on 03.03.2008 to provide security clearance in respect of three bidders which 
was given vide their letter dated 18.06.2008.   The sub -Committee set up by the CBEC 
to evaluate the technical bids then examined the bids and submitted its findings to the 
Tender Evaluation Committee (TEC) on 25.6.2008 which accepted these findings on the 
same day.  The price bid of eligible bidders was opened on 09.07.2008 and the bid of 
M/s ECIL was recommended by the TEC on 18.07.2008.  The matter is now being 
examined by the Integrated F inance Unit of the Department of Revenue before final 
approval of the Finance Minister can be obtained.   Separately, concerns were also 
expressed in the media and a legal notice received against the choice of gamma -ray 
scanners.  A reference was also made  in a complaint to a report of the IB addressed to 
the Home Ministry to the effect that gamma-ray scanners were not suitable for detection 
of weapons etc. Advice was also sought from the Department of Atomic Energy who 
opined that gamma -ray scanners are ad vantageous for the first level screening of low -
density cargo and high energy x -ray based systems are necessary for detection of high 
density cargo such as weapons/armaments.  The Department of Atomic Energy further 
advised that Neutron -based systems are r ecommended for detection of concealed 
explosives, which are however not yet available internationally on commercial terms.  A 
final decision with respect to all the aforesaid concerns, as also the action to be taken 
on the legal notice was pending at the t ime when evidence was tendered before the 
Committee. 

 11 
 
13.  The sequence of facts given now by the Ministry, after an 
explanation was sought from them regarding the different versions put forth on 
the process of approval and procurement of anti -smuggling eq uipment, could 
well have been placed earlier before the Committee.  These facts were not 
clarified even in their Action Taken Replies submitted subsequently.  The 
Ministry’s omission to furnish all the relevant facts to the Committee had resulted 
in incomplete and mis -leading information, which prevented the Committee from 
arriving at the right conclusion on the subject.  While deprecating the Ministry’s 
omission to furnish the material facts, the Committee expect that the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of  Revenue) will be more careful in the future. The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry of Finance should now act in a decisive 
manner in the matter without any further delay so that the requisite anti -
smuggling equipment are procured and duly install ed.  The Committee would like 
to be kept apprised in the matter. 
 
 
Rewards 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
 14. The Committee had desired that the Department of Revenue should 
evolve a mechanism so that linkage is established between the reward given to the 
informers of revenue intelligence and the final revenue realised.  In this regard, 
consolidated figures should be worked out in order to get a fair idea of the effectiveness 
of intelligence gathering.  
 15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have expresse d their inability to 
link instances of information given by informers with final revenue generated by such 
instances.  They have explained that the quantum of extra taxes realisable is 
determined only after all the assessments have become final and no appe al is pending 
or filed and the time for filing of appeal has expired and that the time lag between the 

 12 
information given by the informer and    the final demand realised which is attributable to 
such information is such that a mechanism to correlate inform ation gathering and final 
revenue collected is not readily possible.   
 
16. The Committee are at a loss to comprehend as to how the quantum 
of the rewards and the efficacy of the information provided by the informers of 
revenue intelligence can be decided without reference to the revenue realised as 
a result of such information.  The Committee would therefore emphasise again 
that the Department of Revenue must endeavour to evolve a coherent mechanism 
for this purpose, whereby consolidated figures for grant of reward can be worked 
out on the basis of revenue realised. 
 
Comprehensive Computerisation Programme 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 
 
17. The Computerisation programme of the Income Tax Department which 
was to be completed by June, 2006 at a cost of Rs.251 crore had been rescheduled 
four times and now expected to be completed by December, 2008.  The Committee 
were of the view that had the computerization programme been completed as per 
original schedule, the extent of problem of fake PAN Cards would not have been to the 
extent that it is today. 
 
18.  The Government in their action taken reply have, inter alia stated as 
follows:- 
“Expenditure sanction of Rs. 251.56 crores was accorded by the 
Cabinet in December 2002 for the third phase of the computerization 
plan of the Income Tax Department. Subsequently, because of change 
in implementation methodology, the department sought additional grant 
of Rs. 442.03 crores on account of running and managing the All India 
Income Tax network, National Data Center (PDC), Business  Continuity 
site (BCP), Disaster Recovery site (DR) and the Facilities Management 
Services (FMS) for a period of 5 years.  Approval was given by the 
Cabinet on 30/6/2005 for additional grant and the revised total 
sanctioned cost of the project was Rs. 693. 59 crores ( Rs 251.56 Crores 
+ Rs 442.03 crores ) to be spent between FYs 2004-05 to 2010-2011. 

 13 
 As against the approval of Rs. 693.59 crores for the project for five 
years, the committed/actual expenditure incurred so far is Rs. 543.13 
crores. There has been no cost escalation of the project.  
           As regards the observation of Hon’ble Committee on the need to 
ensure effective monitoring and close co -ordination of the project, it is 
submitted that as per the latest schedule, the project in all likeli hood will 
be completed by March 2009. The department is taking all necessary 
steps to ensure that the above timeline is maintained. The department 
has engaged the services of a professional project consultant firm which 
assists the departmental officials i n day to day project monitoring. A 
steering committee headed by Director General of Income Tax 
(Systems) is also regularly meeting all the concerned project vendors to 
ensure that there are no slippages.  
         The matter of false PAN cards is not relat ed to the project 
integration in any way. The issue of PAN cards is an outsourced 
activity.” 
 
19.  During the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Revenue, the Committee were informed that the 
Computerisation programme of the Income Tax Department would be completed 
by December, 2008.  However, as per the reply furnished by the Ministry, the 
deadline has again been extended to March, 2009.  The Committee are dismayed 
over the casual approach of the Ministry in handl ing such an important project, 
which has been re -scheduled four times.  Although, the Ministry have denied 
any cost escalation in the project, the Committee find this plea untenable as the 
Department had sought an additional grant of Rs. 442.03 crore for t he project 
and further, the sanctioned cost was revised to Rs. 693.59 crore. While taking an 
adverse view of the vacillation and inordinate delay in the implementation of the 
project, the Committee expect that atleast now the Income Tax Department will 
observe certain discipline and adhere to their revised deadline. Further, the 
Committee would like the Ministry to conduct a high level enquiry into the entire 
matter and submit a report to the Committee within a period of one month from 
the presentation of this Report. 

 14 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
Bogus Refund Claims 
The Committee in their Report on Demands for Grants (2006 -07) had 
sought details of the extent of fraud in terms of r evenue loss and the penal action 
taken against the officials found involved.  However, the Ministry have furnished 
the data on the refund.  The Committee had sought data from the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) regarding cases of bogus claim of  refunds, 
which had been commented upon by the Committee in their earlier reports.  In 
response, the Department of Revenue could give only the data pertaining to 
Delhi region. 
The Chairman, CBDT indicated during evidence that due to constraint of 
time the information could be furnished only for Delhi.   The Committee desire 
that information for the entire country regarding cases of bogus claim of refunds 
during the last three years and the action taken on such cases should be 
furnished to the Committee expe ditiously. The Committee also request the 
Ministry to furnish them of the data on the advance tax paid by and refunds given 
to large listed Companies for the last five years (year-wise). 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
The details of bogus claim of refunds durin g the last three years (2005 -06,2006-
07,2007-08) and the action taken on such cases  are given below: 
 
 (1)Pune : Eighteen cases of bogus claim of refunds  have come to notice in the 
charge of CCIT (CCA) Pune.   One staff and one Inspector have been 
suspended and one daily wager’s service has been terminated for involvement in 
the fraud. The case filed by the Crime Branch against these persons is in 
progress in  Court at Pimpri.  
 

 15 
(2) Chandigarh: 
(a)Panchkula: 10 cases of bogus claim of refunds involving Rs  1.7 lakh (approx) 
have come to notice. No official has been found to be involved. The person who 
claimed bogus refund was arrested by Police and the matter is pending before 
the Civil Court. 
 
(b) Amritsar:14 cases of bogus claims of refunds involving Rs 2 .19 lakh(approx) 
have come to notice. Three officials involved have been suspended and 
departmental proceedings are pending. 
 
(3)Meerut: In Meerut, 7 cases of bogus claim of refunds came to notice   
involving Rs 16.35 lakh,  out of which Rs. 15.25 lakh has  since been recovered. 
One CA has been convicted for 4 months. A complaint with the Institute of CAs 
has also been lodged.  
 
(4)Ahmedabad: In Ahmedabad,  17 cases of bogus claims of refunds have come 
to notice. No official has been found to be involved. On e ITP was involved in this 
case. The case has been referred to CBI for investigation. The matter is under 
investigation by CBI, Gandhinagar.  
 
(5)Chennai: In  four charges,  many cases of bogus claim of refunds have come 
to notice.  One was a case of fraud ulent encashment of Refund Orders and 
alteration of tax challans and interpolation of the amount in the relevant columns. 
Three persons were found involved in this case. Criminal case filed by CBI has 
resulted in conviction of 3 years  for one person.  Dep artmental proceedings 
have been initiated against two officials involved. One CA has also been found to 
be involved. Matter of CA has been referred to ICAI for action.  
 
(6)Hyderabad: In Hyderabad, 30 cases of bogus claims of refunds have come to 
notice. One ITP (Income Tax Practitioner) was involved.  The name of the ITP 
has been deleted from the register of authorised ITPs maintained in the office of 
CIT-V. The matter has been referred to CBI. 
 

 16 
(7)Delhi: In Delhi,  seven cases of bogus claims of refunds h ave come to notice. 
Two officials were found to be involved and have been placed under suspension. 
Investigations are still going on. In some cases FIR has been lodged with 
Economic Offences wing on 22.8.2005 against the claimants of bogus refund. In 
three cases,  amount of bogus refund claimed along with the interest was 
recovered by attachment of bank account of the accused person and has been 
deposited in Government Treasury.  
       
(8) Bhubneshwar: Many cases have been detected. All cases were of SAIL 
employees. The modus operandi was to attach forged documents like banker’s 
certificate regarding recovery of house -building loan, the principal amount and 
the interest charged to show loss under the head “Income from house property” 
and to adjust the loss amount against the salary income. Forged documents of 
ICICI Bond and IDBI Bond, deposit -slip of PPF etc. were also attached. No 
official is found to be involved.  
 
 (9) In Mumbai, 4 cases of bogus claims of refunds have come to notice. One 
official who has  been found to be involved has been placed under suspension. 
The case is being investigated by the Kalyan Police Station.    
 
(ii) The On Line Tax Accounting System (OLTAS) was started on 01 -06-2004. 
Therefore  data for only the last four years  on the adva nce tax paid by and 
refunds given to large listed Companies is annexed as Annexure-A. Such data 
in respect of all corporate assessees is as under:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 17 
Details of Tax Collection from corporate assesses  (Rs in crore) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Figures in brackets indicate percentage of total collection (Source:  C&AG 
reports  2006 & 2008) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Timely Refunds 
 
   The Committee is surprised to l earn that the Department of Revenue do 
not maintain data regarding the cases of refunds in which the Department have 
taken more than the stipulated time of four months.  This information is 
necessary to assess the Department’s performance in this regard an d to see that 
assessees are not deprived of timely refund of their hard earned money.  The 
Committee feel that there should be no difficulty in maintaining such data in the 
era of computerization.  The Committee desire that this should be done forthwith 
having regard to all details such as the amount involved, causes of delay, break -
up of cases of more than one month, two months, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
       The data relating to refunds, including pending refund claims is at present 
available in the  various subordinate offices of CBDT and CBEC throughout the 
country, albeit in a disaggregated form.  It would have been difficult to collate 
such information from the large number of field offices manually and that was the 
reason why the collated data wa s not provided. The committee has now 
 
Financial 
Year 
Advance 
Tax 
Total 
Collections  
Refund
s  
Net 
Collections 
1 2 3 4 5 
2002-03 40,625 
(64.54) 
62,950 16,778 
(26.65) 
46,172 
 
 
2003-04 49,004 
(59.60) 
82.231 18,669 
(22.71) 
63,562 
2004-05 73,934 
(70.29) 
1,05,189 22,509 
(21.40) 
82,680 
 
2005-06 66,625 
(53.37) 
1,24,837 23,560 
(18.87) 
1,01,277 
 
2006-07 96,568 
(55.20) 
1,74,935 30,617 
(17.51) 
1,44,318 

 18 
recommended that such data be maintained through computerization. The 
Department of Revenue accepts this recommendation. Computerization efforts 
have already been started and is well on its way in  the various wings of the two 
Boards. The present position is as follows:- 
 
Central Excise and Service Tax  
 
       The CBEC has   consolidated its infrastructure and is moving towards 
creating a centralized database.  A new software application for automating 
Central Excise an d Service Tax processes, called ACES [Automation in Central 
Excise and Service Tax], has been developed and will be deployed soon.  This 
software application has a specific refund module which will keep track of all 
refund claims filed by the assessee.  Th ere is also a separate dashboard in the 
application itself exclusively meant for use by the assessee to keep track of his 
refund claims online and also obtain the status of  processing of his refund 
claims.  
 
Customs 
 
    The CBEC has also issued detailed instructions vide Customs Circular 
No.24/2007 dated 02.07.2007 for providing on -line data -base on the 
departmental website to enable any person, who had applied for refund with 
Customs to know the status of his refund application.     
 
Customs Drawback 
 
      The Citizens’ Charter of CBEC makes a commitment to pay any duty 
drawback within 48 hours of the export of the goods in case of electronic 
declarations and 15 days in case of paper declarations.  Normally, drawback 
claims are sanctioned within the pres cribed time limit except in cases where 
errors take place on account of EGM mismatch or queries raised by officers for 
deciding classification, production of CENVAT non -availment certificate or test 
report results etc. 
 
     It is mentioned that the Indian  Customs EDI System (ICES) is an automated 
workflow application and is currently functional at 40 locations. Out of these 40 

 19 
locations, the facility for electronic credit of Duty Drawback is operational at 33 
locations, which expedites the process of grant of drawback.    
 
          When the custom modules are fully operational  ( by 2009-10), the full data 
on refund claims will be available on line.  
 
C.B.D.T. 
              As on date,  Income Tax Offices in 440 cities are not working on the 
network and the  processing of returns in these stations is done on stand alone 
computers. In the All India Income Tax Network that is expected to be fully 
operational  by 2009 -2010, a provision has been made to generate the 
information relating to payment  of refunds. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Acquisition of office accommodation 
 
The Committee regret to find that there has been surrender of huge 
amount of funds year after year to the extent of 55% (Rs. 44.30 crore) in 2004 -
05, 78% (Rs. 51.50 crore) in 2005-06 and 86% (Rs. 16.37 crore) in 2006-07 from 
the head of acquisition of office accommodation.  This reflects poor budgetary 
planning and control.  The Committee suggest that the deficiencies in the system 
be identified so that corrective steps can be taken to ensure that the re is no 
recurrence of such surrender of funds atleast in the future. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Need for careful review of proposals in respect of acquisition of ready built 
office accommodation before sending proposals for allocation of funds as well as 
to minimise the time lag between inception of proposal and its final execution is 
being communicated to the field formations.  As the very process of preparing of 
such proposals entails multiple stages of examination including inter -alia 
obtaining CPWD certi ficate on valuation/technical suitability and meeting the 
objections/queries raised by the Appraising/Sanctioning Authority etc, it is 
proposed to ensure that budgetary allocations are proposed only when the 

 20 
project reaches an advance stage of maturity.  T his would help in reducing the 
extent of surrender of amounts as suggested by the Hon’ble Committee.   
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
Comprehensive Computerisation Programme 
 
There has been inordinate delay in completion of the Computerisation 
programme of the Income Tax Department. The programme which was originally 
scheduled to be completed in June 2006 at a cost of Rs. 251 crore has been re -
scheduled four times and now expected to be completed by December, 2008. 
The delay is stated to be on account of cancellatio n of initial tender and 
contractual disputes. Committee would like to know whether the project suffered 
any cost escalation. It is the responsibility of the Department to ensure by 
effective monitoring and close co -ordination that the project does not suff er any 
further delay beyond December, 2008. The Committee are of the view had the 
computerization programme been completed as per the original schedule, the 
extent of problem of the fake PAN Cards would not have been to the extent that it 
is today. 
Reply of the Government 
 
            Expenditure sanction of Rs. 251.56 crores was accorded by the Cabinet 
in December 2002  for the third phase of the computerization plan of the  Income 
Tax Department. Subsequently, because of change in implementation 
methodology, the department sought additional grant of Rs. 442.03 crores on 
account of running and managing the All India Income Tax network, National 
Data Center (PDC), Business Continuity site (BCP), Disaster Recovery site (DR) 
and the Facilities Management Servi ces (FMS) for a period of 5 years.  Approval 
was given by the Cabinet on 30/6/2005 for additional grant and the revised total 
sanctioned cost of the project was Rs. 693.59 crores ( Rs 251.56 Crores + Rs 
442.03 crores ) to be spent between FYs 2004-05 to 2010-2011. 
 

 21 
 As against the  approval of Rs. 693.59 crores for the project for five years, 
the committed/actual expenditure incurred so far is Rs. 543.13 crores.  There has 
been no cost escalation of the project.  
  
           As regards the observation of Ho n’ble Committee on the need to ensure 
effective monitoring and close co -ordination of the project, it is submitted that as 
per the latest schedule, the project in all likelihood will be completed by March 
2009. The department is taking all necessary steps to ensure that the above 
timeline is maintained. The department has engaged the services of a 
professional project consultant firm which assists the departmental officials in day 
to day project monitoring. A steering committee headed by Director General of  
Income Tax (Systems) is also regularly meeting all the concerned project 
vendors to ensure that there are no slippages.  
 
         The matter  of false PAN cards is not related to the project integration in 
any way. The issue of PAN cards  is an outsourced activity. 
 
Recommendation No.8 
 
 
Shortage of staff 
 
   The Committee observes that there has been shortage of manpower to a large 
extent over the years.  Shortage of staff is stated to be affecting the entire 
collection of tax and revenue, although the R evenue Secretary held that there 
can be no direct co -relation in this regard.  The Committee have been informed 
that recruitment of 3000 personnel has taken place last year who will be 
appointed on completion of formalities.  It should be ensured that ther e is no let 
up in the collection of revenue on account of delay in filling up of vacancies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
C.B.E.C. 
          The manpower position has significantly improved since the year 2007 -08.  
The Cabinet has approved creation of additiona l 4,647 posts for the CBEC and 
has also exempted the CBEC from the mandatory annual  2/3 rd cut in Direct 

 22 
Recruitment under the DOPT guidelines for 3 years upto 2008 -09.   In addition, 
906 posts have been created for providing Customs staff to the new SEZs.   
Promotion posts have been largely filled up now.   Regarding Direct Recruitment, 
requisition has been sent to UPSC (for 320 Group A IRS(C&CE) posts) and to 
SSC (for 2,632 posts of Inspectors and 1,067 posts of Tax Assistants).   The staff 
position will significantly improve as soon as the additional manpower is received 
through UPSC and SSC.  However, even at present, the deployment of 
manpower has been made in such a manner that the revenue collection does not 
suffer. 
 
C.B.D.T. 
 
         Central Board of  Direct Taxes taken steps to fill up vacant posts through 
Government recruitment agencies like Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) to ensure that there is no let up in the 
collection of revenue on account of delay in filling up of vacancies. 

 23 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE INVIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
Anonymous donations 
 
 The Committee are of the view that the philanthropic activities for 
instance, propagation of yoga, providing succour to the victims of natural 
disasters, running gaushalas, old age homes, orphanages, conservation of  
environment, wild animals etc. are being equated with charitable institutions and 
the entity concerned taxed  accordingly.  The Committee are of the view that the 
aforementioned activities should not be treated on par with the charitable 
activities like providing education and medical facilities etc.  They, therefore, 
recommend that the appropriate guidelines in this regard be issued as to not tax  
these entities. 
Reply of the Government 
The term “charitable purpose” as defined in sec 2 (15) in the Income -tax Act, 
1961(Act) includes relief of the poor, education, medical relief, and the 
advancement of any other ob ject of general public utility provided certain 
conditions prescribed in this regard are satisfied. Under the Act, charitable 
institutions are eligible for tax exemptions u/s sec 11 subject to the fulfilment of 
prescribed conditions. Philanthropy like char ity, also intends to do good to all 
mankind by providing charitable funds as well as services and supportive efforts 
but in a more strategic and sustained manner. Therefore, all philanthropic 
activities fall within the ambit of “charitable purpose” defined  in the Act and 
treated similarly for tax purposes.  
 
It has been specifically provided that exemption from taxation of anonymous 
donations would be applicable to any trust or institution created or established 
wholly for 
 

 24 
(a)  religious purposes  or  
(b) religious and charitable purposes provided the anonymous donations are 
not for the purpose of running a university or education or medical 
institution or hospital. 
Creating any other category such as ‘philanthropy’ within the ambit of 
‘charitable purposes’ in order to exempt such trust or institution from the taxation 
of anonymous donations would adversely affect the efficacy of the provision 
which has been brought about to curb the practice of channelizing unaccounted 
money by way of  anonymous donations.   

 25 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOTBEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Acquisition of anti-Smuggling Equipment  
           
The Committee have been informed that huge shortfall in utilization of 
allocations made for the purpose of acquiring anti smuggling equipments 
(container scanners)  during the last four years is due to lack of decision as to the 
type of scanners to be procured - whether X -ray scanners or gamma ray 
scanners.  Th e Committee are of the view that the Government indecision on 
such technical question should not keep the scarce resources blocked year after 
year.  The Committee expect that the decision on the question of the type of 
scanner to be procured should be take n without any further loss of time and the 
Committee be informed of the outcome.  The Committee expect that there should 
be no underutilization of allotted funds on this account during 2008-09. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            The decision regarding t he type of scanner to be procured was taken by 
the Department in 2005 and Committee on Non Plan Expenditure (CNE) 
approval obtained on 14.02.2006 for procurement of 4 fixed X -ray scanners and 
3 mobile Gamma ray scanners.   Subsequently, the proposal to pro cure 7 Truck / 
Container Scanners at an estimated cost of Rs. 172 crore was approved by the 
Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 27.10.2006. 
         
               The Government will take every possible step to ensure that the funds 
allocated for the procurement of 7 Container Scanners are fully utilized during 
2008-09. 
 
 

 26 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Rewards 
      
The Secret Service Fund administered by Department of Revenue is 
utilized for generating information through informers and other means, for  
providing meaningful intelligence and additional information.  The Committee do 
not agree with the view of the Department of Revenue that it is not possible to 
specifically quantify the additional revenue brought under the tax net through 
informer.  The C ommittee feel that without disclosing the identity of informer, it 
should be possible to identify the instances and the final revenue generated by 
such instances and work out consolidated figures to get a fair idea of the 
effectiveness of the intelligence gathering.  The Committee desire that the 
Department of Revenue should evolve a mechanism for this purpose.  The 
Committee would also like to be informed of the cases of mis-use and deprivation 
of the informers of their due share, if any, during the last five years. 
 It is needless to point out that role of a person, who takes risks and 
voluntarily furnishes information regarding tax evasion, albeit for monetary 
considerations is extremely vital in detecting tax evasion cases and prevention of 
unlawful acti vities. Timely and sufficient rewards in such cases will act as a 
driving force for the success of reward scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should have a fresh look at the Rewards Scheme to 
see what refinements can be made in th e Scheme in the light of the experience 
gained over the years. 
Reply of the Government 
 
    The recommendation of the Committee to evolve a mechanism to link 
instances of information given by informers  with final revenue generated by such 
instances has be en examined.  The quantum of extra taxes realisable is 
determined only after all the assessments have become final and no appeal is 
pending or filed and the time for filing of appeal has expired.  The time lag 
between the information given by the informer and    the final demand  realised 
which is attributable to such information furnished by the  informer is such that a 

 27 
mechanism to correlate information gathering and final revenue collected is not 
readily possible.   
 
         No case of misuse and depriv ation of the informer of their due share  has 
been reported.  
 
        Committee’s recommendation that the Department should have a fresh look 
as to what refinement can be made in  the light of experience gained over the 
years has been duly considered.  Th e Reward Guidelines to informers after 
careful examination has been revised by the CBDT and fresh guidelines have 
been issued on 29.11.2007 w.e.f. 01.12.2007 to further expedite and streamline 
the disbursal of reward to the informers. 
 
         The CBEC to o has examined its old reward scheme and comprehensively 
revised the reward guidelines in 2005.   
 
         The scheme is operating fairly smoothly in CBEC and CBDT. The 
implementation is closely watched and any changes required will be made, as 
soon as it is needed. 

 28 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
Tax Code 
 The Committee had recommended in their 52 nd Report (2006-07) that the 
Bill amending the Direct Tax Laws be introduced with a view to ensuring the 
effective administration of Direct Tax Laws.  The Committee regret to find that 
even one year after the Committee’s recommendation, the amendment Bill is yet 
to be introduced in Parliament.  It has been stated that  the Discussion Paper 
alongwith the Draft of the Bill is under preparation and will be released to the 
public for debate and then based on feed back with suitable amendments, the Bill 
will be introduced in Parliament.  The Committee feel that fairly long t ime has 
already been taken by the Department on this matter.  It should be ensured that 
there is no avoidable delay in introducing the Bill before Parliament. 
  
Reply of the Government 
There have been a number of amendments to the Income Tax Act, 1961 
since September, 2006 when the ATR on the 52 nd Report was sent by the 
Department of Revenue.. 
 
The Bill relating to the Direct Taxes Code and the Discussion Paper 
thereon is in an advance stage of preparation.  It can be expected to be released 
to the public for discussion within the next one month. 
  
 
 

 29 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
Benami Transactions (prohibition) Act, 1988 
 
 It transpired during the Committee’s examination of the Demand for 
Grants of the Department of Revenue that the Benami Transaction Prohibition  
Act enacted in 1988 contained grave infirmities and hence the rules to implement 
the same had not been formulated.  It has been stated that the Department of 
Revenue had a discussion in this regard with the Ministry of Law and will amend 
certain provisions of Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 keeping in mind 
the need to curtail terror funding and to cover fund flow to tax havens.  It came as 
a rude shock to the Committee that during the last two decades, the rules under 
the Act could not be framed and one of the important legislations has been made 
ineffective.  The Department owes an explanation for this serious lapse.  The 
Committee are of the view that considering the funding pattern of the various 
terrorist outfits in particular and utilization  of ill -gotten money therefor, it has 
become all the more imperative to enforce the existing legal provisions strictly 
and remove any lacuna therein within six months.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the matter should be examined expeditiously and i f need be, suitable 
amendment bill in this regard be brought  before Parliament without delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The file pertaining to the matter is under submission to the Finance Minister. 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;         ANANTH KUMAR, 
11 December, 2008        Chairman, 
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance. 
 

 30 
Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11 th December, 2008 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs.  in 
Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri Rupchand Pal 
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Shri Mahendra Mohan 
9.  Shri Vijay J. Darda 
10.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
11.  Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
12.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Ahuja   -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Director 
3.   Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan- Deputy Secretary –II 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3.  The Committee, then took up the following draft Reports for consideration :- 
  
(i)    Draft action take n Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 67 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services and Disinvestment);  
 

 31 
(ii)   Draft action taken Report on  the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 68 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 69 th Report on Demands  for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Planning. 
 
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 70 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
(v)  Draft acti on taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 71 st Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
The Committee adopted the Report at (iii) above without any amendment and 
the Reports at (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) with modifications as shown in the annexure. 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the 
light of the modifications made and present the same to Parliament. 
5. The Committee decided to defer consideration of the two draft Reports on (i) 
‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’; and (ii) ‘Counterfeit Currency Notes in 
Circulation’, to a subsequent sitting. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 32 
Annexure  
 
 
(a) Modification made in Chapter -I of the draft action taken report on the 67 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of Ministry of Finance (Departments 
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment). 
 
 
XX     XX     XX 
   XX        XX        XX 
 
 
 (b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 68th  
Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
 
 
Para Line Modification 
19 - Insert the following sentence at the end of the para 
 
“Further, the Committee would like the Ministry to conduct a high level inquiry 
into the entire matter and submit a report to the Committee within a period of one 
month from the presentation of this Report”.  
 
 (c)  Modification made in Chapter -I of the draft action taken report on the 70 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
 
 XX     XX     XX 
 XX     XX     XX 
 
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 
71st Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
 XX     XX     XX 
 XX     XX     XX 

 33 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF  THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2008-2009) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
  
              Total  % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations   10   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which   5  50.00 
have been accepted by the Government     
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,5, 
6 & 8) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   1  10.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view      
of the Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 9)  
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect   2  20.00 
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3 & 4) 
 
 
(v) (Recommendation/observation in respect  2  20.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 (Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 7 & 10) 
 