21 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
 
  
          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
July, 2005/Asadha, 1927 (Saka) 

 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  26 July, 2005 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26 July, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
July, 2005/Asadha, 1927 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
REPORT       
 
 
NOTES OF DISSENT 
  
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 17,18 & 19 
MAY,2005, 
 
1,2,13,14 & 22 JUNE, 2005 AND 5 JULY, 2005 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY BILL, 2005 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
  MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 

28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri John Joseph, Secretary 
2. Smt (Dr.) P.K. Sandhu, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar, Under Secretary 

Introduction 
 
 
 I, Chairman of the  Standi ng Committee on Finance having been 
authorised to submit the Report  on th eir behalf present this Twenty First 
Report on the Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority Bill, 
2005. 
 2.  The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 
2005, introduced in Lok Sabha on 21 st March, 2005, was referred to the 
Committee on 24 th March, 2005 for examinati on and report thereon, by 
the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 3.  The Committee obtained written information on various 
provisions contained in the aforesai d Bill from Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Economic A ffairs, who also briefed them at their sitting 
held on 17th May, 2005. 
4. Written views/memoranda we re received from  (i) the 
Chambers of Commerce viz.,  Fede ration of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI),  Confed eration of Indian Industry (CII), 
PHD Chambers of Commerce and Indu stry (ii) National Trade Unions 
viz., Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU),  Hind Mazdoor Sabha 
(HMS),  Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (B MS), Indian National Trade Union 

Congress (INTUC), All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), (iii) 
Employees Unions and Associations viz.,  Confederation of Central 
Government Employees and Workers, New Delhi,  National Federation of 
Postal Employees, New Delhi, All India State Government Employees’ 
Federation (AISGEF), Calcutta, Punjab  Subordinate Service Federation, 
Chandigarh,  The Telengana Non-Ga zetted Officers’, Central Union, 
Hyderabad,  State Co-ordination Co mmittee of West Bengal Government 
Employees’ Associations and Unions, Kolkata, Maharashtra State Zilla 
Parishad Employees’ Confederati on, Nagpur,  Jharkhand State Non-
Gazetted Employees Federation, Ran chi,  Akhila Karnataka State 
Government Employees Federation (R),  Bangalore, Orissa State 
Government Employees Co-ordin ation Committee, Bhubaneswar,  
Income Tax Employees Federation, New Delhi;  (iv) Shri Mahila Sewa 
Sahakari Bank Ltd, Ahmedabad, (v) Dr. Kirit Parikh, Member Planning 
Commission, New Delhi, (vi) Shri B.K. Bhattacharya, Chairman, High 
Level Expert Group on New Pension System, New Delhi,  (vii) Shri N. 
Rangachary, Former Chairman, Insu rance Regulatory and Development 
Authority,  (viii)   Shri Anand Bord ia, Former Member (Finance),  NHAI, 
and (ix)  Shri Gautam Bhardwaj , Director, Invest India Economic 
Federation, New Delhi. 

  5.   The Committee, at their sitti ng held on 18 May, 2005  heard the 
views of the representatives of  (i ) Indian National Trade Union Congress 
(INTUC), (ii) Hind Mazdoor Sabha (H MS), (iii) All India Trade Union 
Congress (AITUC) and (iv) Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS).   
6.  In their sitting held on 19 May, 2005 (i) Dr. Kirit Parikh, 
Member, Planning Commission, (ii) Shri Gautam Bhardwaj, Director, 
Invest India Economic Foundation, (iii) Shri N. Rangachary, Former 
Chairman, Insurance Regulatory and De velopment Authority and (iv) Dr. 
S.A. Dave, Chairman, Project OASIS Expert Committee for Divising a 
Pension System for India and Chairman, Centre for Monitoring the Indian 
Economy presented their views before the Committee.  
 
7.  On 1 June, 2005, the Co mmittee heard the views of the 
representatives of  (i) Centre of Indian  Trade Unions (CITU) and  (ii) All 
India State Government Employees’ Federation; and  on 2 June, 2005, the 
Committee heard the views of (i) Shri  B.K. Bhattacharya, Chairman High 
Level Expert Group on New Pension System  and (ii) Shri Anand Bordia, 
Former Member (Finance) National Highway Authority of India (NHAI). 
8.   At their sitting held on 13 June, 2005 the Committee heard the 
views of the representatives of (i) Federation of Indian Chambers of 

Commerce and Industry (FICCI) (ii) Confederation of  Indian Industry 
(CII), and  (iii) Confederation of Central Government Employees and 
Workers.   
9.    The Committee again took or al evidence of the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs on 14 June, 2005.  
10. Members gave their suggestions for incorporation in the draft 
report on the aforementioned Bill at the sitting of the Committee held on 
22 June, 2005.   
11.   The Draft Report was circulated to Members on 2 July, 2005.  
           12.   The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at 
their sitting held on 5 July, 2005.  
 13.  The Committee wish to expre ss their thanks to the officers of 
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, representatives 
of the Chambers of Commerce, National Trade Unions, Employees 
Unions and Associations and other i ndividuals for their co-operation in 
placing before them their considered views and perceptions on the 
provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written notes and information that 
the Committee had desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 14.  For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type.  

 
 
NEW DELHI;              (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. 
KHANDURI), 
         22  July, 2005                                                            
Chairman, 
31 Asadha Sravana,1927(Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
Background  
 
Escalating costs of the pension syst em has compelled the Government 
to have a re-look at the formal programmes that provide social security to 
employees.  An added, if not more impor tant factor that has given an impetus 
to the pension reform process in the country is the need to extend old age 
income security coverage to a wider section of the populace, the demographic 
composition of which is rapidly changing.  As is the case with most other 
developing countries, India does not have a universal social security system to 
protect the elderly against economic depr ivation.  The pension policy adopted 
and followed in the country largely hi nges on financing through employer and 
employee participation.  As a result, the coverage of pension programmes and 
schemes is largely restricted to the organized sector workers and a vast 
majority of the workforce in the unorga nized sector is devoid of access to 
formal channels of old age economic support.   
2.    India does not have a tax finan ced universal social security system. 
It is a well known fact that the pove rty alleviation and social welfare 
programmes of the Government are not commensurate with the country’s 
needs, which are indeed immense. In case of need, old people generally rely 
on immediate family members and privat e charities. With the breaking-up of 

the joint family system, it has become in evitable that people plan for their old 
age financial security while they are young and working. 
3. On the pension expenditure of the Central Government, as 
informed by the Ministry, of the total estimated expenditure of Rs. 27,817 
crore for the year 2005-06, the pension expenditure on Defence services totals 
to Rs. 12,452 crore. Details of the pension expenditure for different 
sectors/services of the Government for the years 2001-02 to 2005-06 are as 
shown below: 
Year Civil Telecom Railways Defence Posts  Total  
2001-02 (RE4170 703 5590  
(actuals)
10488 875 21826 
2002-03 (RE4170 840 5940 
(actuals)
10092 1060 22102 
2003-04 (RE4400 1011 6100 11000 1118 23629 
2004-05 (RE5250 1200 6540 11922 1242 26154 
2005-06 (BE5925 1200 6940 12452 1300 27817 
 
4.   The pension expenditure of the Central and State Governments taken 
together, as furnished by the Ministry s how that the expenditure for the year 
2004-05 totals to Rs. 65,524 crore.  The year-wise break-up of pension 

payments of the Central and State Governments for the years 1990-91 to 
2005-06 is shown in the table below: 
Year Pension Payments (Rs In crore)
 States Centre 
1990-91 3131 3272 
1991-92 3716 3748 
1992-93 4379 4585 
1993-94 5107 5206 
1994-95 6146 5734 
1995-96 7813 6928 
1996-97 9827 8252 
1997-98 11599 11376 
1998-99 16166 15346 
1999-00 22679 19446 
2000-01 25453 21117 
2001-02 28196 21826 
2002-03 31005 22102 
2003-04 (RE) 35279 23629 
2004-05 38370 (BE) 26154 (RE) 
2005-06 N.A. 27817 (BE) 
 
PENSION PROGRAMMES AND SCHEMES – SCOPE AND COVERAGE 
5. The pension programmes and sc hemes currently in operation in 
the country and the scope of their cove rage, as depicted by the Ministry of 
Finance in a presentation made before the Committee are as follows:   

Mandatory Schemes Voluntary Schemes 
Civil Services Pension Schemes 
(Pay-as-you-go) (120 Lakhs) 
Personal pension plans from 
annuity providers (8 lakhs) 
 
Employees’ Provident Fund (400 
lakhs) 
Superannuation plans offered by 
life insurance companies ( 8 
Lakhs) 
 
Employees’Pension Scheme (280 
lakhs) 
Public Provident Fund (35 lakhs) 
Special Provident Funds (21 
lakhs)  
 
  
 
6.  The limitations of the formal pe nsion schemes, as highlighted by the 
representatives of Ministry of Finance include, inadequate coverage; lack of 
individual choice and portability; lack of  multiple pension providers; funding 
gaps as in the case of the publicly  managed Employees  Pension Scheme 
(EPS); and fiscal stress of Civil Services Pension Schemes. 
7.  The EPS, which is managed by a Board of Trustees and under which 
subscribers are offered defined benefits  upto a maximum of 50 percent of the 
average of the last 12 months wages devoid of any worry of investment risk, 
administrative costs and other kinds of  risk associated with pension fund 

management, has, as info rmed by the Ministry of Finance, ‘an unfunded gap 
of over Rs. 19,000 crore as per the latest actuarial.’ 
8.   On the extent of coverage of th e formal sector pension schemes per-se, 
the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance stated during evidence: 
“Presently, the coverage of the formal pension system is, through EPF 
we are covering around ten per cent; and State and Central Government 
employees are 2.8 per cent. 87.2 per cent of the workers are today not 
covered.” 
9.  Implementation of the recommendations of the Fifth Central Pay 
Commission on Pension related issu es contributed immensely to the 
burgeoning pension expenditure of the Central and State Governments.  
Unsustainability of the Existing Pension System  
10.  As regards the mounting expenditure of the Central and State 
Governments on pension payments, the Secretary, Economic Affairs 
informed: 
“In absolute numbers, the pension expenditure of the Central 
Government was Rs. 5206 crore in 1993-94.  In 2004-05, it has gone 
upto Rs. 26,154 crore for the Centr al Government.  The compounded 
growth of this is around 21 per cent and pension expenditure as a 
proportion of tax reve nue has gone up from 9. 7 percent in 1993-94 to 

12.6 percent in 2004-05.  For the State Governments, the pension 
expenditure in 1993-04 was around Rs. 5107 crore and that has gone up 
to Rs. 38,370 crore in 2004-05.  The compounded growth has been 
around 27 per cent.  That proportion has gone up from 5.4 percent in 
1990-91 to 10 percent of State tax revenues in 2000-01.” 
11.  During the briefing by the Minist ry of Finance, the Joint Secretary 
while explaining the unsustainability of th e present pension scheme stated as 
under: 
“The Compounded Annual Growth Rate (of pension liability) for 
Central Government employees is 21 per cent and for the State Government 
employees it is 27 per cent. So, this liab ility is rising and it is quite expected 
because if the number of workers who are going to live longer, naturally this 
is going to create more and more burden.  In fact, the dependency ratio for the 
Central Government employees is now as  high as 85 per cent. That means for 
every 100 active workers, we have 85 pens ioners. What are the lessons are we 
learning from the existing pension provisions? We would imagine that good 
pension system should be sustainable over a period of time. That means it 
should be fiscally sustainable, and administratively easy to implement. It 
should result in meaningful retiremen t outcomes and ade quate pension for 
workers. It should be equitable and pro-labour and should not exclude any 

worker from saving for retirement. We w ould like to highlight here one of the 
guiding principles behind the new pe nsion system and the PFRDA Bill has 
been to provide an architecture so th at we can cover un-organised sector 
which is not covered today.” 
12.  On the rationale for undertak ing pension sector reforms by 
switching over to the New Pension System  viz. contributory pension system 
for new recruits to Central Servi ces joining service from 1 January, 2004 
onwards and the move to constitute the PFRDA as a statutory body to regulate 
and promote growth of pension sche mes and funds, the Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Finance stated that the broad kind of fiscal pre ssure that had come 
up had induced the move to set up expert groups and attempt to find a solution 
to the problem that would only ‘get wo rse in the years to come’. In this 
regard, he further elaborated: 
“Now the solution or the attempt to fi nd a solution is really to start a 
unique system of pension, that is, in  the best circumstances, financial 
self-sustaining, cost efficient and al so capable of serving both organized 
and unorganized labour and also allowing full portability.  The last point 
is very important.  In the current system, the pensions of those people 
who are either in the Government or in the organized sector who do have 
a pension, are not portable.  When  you leave the Government before you 

serve the requisite number of years, then you do not get any pension.  
Similarly, in the organized sector also, pensions are not portable.  
Whereas with the change in the empl oyment system that is taking place 
now and in the future, we ought to have a pension system where pensions 
are portable.  What has been ha ppening in most of the developed 
countries in particular is, they increase the retirement age so that people 
work longer.  So, the portion of the pensioners to the proportion of the 
working people does not go up as much  as it would be otherwise.  In 
some countries, there has been a defined contribution system and some 
countries have actually reduced the benefits.  About 31 countries in the 
last decade or so have done it whic h is not a very pleasant thing to do 
frankly speaking.     In some countri es, there has been a systemic pension 
reforms from a defined benefit to a defined contribution system and this 
has happened in about 18 countries in the last decade or so.  Now, we are 
lucky to a certain extent that our stage of demography is such that the 
working population is relatively young.  Compared to the world standard, 
the projections of the next 20 years are such that, in some sense, we will 
have the best situation in the world  in terms of the proportion of working 
population to the older population.  So, this is a very good time for us to 
be starting a system of pension reforms.” 

PENSION REFORM MEASURES  
13. The Secretary, Economic Affa irs briefly recapitulated the 
pension reform measures undertaken in the preceding years which led to 
the switch over to the Contributory Pension System viz., New Pension 
System to the new entrants to th e Central Services appointed from 1 st 
January 2004 and the intr oduction of the PFRDA Bill,  2004 seeking to set 
up a statutory Authority inter alia fo r managing the New Pension System.  
The Pension reform measures undertaken in the previous years, as pointed 
out by the Finance Secretary include d setting up of the OASIS (Old Age 
Social and Income Security) project by the Ministry of So cial Justice and 
Empowerment in 1998 for devising a pension scheme for the unorganized 
sector; the budget announcements of th e Hon’ble Finance Minister in 
2001-2002 inter alia requiring the IRDA to study the various aspects in the 
area of system of pension to the unorganized sector and constituting a High 
Level Expert Committee to review th e existing pension system for Central 
Government Employees; submission of  the related reports viz. IRDA 
report in 2001 and the report of the High Level Expert Group in 2002; and 
presentation of the Report of the ‘Group ’ to Study the pension liabilities of 
the State Governments in 2003.” 
 

(II) REPORTS OF EXPERT GROUPS AND CO MMITTEES ON 
PENSION REFORM MEASURES 
 
14.   Major among the reports that have examined old age income and 
financial security encompassing the workforce at large – both in the 
Government and other sectors and were considered by the Government are: 
(i).  Project OASIS Committee Report, December 29, 1999 (OASIS 
Report); 
(ii)  Pension Reforms in the Unorga nized Sector – a Report prepared by 
the Insurance Regulatory and De velopment Authority, October 
2001; 
(iii) Report of the High Level E xpert Group on New Pension System, 
Government of India, February 2002; and  
(iv)  Report of the Group to study the pension liabilities of the State 
Governments (RBI Oct., 2003) 
15.  The Group to Study the pe nsion liabilities of the State 
Governments (serial no. iv) was set up by the RBI under the Chairmanship of 
Shri B.K. Bhattacharya as a sequel to  the decision taken in the Eleventh 
Conference of State Finance Secretaries held during January, 2003. The Study 
Group was given the specific task of studying the pension liabilities of the 
State Governments and making suitable recommendations. 

16.  The major observations of th ese reports, and th e recommendations 
made in the direction of pension refo rms, as observed by the Committee, are 
delineated below:-  
(i)  OASIS (Old Age Social and Income Security) Project Report  
17.  The report of OASIS (Old Age Social and Income Security) project 
- which was commissioned by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment under the Chairmanship of  Shri S.A.Dave for ‘Devising a 
Pension System in India’ -  was subm itted in January, 2000. The prime focus 
of the OASIS Committee has been on the great mass of individuals who are 
working outside the pension provisions th at presently exist in the unorganized 
sector. The OASIS report - on the ba sis of which the PFRDA Bill, 2005 is 
observed to be significantly drawn -  recommended a pension scheme based 
on Individual Retirement  Accounts to be opened anywhere in India at the 
price of modest contributions throug h the working career of  the worker. 
Banks, Post Offices etc., could serve as  Points of Presence (POPs) where the 
accounts could be opened or contribut ions deposited. Their interconnectivity 
could ensure portability as the worker  moves from one place/employment to 
another. The report recommended for cr eation of a depository for centralized 
record keeping, management of fund s by ‘Fund Managers’ and provision of 

benefit  after the age of 60 by annuity providers.  A Central Regulatory 
Authority, namely, India Pension Authority was recommended.  
18.   As per the report, a minimu m contribution of Rs. 500 per  annum 
was expected to have an accumulation of around Rs. 2 lakhs at the age of  60 
years, of which, Rs. 1 lakh was to be used for buying an annuity, beyond 
which one would be free to deploy. 
(ii)  IRDA Report 
19.  The IRDA Committ ee’s recommendations for reforms in the non-
governmental/unorganized sector are as follows: 
•  Establish a system based on pr ivately managed, individual funded 
defined-contribution accounts. Freedom  to invest in equities must be 
ensured and such a facility leads to  a tremendous enhancement over a 
long period of time, to the return s. Lump sum payments and/or 
annuity on retirement would be actuari ally determined based on funds 
available. 
.   For the new pension system to be functional, there should be a “critical 
mass” by way of subscribers. 
 
•  Privatize assets management functi ons of EPFO and exempt provident 
funds (managed by the trustees appointed by the employers and 
employees) and allow private insurance firms to provide annuities. 

•  For persons not covered by any scheme, allow a limited number of 
private asset managers to operate,  each offering three investment 
portfolio options. Participants  would have choice among fund 
managers selected through a competitive bidding process by 
regulatory authorities. 
•  Employers’ and fund managers’ re sponsibility to participants would 
be that of ‘principal and agent’ and fiduciary in nature. Fund 
managers would work for a fee with no performance guarantee. 
However, it is hoped that with expert managerial skill and wider 
investment choice, participants woul d be better off than at present, 
through publicly managed funds.   
•  Government would need to provide tax subsidy to encourage 
acceptance of privately managed funds.  
•  Government should allow facilita ted access to the system through its 
postal and banking network througho ut the country to keep the 
administrative cost low. 
•  To supervise and regulate the system, an independent regulatory 
authority called the Indian Pensions Authority should be set up. 
 
 
 
 

(III)  REPORT OF THE HIGH LEVEL EXPERT GROUP ON NEW 
PENSION SYSTEM 
 
20.   As a sequel to the announcement  made by the Finance Minister in 
the Union Budget (2001-02), inter-alia for reviewing the existing pension 
system and to provide a roadmap for th e steps to be taken by the government 
for switching over to a  new pe nsion programme based on defined 
contributions, a High Level Expert Group under the chairmanship of Shri B.K. 
Bhattacharya was constituted. 
21.  The recommendations of th e High Level Expert Group on the 
Pension Policy of Central Government Employees included: 
(a) An unfunded defined benefit, pa y-as-you-go scheme (PAYG), or a 
pure defined contribution sc heme was not considered suitable for government 
employees; instead the Committee recommended a hybrid defined 
benefit/defined contribution scheme. It  envisaged a two-tier scheme. In the 
first tier, there is a mandatory cont ribution of 10 per cent each by employer 
and employee. The accumulated funds would be used to pay pension in 
annuity form. The second tier is to promote personal savings and there is no 
limit for employee’s contribution but employer’s contribution would be 
matching and limited to 5 per cent. Accu mulated funds can be withdrawn in 
lump sum or converted into annuity at the time of retirement. These payments 

would be tax exempt and portable if  an employee changes job before 
retirement. 
(b)  Funds collected in the first tie r would be deposite d in a separate 
fund and would be invested in both de bt and equity. Some funds can be 
earmarked for active fund management including for short term trading for 
better returns. However, irrespective of  fund performance, government would 
remain liable for pension to its employees based on predetermined benefit 
formula.  
 (c)  Contributions obt ained in the second tier will have a separate 
institutional structure and the employ ees would  have a choice of funds 
(income based funds with predominant investment in government securities, 
balanced funds with equal investment  in government securities and market 
equity and growth funds with pre-do minant investment in market based 
equity) to invest in. Employees may deci de to continue, quit, or swap among 
funds while in service. Government wi ll not guarantee any specific rate of 
return.  
 (d)  The new schemes would be applicable to new employees only.     
 
 
 
 
 
 

(IV) REPORT OF THE GROUP TO STUDY THE PENSION LIABILITIES 
OF THE STATE GOVERNMENTS 
 
22.  On the growing liabilities of State Governments on account of the 
existing defined benefit pension syst em, the report of the Study Group 
observed: 
“During the period 1980-2002, pe nsion payments of the State 
Governments have sharply risen at  a annual compound rate of 23.6 per 
cent from Rs. 268 crore in 1979-80 to Rs. 28,197 crore in 2001-02. 
State-wise trends show that the growth rates varied widely across the 
States. Pension payments as percenta ge of total revenue  receipts of the 
States rose from 2.1 per cent in 19 80-81 to 11.0 per cent in 2001-02; 
during the same period, the ratio of  pension payments to States' own 
revenue receipts rose at a faster rate from 3.4 per cent to 17.2 per cent. 
 The rapid increase in States' pensi on outgo could be attributable to a 
number of factors which, inter alia, include expansion in the number of 
State Government employees during the earlier decades; extension of 
pension facilities to employees of va rious non-Government institutions 
(Grant-in-Aid Institutions and Local Bodies etc.); impact of various pay 
revisions; introduction of wa ge indexation, and significant 
improvement in life expectancy .” 

 23.  The Study Group Report recommended for introduction of 
contributory pension scheme/s fo r the new employees of the State 
Governments in place of the existing non-contributory defined benefit pension 
scheme. 
NEW PENSION SYSTEM 
24.  The salient features of the New Pension System viz., Defined 
Contributing Pension System introduced for new entrants to Central 
Government Service vide Ministry of Finance notification No- 5/7/2003 
CB&PR dated 22nd December, 2003 are delineated as under: 
1. The System is applicable to  all new entrants to Central 
Government service, except to Arme d Forces in the first instance,, 
joining Government service on or after 01.01.2004. 
2. The system works on defined c ontribution basis a nd has have two 
tiers – Tier-I and II.  Contributions  to Tier I is mandatory for all 
government servants joining government service on or after 
01.01.2004, whereas Tier II is optional and at the discretion of 
Government servants. 
3. In Tier I, Government servants  make a contribution of 10% of the 
basic pay plus DA, which will be  deducted from the salary bills 

every month by the PAO concerned.   The Government is to make 
an equal matching contribution. 
4. Tier I contributions (and the inve stment returns) are kept in a non-
withdrawable Pension Tier I Acc ount.  Tier II contributions are 
kept in a separate account that w ill be withdrawable at the option 
of the government servant.  Government will not make any 
contribution to Tier II account. 
5. The existing provisions of De fined Benefit Pension and GPF are 
not available to new government servants joining Government 
service on or after 01.01.2004. 
6. In order to implement the sche me, there will be a Central Record 
Keeping agency and several Pensi on fund Managers to offer three 
categories of Schemes to Government servants viz. options A,B 
and C based on the ratio of investment in fixed income instruments 
and equities. 
7. At exit from Tier I of the Pension System at the age of 60  it would 
be mandatory for a government se rvant to invest 40 percent of 
pension wealth to purchase an annuity (from an IRDA regulated 
Life Insurance Company),  which will provide for pension for the 
lifetime of the employee and his de pendent parents/spouse.  In the 

case of government servants w ho leave the Scheme before 
attaining the age of 60, the manda tory annuitisation would be 80% 
of the pension wealth. 
25.   As the New Pension System was put in place without the full 
architecture and a statutorily regul ated mechanism, the Government 
promulgated an ordinance viz. the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Ordinanc e, 2004 (Ord 8 of 2004) on the 29 th 
December, 2004, which lapsed. In the interim to the setting up of ‘proper 
infrastructure under a regulatory framewo rk’, contributions under the NPS 
are being credited in the public acc ount, earning an administered rate of 
return equal to the rate on the Genera l Provident Fund.  The Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2005 was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on 21 st March, 2005 and re ferred to the Standing Committee on 
Finance on 24 th March, 2005.  The Bill seeks to provide for the 
establishment of an Authority to promote old age income security by 
establishing, developing and regulating pension funds, to protect the 
interests of subscribers to schemes of pension funds and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.” 
 
 

INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE ON PENSION REFORMS: 
26.  The literature and research pa pers furnished to the Committee by 
Ministry of Finance inter-alia reveal that in the c ontext of growing pension 
liabilities, several reformi ng countries (in terms of pension reforms) have 
initiated modifications in the civil se rvice pension schemes. Many countries 
have taken measures to reduce the pe nsion liabilities by introducing higher 
retirement ages and or longer servic e periods; changing post retirement 
indexation policy; lowering ra tes of benefit accruals etc. In Europe, with the 
possible exception of U.K and Netherlands,  almost all countries face pension 
crisis in terms of under funding of the system.    In order to address the 
problems on account of rising pensions liability which are mostly based on 
defined benefit, there are two opt ions, which are being exercised 
internationally to bring in reforms in  the pension system viz. parametric 
(minor) reforms and systemic (major) reforms. While major reforms include 
mainly moving from pay-as you-go (PAYG) i.e., defined be nefit to defined 
contribution etc., the minor reforms are related to changing contribution 
structure, benefit structure and administration etc.    
27.  Some of the countries which have gone in for major pension 
reforms (systemic) are Chile, Sweden , Poland, Mexico, Australia, Hungary, 
Kazakastan ( moved from PAYG to defined contribution). Indonesia and  

Nigeria have moved from provident fund system to PAYG.    The 
privatization of the pension reforms in Chile by Pinochet in 1981 is an oft-
cited case.  In the category of minor re forms, New Zealand, Ireland, Italy etc. 
have changed the eligibility  criteria in terms of changing the retirement age 
whereas Brazil, Latvia, Greece etc. have  changed eligibility criteria in terms 
of changing the service years. Other minor reforms of changing the 
contribution structure has been carried out in Japan, Malaysia, Taiwan, Korea, 
Bulgaria, Sudan etc. 
28.  The cross country experience on approaches to social security as 
depicted in the Report of the Group to study the pension liabilities of the 
State Governments is summarised below: 
1.     A large majority of countri es provide old-age benefits through a 
defined benefit social  security system based on principles of 
social insurance. Most of the c ountries of the OECD have such 
programmes. 
2.    An increasing number of countries provide benefits through a 
mandatory individual account defined contribution programme. 
A number of countries in Latin America adopted these 
programmes during the 1990s. 

3.    A number of countries whic h were formerly British colonies 
have provident funds. These provident funds are national 
mandatory savings plans that gene rally pay benefits in a single 
payment, known as lump sum benefits. 
4.    Notional account plans are relatively new and recently adopted 
by Sweden and Poland, where each worker has an individual 
account but the accounts are not funded. The return that is 
credited to each worker's acc ount takes into consideration 
current and prospective demographic and productivity change. 
5.    Some countries give work ers the option of contributing to a 
state-run plan or contributing to  a private sector managed plan. 
This approach is often called contracting out, and is used by the 
United Kingdom, Japan and some countries in Latin America. 
6.     Some countries mandate employer-provi ded pension plans , an 
approach used by Australia and Switzerland. These mandated 
plans can either be defined benefit or defined contribution 
plans. In Switzerland, cash ba lance plans are commonly used, 
which are a hybrid plan combining features of both defined 
benefit and defined contribution plans. 

7.    Some countries have quasi-mandating of employer-provided 
plans, where the mandate is not a legal requirement imposed by 
the State but is the result of a contractual agreement between 
labour unions and  employers that  covers most workers in the 
country. The Netherlands and Sweden are examples of this 
approach.  
           Countries, such as  Sweden and Poland, combine two or 
sometimes three of these approaches. 
 
29.  The ‘pension model’ adopted in Chile figured with prominence in 
the Committee’s deliberations.  An excerpt on the fundamental 
characteristics of the Chillean system  from the Chapter on ‘Civil Services 
Pension Reform : Cross - Country Experience’ of the report of the ‘Group to 
study the Pension liabilities of the State Governments’ is reproduced below: 
“The pension reform of 1980s in Chile created a new system known 
as the 'AFP system Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (Pension 
Fund Management Companies) which completely replaced its 
Government run PAYG social secur ity system with an investment-
based private system of individual retirement accounts. The new 
pension system also gives the wo rkers, covered by the scheme, the 

right to choose between different  pension providers and between 
different forms of payout after their retirement.  
 The most fundamental characte ristics of the Chilean system 
are: (i) contributions are capitalised  in individual (personal) accounts 
(the rate of contribution is defined in the law as a proportion of the 
wage), (ii) the value of old ag e pension depends on the balance 
accumulated in the personal account of each worker, (iii) disability 
and survivorship pensions are "d efined benefits" with a value 
proportional to the taxable wage of the member, (iv) the worker is free 
to choose among different regist ered, single-purpose, pension 
management institutions (the A FPs), (v) AFPs are private and 
competitive firms whose purpose is to invest the funds in the capital 
market on behalf of its members, (v i) at retirement, the worker can 
choose among three different ways in which he can receive the 
pension, (vii) and the State play s mainly a "subsidiary role", 
manifested in its responsibility to  regulate and supervise the system, 
finance minimum pensions, and provide certain guarantees.” 
30.  On the Chilean Pension reform process in particular, an article 
furnished to the Committee by the Mi nistry of Finance on the Pension 

reforms processes in the Latin American countries inter alia reveals as 
follows: 
“The new model of pension provision has, offere d a viable alternative 
to the failing pay-as-you-go, public schemes that had become prevalent 
around the world over the last century. In its short history in Latin 
America, comprising 55 years of cumulative experience, millions of 
workers have opened accounts in specialized firms under strict 
supervision, acquired property right s and a greater degree of control 
over their retirement income. In gene ral, they have enjoyed good rates 
of return, more flexibility in terms of  benefits and better service in the 
new system.” 
31.  The early years of the Chil ean Pension Reform experience were 
characterized by a portfolio highly con centrated in government bonds and 
the system had to survive a major banking crisis and economic recession. 
The impact on capital markets in particul ar could, therefore, only be felt 
once sufficient funds had accumulated and parallel reforms took place. 
Investment rules were gradually relaxed and improveme nts made, which 
culminated in  the introduction of mo re investment choices through the 
‘multifondos’ scheme (multifund s managed by AFP – Pension Fund 
Management Companies). 

32.  The ‘Chilean reform syst em’ has received many criticisms, 
mainly on account of high administrative costs, lack of portfolio choice, and 
the high number of switchovers from one fund to another, inability to 
provide enough incentives to cover low-income employees, etc. The 
literature made available to the Co mmittee on the Chilean Pension System 
also inter-alia indicates that contrary to claims made, private individual 
accounts had proven to be more expensive to manage than collective claims, 
when administrative costs were discounte d, privately held and administered 
pension funds in Chile showed an aver age annual real return of 5.1 per cent 
between 1982 and 1998, and,  high fees and commissions –charged at a flat 
rate on all accounts – ha d proven to be highly regressive; instead of 
competition, monopolization of pension fund administrators had taken place; 
and expansion of coverage remained on unfulfilled promise.  
33.  The Ministry of Finance, in a written submission inter-alia, 
informed that ‘pension’ has not been defined in the PFRDA Bill, 2005 as the 
intended scope and  applicability of the Bill is confined to the New Pension 
System (NPS) and any other scheme not regulated by any other enactment.  
On other hand, the Bill defines the ‘New Pension System’ and ‘Pension 
funds’ as the regulator will have power s to regulate pension funds under the 
Act.  

34.  As per Article 366 (17) of the Constitution of India, pension 
means a pension, whether contributor y or not, of any kind whatsoever 
payable to or in respect of  any person, and includes retired pay so payable, a 
gratuity so payable and any sums so payable by way of the return, with or 
without interest thereon or  any other addition thereto, of subscriptions to a 
provident fund. 
35.  The Fifth Central Pay Comm ission had, in considering the 
Overall Strategy on Retirement Benefits, observed that ‘pension is an area 
where clarity of vision is often obscured by ill conceived notions’. The 
Commission drew referen ce to the judgment of th e Supreme Court of India 
in D.S. Nakara and other vs. Union of India (AIR 1983, SC130). 
 
VIEWS/MEMORANDA SUBMITTED IN RESPECT OF THE PFRDA BILL, 
2005 
 
36.  The Committee have, apart from taking evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Finance, Chairman, PFRDA and Chairman 
IRDA, with a view to s eek clarifications on various aspects of the ‘New 
Pension System’ viz. Contributory pe nsion system and the provisions of 
PFRDA Bill, 2005, sought memoranda and had personal hearings of a cross-
section of experts and representatives of employees associations, trade 
unions and individuals. 

37.  Though the memoranda submitted and in the course of personal 
hearings, the trade and employees unions have been vehement in opposing 
the pension reform processes and the setting up of PFRDA as a statutory 
regulatory body. Most of them have contended that the ‘contributory pension 
scheme’ and the provisions of the PFRDA Bill seek to deprive government 
employees of their old age security guarantee by way of statutory pension, 
which is considered the best of social security measures. Their main 
contentions for opposing the Bill have been on account of: not having had 
consultations with the trade and employees unions; not defining ‘pension’ 
and guaranteeing a ‘minimum pension’ in the Bill; the new pension scheme 
envisaged being retrograde, insecure and tending to render the retirees 
dependent on the market forces; and contributing 10 per cent of the monthly 
wage Bill by employees being an additional burden, particularly for the 
lower wage group. It has also been pointed out to the Committee that the 
government’s move amounted to doing it away with the existing social 
security net provided for the care of retired government personnel. In 
support of their claim, they relied heavily on the observations of Supreme 
Court of India and Fifth Central Pay commission. The Supreme Court in 
D.S. Nakara Vs. Union of India (AIR 1983, SC 130) observed as follows : 

“A pension scheme cons istent with available resources must provide 
that the pensioner would be able to live; 
(i) free from want, with decency,  independence and self-respect; 
and 
 
(ii) at a standard equivalent  at the pre-retirement level.” 
38.  The Court had, in delivering the judgment held that ‘pension is 
neither a bounty nor a matter of grace depending upon the sweet will of the 
employer.   It is not an ex-gratia pa yment, but a payment for past services 
rendered.  It is a social welfare measure, rendering socio-economic justice to 
those who in the heyday of their life ceaselessly toiled for the employer on 
an assurance that in their old age, they would not be left in the lurch.’ 
39.   On the basis of the observations of the Apex Court in the ‘Nakara 
Case’, the Fifth Central Pay Commission observed that ‘pension is not in the 
nature of alms being doled out to begg ars.  The senior citizens need to be 
treated with dignity and courtesy bef itting their age.  Pension is their 
statutory, inalienable, legally enforceable right and it ha s been earned by the 
sweat of their brow.  As such it shoul d be fixed, revised, modified and 
changed in ways not entirely dissimilar to the salaries granted to serving 
employees.’ 
40.  The Chambers of Commerce as well as most of the Experts have, 
on the other hand, supported the pensio n reform measures and establishment 

of Pension Fund Regulatory and Deve lopment Authority. It has been 
contended that the define d benefit pension scheme for Civil Servants was 
beginning to consume an alarming pr oportion of Central and State 
Government revenues and was theref ore  becoming unsustainable, EPFO 
Members received poor returns on their contributions and on the other end 
of the spectrum, social assistance schemes did not reach many of the 
poorest. Therefore, there is an urgent need for pension reforms. It has also 
been contended in a Joint note submitted to the Committee by CII and FICCI 
that there ‘clearly exists an important strata of working population which is 
capable of and is willing to  contribute to their pensi on’ but is not able to do 
so due to lack of opportunities. Se tting up of PFRDA would provide them 
with necessary confidence and motivation to save for their old age security 
and  retirement. 
41.  The views expressed by the representatives of Chambers of 
Commerce etc. on the specific provisions of the Bill inter-alia centered on:   
(i) Guidelines and providing clarity on pre-requisites, constitution, 
capital requirements, number, elig ibility norms, selection process, 
functioning, charges, investment norms etc. of ‘pension fund 
managers’ who have to function under the regulatory aegis of 
PFRDA. 

(ii) Ensuring a  level playing field for insurance and pension sectors. 
(iii) Constitution of an Advisory Committee for the PFRDA as in the 
case with IRDA 
42.  A case was also made out by Shri N. Rangachary, Former 
Chairman, IRDA that instead of constituting the PFRDA, the IRDA 
could take up the role of regulating the pension sector. 
43. On this issue, the Ch airman, IRDA however, stated: 
 “we do find that the regulatory aspects are different. So far as 
insurance is concerned, because in insurance we are l ooking at the risk 
factors whereas in the cas e of pension we are l ooking at the growth in 
the fund.  So, we have the situation where pension regulator and 
insurance regulator are independent in different countries very often 
you will find that the total amount of accumulations in the pension fund 
are much higher than the accumulati ons that are taking place in the 
insurance sector in the rest of the world.  So, if that is the kind of 
potential that we have today it is quite obvious that we should have 
pension regulator who is going to concentrate on the development of 
this sector which is at a very nas cent stage on the other hand, so far as 
insurance is concerned, it is also  at a very nascent stage and the 
insurance regulatory authority is al so being given th e responsibility of 

developing insurance sector.  So, there is certain amount of pension that 
has to be paid for the development of insurance to increase the density 
and penetration of insurance into the rural areas.  So, the insurance 
regulatory authority has already got this responsibility of popularising 
insurance.  It is perhaps obvious that we should have pension regulatory 
who will take up independently the regulation of the pension.”  
44.    The Committee, inter-alia sought to know from the 
Government whether : 
i) the employees covered or subscribers of the NPS could be 
guaranteed a minimum pension amounting to atleast 50 
percent of the last pay, as provided for under the prevailing 
pension rules or the EPF; 
ii) the Government would actually be  able to reap the benefit of 
consolidating or lessening the fiscal stress on pension 
payments as the Defence  servi ces were left out of the NPS, 
and the Government had to , in addition to meeting the 
liability on pension payments  of retired and serving 
employees, also make a matchi ng  10 percent contribution in 
the case of the new recruits covered under the NPS; and 

iii)  the projected or potential pension market of the  ‘unorganised 
sector’ justified the setting up of PFRDA as a statutory body. 
45. On the issue of benefits to th e subscribers in regard to which, 
Clause 20 (f) of the PFRDA Bill specifically states that there shall not be any 
implicit or explicit assurance of benefits except market based guarantee 
mechanism to be purchased by the subscriber, the Finance Secretary stated: 
 “It is true that there is no guarantee in the system and in that 
sense there would be uncertainty in the peoples’ mind about what they 
would get.  There are two responses to  that question.  One is the market 
development.  The market itself could provide certain instruments for 
providing guarantee.  But there will be a cost attached to that.  I am not 
in a position to say what that co st might be.  Market itself could 
generate options where people could buy such guarantees.  Secondly, 
once again, the system gets into ope ration presumably people would be 
provided calculations of the kind we are providing to the Committee 
now in terms of what would be the pension – given different 
assumptions – available at the end o f  3 5  y e a r s .   T h a t  k i n d  o f  
information would hopefully help the employees in feeling more 
secured. But as an employer, I can  certainly feel this kind of an 
uncertainty that any employer woul d feel until the information is 

available and also whatever guarantee is available in the market.  But as 
of now, there is clearly no intention to provide a guarantee on the 
pension under this system.”  
  
46. The Committee was informed by the Chairman, PFRDA that the 
Government had an open mind on providing for a ‘pension scheme’ or 
‘option’ under the NPS involving 100 percent investment in Government 
securities.  
 
 47. On the question of the haste in introducing the Bill the Chairman, 
PFRDA had informed the Ministry as follows: 
“Finally, if you permit me to say wh at are the consequences of not 
passing the Bill.  There is a de mand for pension, for generating 
retirement income in the market.  The demand has come out from the 
survey which was conducte d on behalf of the Finance Ministry which 
said 20 million people are willing to jo in the new pension system when 
they were told about the aspects of the new pension system including 
that there are no assured returns.  In due course of time that is five or 
ten years down the line, another 20 million will join this scheme.  
Assuming there is demand for the scheme – which the survey brings out 
– the market forces are going to meet this demand in whatever manner 

they can.  If they meet this de mand would the Standing Committee like 
that they should be under an unregulated environment or they should be 
under a regulated environment?” 
  
48.   On the question of providing minimum guarantee to the 
subscribers in the Bill, the Chairman  PFRDA had inter-alia in his reply 
stated as under: 
 “PFRDA has an open mind on it.  But if I add one more 
aspect to it,  Sir, a suggestion was made why limit the number of  
Pension Fund Managers….  It is  only that the Government has 
envisaged that there may be six.  I had mentioned there could be 
much more than that.  Greater  the competition, some Pension 
Fund Managers on their own w ill provide some element of 
guarantee.” 
 
 49.  On the issue of likely terminal benefits that may accrue 
(accumulations/replacement rates) fo r employees compulsorily covered 
under the  ‘defined contribution’ or  New Pension System, the Ministry 
furnished to the Committee certain illustrative projections/calculations, 
for six kinds of asset allocations  or investment options.  The 
calculations, which were worked ou t on the basis of some common 

assumptions, and the projections of accumulation/replacement rates, as 
furnished, is shown at Annexure-I. 
 
 50.  It is seen from the calculati ons furnished by the Ministry that 
in the case of an asset allocation involving 100 percent investment in 
Government securities – which presumes a pessimistic asset return 
assumption of 1.5  percent per year for Government bonds, 3 percent 
for corporate bonds and 5 percent for equities – the terminal 
replacement rates for different cate gories of employees (Group A, B, C 
and D) range between 43% to 49%.  On the other hand, in the case of 
an asset allocation at the other e nd of the spectrum which involves 100 
percent investment in equities, th e replacement rate for different 
categories of employees is projected to be in the range of 80 to 95%. 
 
51.  On whether there was any actuarial basis for establishing that 
the ‘new pension system’ was benefici al to the Government in terms of 
lessening the fiscal stress on pension outgo and the time period  by 
when a positive gain could be witnessed in this regard, the Ministry 
cited the findings of the report of the High Level Expert Group 
(HLEG), which inter alia  examined the issue of the  budgetary impact 

of introducing the alternate pension system recommended by it.  As per 
the HLEG report: 
“the positive gain of a switchove r to a  DC scheme would be 
witnessed from the year 2038-39. The saving to the Government 
increases steadily from this stage onwards and within a decade after 
this point of time, Government sa ves approximately Rs. 14,000 crore 
per annum by undertaking reform, which increases to about Rs. 
40,000 crores per annum in another decade. “ 
 
52.   The High Level Expert Group (HLEG) had commissioned 
the National Institute of Finance and Policy for examining the 
‘Government liability on pension’.  The tabulated findings on the 
year-wise budgetary impact on account of switching over to the 
‘defined contribution system’ to the new recruits, as furnished to the 
Committee, is shown at Annexure II. The Ministry have also informed 
the Committee that the projections  made were on the conservative 
side and that the ‘savings for Government on account of pension 
payments could occur at an earlier date than envisaged by the HLEG’. 
 

53.  On the ‘pension market’ in the unorganised sector, or the 
workforce presently not covered unde r any pension sche me’, the Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Finance  stated during evidence: 
“Today the requirement is that we should have an infrastructure 
whereby the fund and the instrument of various people in the 
unorganised sector can be transfe rred to a Central Record Keeping 
Agency and then from there it can be  sent to where they are.  This 
infrastructure will provide the backbone for any future scheme to 
provide social security to the unor ganised workers and the low paid 
workers.  Tomorrow even if the Government can provide for a sum of 
Rs. 5,000 crore for this purpose, th e delivery mechanism will come in 
the way.  This infrastructure w ith this new pension system is 
providing the backbone on which we can ride.” 
54.  As per the estimates furnishe d by the Ministry, the projected 
growth of the pension market under the NPS for the Central Government 
employees would total to Rs. 3645 cror e in ten years from now.  A Joint 
Note furnished to the Committee by FICCI  and CII indicates that the market 
size for pension funds in the uncovere d  sector of the workforce would 
encompass 34.5 million people involving a corpus of Rs. 28,770.2  Crore. 

55.  On the specifications and moda lities of selection and registration 
of pension funds, the Ministry have informed that:  
 “It is proposed that the requirements for qualifications as pension 
fund managers including pre-requisites relating to capital structure, basic 
qualifications etc, would be spelt out  by PFRDA under regulations to be 
framed under the proposed legislation”.  
56.  On the issue of permitting FDI in the Pension Sector, while the 
Chairman, PFRDA stated that ‘it cannot be anymore different from what it is 
in the insurance sector, which is 26 pe rcent today’, the Secretary, Economic 
Affairs informed that the Government was yet to decide on the matter. 
57.  The Committee, having considered the diverse views expressed 
and the clarifications given by the Ministry of Finance are of the opinion that 
the reform process in the pension sector involving the setting up of the 
PFRDA as a statutory regulatory body for managing the NPS is an urgent 
necessity mainly on account of burgeoning  fiscal stress of pension payments 
on the Central and State revenues a nd the need to provide a viable 
alternative to the populace at large to sa ve for old age income security.   
This, the Committee feel, notwithstanding the fact that the positive affect of 
lessening the fiscal stress on the Central revenues on account of the 
switchover to the New Pension System is to be witnessed probably only 

from the year 2038.   The Committee woul d, however, also hasten to add 
that the apprehensions expressed by the concerned sections on the new 
contributory pension system are bor n out of genuine concerns.  The 
Committee feel that such apprehensions can be minimised, if not totally 
eliminated, if proper safeguards are intr oduced in the larger interest of the 
subscribers- both the Government employees who are compulsorily covered 
under the scheme as well as the others .  After having considered the PFRDA 
Bill clause wise, the Committee approve the same for enactment subject to 
the modifications/amendments/ recommendations as detailed in the 
subsequent paragraphs of the report. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Clause 4 - Composition of Authority 
58. Clause 4 reads as under: 
The Authority shall consist of a Ch airperson and not more than five 
members, of whom at le ast three shall be whole-time members, to be 
appointed by the Central Governme nt from amongst persons of ability, 
integrity and standing and having e xperience and knowledge in economics, 
finance, law or administrative matters with at least one person from each 
discipline. 
59. The above provision conveys th at the Authority shall include 
two part-time members. Yet the quali fications required to be met for 
selection of part-time members in te rms of expertise and knowledge in 
specified fields have not been provided in the clause. With a view to provide 
clarity, the Committee recommend that th e clause be rephrased to clearly 
depict the composition of the authority viz. (a) a Chairperson; (b) not more 
than three whole time members; and (c) not more than two part-time 
members.  The Committee further desire  that selection of both whole-time 
and part-time members of the Authority should be confined to professionals 
having experience in economics or fina nce or law only.  The Committee are 

also of the opinion that if the Central Government so desire, one of the part 
time members in the Authority could be their nominee. 
 
 
 
 
 
Clause 14 - Duties, Powers and Functions of Authority 
60. Clause 14 reads as under: 
 
 (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the 
time being in force, the Authority shall have the duty, to regulate, promote 
and ensure orderly growth of the Ne w Pension System and pension schemes 
to which this Act applies and, to protect  the interests of subscribers of such 
System and schemes. 
(2) Without prejudice to the genera lity of the provisions contained in 
sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the Authority shall include- 
(a) regulating the New Pension Syst em and the pension schemes to 
which this Act applies; 
(b) approving schemes, the terms and conditions thereof and laying 
down norms for the management of the corpus of the pension funds, 
including investment guidelines under such schemes; 
(c) registering and regulating intermediaries; 

(d) issuing to an intermediary, on application, a certificate of 
registration and renewing, modifying, withdrawing, suspending or canceling 
such registration; 
(e) protecting the interests of subscribers; 
(f) establishing mechanism for redressi ng grievances of subscribers to 
be determined by regulations; 
(g) promoting professional organisa tions connected with the pension 
system; 
(h) adjudication of disputes betw een intermediaries and between 
intermediaries and subscribers; 
(i) collecting data and requiring the in termediaries to collect such data 
and undertaking and commissioning studies, research and projects; 
(j) undertaking steps for educating subscribers and the general public 
on issues relating to pension, retirem ent savings and related issues and 
training of intermediaries; 
(k) standardising dissemination of information about performance of 
pension funds and performance bench marks; 
(l) regulating the regulated assets; 
(m) levying fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act; 

(n) specifying by regulations the fo rm and manner in which books of 
account shall be maintained and stat ement of accounts shall be rendered by 
intermediaries; 
(o) calling for information fro m, undertaking inspection of, 
conducting inquiries and investigations including audit of, intermediaries 
and other entities or organisations connected with pension funds; 
(p) exercising such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, while exercising the po wers under clause (o) of sub-section 
(2), the Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(5  of 1908) while trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:- 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other 
documents, at such place and at such  time as may be specified by the 
Authority; 
(ii) summoning and enforcing th e attendance of  persons and 
examining them on oath; 
(iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any 
person or entity referred to in section 24, at any place; 

(iv) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; 
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1), 
(2) and (3) and section 15, the Authorit y may, by order, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, in the interests of  subscribers, take any of the following 
measures, either pending investigation or inquiry, namely:- 
(i) restrain persons from participating in any scheme; 
(ii) restrain any office bearer of an intermediary from acting as such; 
(iii) impound and retain the proceed s under the scheme in respect of 
any activity which is under investigation; 
(iv) attach, after passing an orde r, on an application made for 
approval, by the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for 
a period not exceeding one month, one or more bank account or accounts of 
any intermediary or any person associated with the scheme in any manner 
involved in violation of any of the provis ions of this Act or the rules or the 
regulations made thereunder: 
Provided that only the bank account or accounts or any transaction 
entered therein, relating to the proceeds actually involved in the violation of 

any of the provisions of this Act or  the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder shall be allowed to be attached; 
(v) direct any intermediary or any person associated with the scheme 
in any manner not to dispose of or alienate an asset forming part of any 
activity which is under investigation: 
Provided that the Authority shall, either before or after, passing such 
orders, under this section, give to su ch intermediaries or persons concerned 
an opportunity of being heard. 
61. With specific reference to subs cribers interests, the Committee 
note that the various duties and func tions of the Pension Fund Regulatory 
Authority as listed in clause 14 are conf ined to establishi ng a mechanism for 
redressing grievances of subscriber s’ which are to be determined by 
regulations; and the power to take pena l or remedial measures against the 
intermediaries, if needed, in the interests of the subscribers protecting the 
interests of the subscribers has been lis ted in the clause - which is a very 
general term - as one among the duties and functions of the authority. 
62. In view of the fact that vast powers are going to be bestowed on 
the PFRDA, which include, issuing of certif icates of registration to pension 
funds and other intermedia ries; promoting efficiency in the development and 
functioning of pension funds and schemes; approving and regulating pension 

schemes; and adjudication of disputes, the Committee are of the view that 
with specific reference to matters re lating to protection of subscribers’ 
interests, the following aspects should inter-alia be inserted in clause 14:  
- Ensuring safety of the subscribers’ contributions to various 
pension schemes and funds under the New Pension System; 
- Ensuring payment of benefits or returns in accordance with  
guarantees, if any, attached to the pension schemes or investment options 
chosen; and 
- Ensuring that the intermediation and other operational costs 
under the New Pension System do not have an adverse bearing on the 
returns to the subscribers. 
 
  
Clause 20 - New Pension System 
 
63. Clause 20 reads as under: 
  
The contributory pension system no tified by the Government of India 
in the Ministry of Finance vide notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-ECB & 
PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, as amended from time to time, and 
having the following basic features, shall, form the New Pension System 
under this Bill, namely:- 
(a) every subscriber shall have an individual pension account; 

(b) the functions of recordkeep ing, accounting and switching of 
options by the subscriber shall be effected by the centr al recordkeeping 
agency; 
(c) there shall be a choice of mu ltiple pension fund managers and 
multiple schemes; 
(d) there shall be portability of i ndividual pension accounts in case of 
change of employment; 
(e) collection and transmission of c ontributions and instructions shall 
be through points of presence to the central recordkeeping agency; 
(f) there shall not be any implicit or  explicit assuran ce of benefits 
except market based guarantee mech anism to be purchased by the 
subscriber; 
(g) a subscriber shall not exit from the New Pension System except as 
specified by the Central Government by, notification; 
(h) at exit, the subscriber sha ll purchase an annuity from a life 
insurance company as specified under the New Pension System. 
(i) Enlarging of basic featur es of New Pension System 
 
69. The Committee, in the course of deliberations on the provisions 
of clause 20 of the Bill viz., New Pension System inter-alia noted that while 
the notification of the Ministry of Fi nance dated 22 December, 2003 clearly 

differentiated between the non-withdrawable Tier-I account which is 
mandatory for all new recruits to th e Central Government Services from 1 
January, 2004 and the voluntary Tier-II withdrawable account, the same has 
not been depicted in the basic features  of the New Pension System as shown 
under the clause. 
64. As per the Government notification, the optional or voluntary 
Tier-II withdrawable account – to whic h the Government would not make 
any contribution – has been designed on account of discontinuation of the 
GPF subscription to the new recruits. 
65. The Committee note that th e differentiation between the 
compulsory Tier I account from which withdrawals are not permissible, and 
the voluntary Tier II account, which has been designed in lieu of 
discontinuation of the GPF Subscription  for the new recruits for enabling 
withdrawals when needed, has not been included as a part of the basic 
features of the New Pension System lis ted in Clause 20.  The Committee are 
of the opinion that the differentiati on between the two types of accounts 
needs to be included as a part of the basic or essential features of the New 
Pension System in Clause 20 itself.   
66. The Committee are also of the opinion that while the principal 
notification No.  F. No. 5/7/2003-E CB & PR dated the 22nd December, 

2003 relating to the New Pension Syst em may have to be amended from 
time to time owing to operational or other reasons, the basic or essential 
features of the ‘pension system’ should not be permitted to be alterable.   
67. The New Pension System provides for a ‘non withdrawable’ 
and compulsory Tier I account and a voluntary Tier II account, for a 
Government servant.  Anyone who wa nts a ‘withdrawable’ facility has to 
opt for Tier II also.  The Committee are of the view that this would be an 
additional burden particularly to Gr oup ‘D’ employees.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that even in the ca se of Tier I account, an element of 
flexibility should be provided under th e New Pension System to enable 
subscribers to withdraw moneys to m eet unforeseen and urgent expenses.  
For instance, the subscribers could be allowed to take one repayable advance 
from their accounts after completion of  15 years of service and also 
permanently withdraw upto 50% of hi s contribution after completion of a 
minimum of 25 years of service to meet expenses on exigencies, which 
should be appropriately listed by regulations.  
 
 
 (ii) Benefits to subscribers  
68. A major source of apprehension for the employees, as 
witnessed during the deliberations of the Committee is the fact that as per 

clause 20 (f), the returns of the subscr ibers would be solely based on market 
performance and guarantees. Thus it has been contended that the scheme 
seeks to deprive Government employees  of their old age social security 
guarantee by way of statutory pension whic h is considered the best of social 
security measure. 
69. The Committee was informed by the Chairman, PFRDA that 
the Government had an open mind on pr oviding for a ‘pension scheme’ or 
‘option’ under the New Pension System involving 100 percent investment in 
Government securities. 
70. On the question of guaranteei ng returns or benefits to the 
subscribers, the Chairman, PFRDA stated as under: 
“Greater the competition, some Pe nsion Managers on their own will 
provide some element of guarantee. 
We were discussing among ourselves a little while ago that there is a 
pension fund which has already been  introduced yesterday. Dr. Ajay 
Shah has mentioned you about the Benchmark Mutual Fund, which 
has already introduced an element of guarantee in the scheme. Greater 
the competition, guarantees will auto matically come in the system. If 
the market forces are allowed to play, guarantees will automatically 
come in the form of either the pr incipal that is guaranteed or the 
nominal returns are guaranteed. That  will automatically come. But we 
are open to the idea of the Standing Committee that this could built in 
to the system of selection of the Pension Fund Managers. Upfront they 

will come with guarantee, we will obviously prefer the PFM which 
provides an element of guarantee.” 
71.   Asked about the details of the reported proposal to introduce the 
Unorganized Sector Workers Bill which inter alia include issues relating to 
pension, the Ministry in a written reply submitted: 
“The Unorganised Sector Work ers Bill is intended to be a 
comprehensive legislation regulate the employment and conditions of 
service of unorganized sector and to  provide for their safety, social 
security, health and welfare. As part  of the comprehensive legislation, 
it has been proposed to frame a pension scheme for unorganized 
sector workers registered with the workers’ facilitation center to 
provide for pension. It is furthe r proposed that Central Government 
would also contribute at the rate of not exceeding 2.5% of the monthly 
wages of registered workers. This will go into a pension fund.” 
 
72.   On the issue of ‘pension co verage’ of the unorganized sector 
workers, as proposed in the Bill the Ministry stated as under: 
“The Unorganized Sector Workers Bill and the PFRDA Bill are 
complementary and not contradictory to each other. Instead of having 
a separate pension scheme for unorganized sector workers, they could 
be accommodated under the New Pe nsion System (New Pension 
System) when its full architectur e is in place. Going by past 
experience of providing Government funded old age pension to 
selected categories of senior c itizens, the delivery mechanism has 
proven to be the single most bottleneck. New Pension System and 
PFRDA will provide the backbone and infrastructure on which any 

such employer/employee/Government funded initiative can be 
effectively implemented.” 
 
 
 
 
 
73. The Committee note that a major cause of concern for the 
employees is the fact that unlike the present pension system which 
guarantees a monthly retirement income of 50% of the average of the last ten 
months pay, devoid of any risk, the New Pension System leaves the likely 
retirement benefits of the subscribers to be determined by the market.  The 
Committee’s attempt to address this issue inter alia evoked the response that 
the Government was open to the ideas of permitting or giving preference to 
such pension fund managers  also who guarantee retu rns to operate in the 
market; and making available to the subscribers the option of 100% 
investment of pension funds in Government securities.   
74.  The Committee reco mmend that the option of 100% investment 
of the pension funds in Government Securities be made available to the 
subscribers and this aspect be indicated in clear terms in Clause 20 (c) of the 
PFRDA Bill. 
 75. The projections of likely return s or benefits that may accrue to 
the subscribers under different possible investment options as furnished by 

the Ministry reveal that returns from an investment option involving equities 
would amount to much more than the returns on investments in Government 
Securities.  Even in th e case of pessimistic asse t return assumptions, the 
returns to an employee are expected to be more bene ficial than the present 
pension scheme of Central Governme nt employees which provides for a 
monthly pension amounting to 50% of the average of the pay drawn in the 
last ten months of service and the facility of commutation. However, 
with the specific intention of minimizing, if not totally eliminating the 
apprehensions or fears expressed about market based returns, the Committee 
recommend that in the matter of selection of pension fund managers 
preference be given to such companies which offer guarantees on returns.  
At the same time, it needs to be ensured that the subscribers have sufficient 
options of choosing funds/ schemes that may fetch high returns on the basis 
of market performance.   
 76. As regards the coverage of the unorganised sector, the 
Committee note that the New Pension Sy stem only offers an option to the 
workforce to join.  The Committee desire that the Government must bring 
forward a comprehensive legislation in order to cater to the social security of 
the unorganised sector inclusive of pension coverage of the workforce 
simultaneous to the setting up of PFRDA as a statutory body.   

 
 
Clause 23 - Pension Funds 
 
77.   Clause 23 reads as under: 
 
The Authority may, by granting a ce rtificate of registration under sub-
section (3) of section 24, permit one or more persons to act as a pension fund 
for the purpose of receiving contri butions, accumulating them and making 
payments to the subscriber in su ch manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 
(2) The number of pension funds shall be determined  by regulations 
and the Authority may, in public interest, vary the number of pension funds. 
(3) The pension fund shall function in accordance with the terms of its 
certificate of registration and the regulations made under this Act. 
(4) The pension fund shall manage  the schemes in accordance with 
the regulations. 
 78.    On the issue of ‘pension funds’ under the New Pension System 
the Joint Secretary stated as under during the course of evidence: 
 “….  There will be multiple pens ion funds, one of which has to 
be in the public sector.  There can be  more than one.  It is one of the 
decisions of the Government that at least one of them must be in the 
public sector.”   
 

79.   The Committee note that in terms of the provisions of Clause 23, the 
PFRDA is entitled to grant a certificate of registration to one or more 
pension funds for the purpose of r eceiving contributions, accumulating them 
and making payments to the subscribers.  As informed to the Committee, the 
Government have decided that one such pension fund would be from the 
public sector. The Committee, therefore,  recommend that this aspect about 
one of the pension funds being from the public sector be specified in clear 
terms in Clause 23 of the PFRDA Bill which would be in the interest of 
subscribers 
 
 
Clause 24 - Registration of Intermediaries 
 
80. Clause 24 reads as under: 
 
Registration of Central Record Keepi ng agency, Pension Fund, Point of 
Presence etc. : 
 (1) No intermediary, including a pension fund or a point of presence to the 
extent regulated under this Act, sh all commence any activity relating to a 
pension fund except under and in accor dance with the conditions of a 
certificate of registration granted by  the Authority in accordance with 
provisions of this Act and the regulations: 
Provided that any intermediary, incl uding any point of presence, who 
may be associated with a scheme of pension fund immediately before the 

establishment of the Authority for which no registration certificate was 
necessary prior to such esta blishment, may continue to  do so for a period of 
three months from such establishment or, if he has made an application for 
such registration within the said period  of three months till the disposal of 
such application. 
(2) Every application for grant of a certificate of registration under 
this Act shall be in such form and manner and shall be accompanied by such 
fees as may be determined by regulations; 
(3) The Authority may, after considering the application and subject 
to such terms and conditions as it may specify, grant a certificate of 
registration as a central record keepi ng agency, point of presence, pension 
fund or such other intermediary, as the case may be. 
(4) The Authority may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of 
registration granted under sub-section (3) in such manner as may be 
determined by regulations: 
Provided that no order under this sub- section shall be made unless the 
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
81. Questioned whether it was not essential to specify the pre-
requisites for selection of the interm ediaries viz. Pension Fund Mangers, 

Central Record Keeping Agency, points of presence in the Bill itself, the 
Ministry, in a written reply stated as follows: 
 “Pension being a new area, th e requirements for setting up 
intermediaries under NPS have to evolve over time based on 
experience. Accordingly, these will be provided in the regulations by 
the regulator, which are also subj ect to Parliamentary scrutiny. 
Discussion papers on pension funds and CRA were drafted and widely 
circulated for public comments, which have been received and will be 
carefully considered before a final view is taken on regulations.” 
 
82. With specific reference to the financial and experience criteria 
for selection of Pension Fund Manage rs and the issue of permitting FDI in
the sector, which have not been spelt out in the Bill, the Ministry, in a 
written reply, elaborated as follows:   
 
“The requirements for qualifica tions of pensi on fund managers  
(PFMs) would be spelt out in the re gulations.  Howeve r, there is one 
difference in so far a capital requirements fo r insurance companies 
vis-à-vis PFMs are concerned.  In the former case, pooled investment 
by Insurance Companies is done th rough the Balance sheet of the 
companies.  Whereas in the l ter case PFMs  would be managing the a
individual retirement  accounts not through thei r own balan ce sheet,  
some thing like an Asset Manage ment Company.   So capital 
requirement would be different and need not be too much emphasised.  
When registering the PFMs, the PFRDA would keep this international 
experience in view that  in the initial phases of development of the 

market, there would be pl ace for only a finite number  of players.   As 
mentioned above, pre-re quisites relating to capital structure, basic 
rules and regulations/qualifications  etc. will be provided in the 
regulations to be framed by PF RDA which will be subject to 
parliamentary scrutiny.”  
 
83. On the likely method of selec tion of Pension Fund Managers, 
the Ministry stated: 
“There are 2 options: either the e ligibility criteria can be prescribed 
and any PF which fulfils those criteri a can be registered as a pension 
fund or they can be selected on the basis of bidding on costs and fees 
and technical qualifications. The mode of selection will be decided by 
PFRDA but international experience shows that even where there 
were a large number of PFMs, eventually, the number reduces through 
consolidation.”   
 
84. The representatives of confeder ations of trade and industry have 
been of the opinion that there should be sufficient clarity on the financial and 
experience criteria for selection of Pension Fund Managers. 
85. The Committee are of the opinio n that as in the case of the 
insurance sector, the pre-requisite s relating to capital structure and 
experience criteria for selection of Pens ion Fund Managers need to be spelt 
out in clear terms in the PFRDA Bill itself. The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the criteria for selection of other intermediaries who would 

become operative under the New Pe nsion System viz. Central Record 
Keeping Agency etc. also need to be specified in the Bill.  
86. The Committee note that unlike th e case of the insurance sector, 
the permissibility or otherwise of FDI in  the pension sector - to be promoted 
and regulated under the aegis of PFRDA – as well as limitations or 
restrictions on deployment of pension funds outside the country have not 
been specified.  The Comm ittee understand that the Government are yet to 
decide on the matter.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that any 
decision relating to permitting FDI in  the pension sector should be 
implemented only by way of bringing forward suitable amendment in the 
present legislation. They are further of the view that the decisions relating to 
permitting FDI in the pension sector and deployment of  pension funds 
outside the Country, should, in no way be in variance with the related 
provisions applicable to the insurance sector. 
 
Clause - 28 Attachment of Assets and Supersession of Management of 
Intermediary: 
 87. Clause 28 reads as under: 
(1) Any person aggrieved may apply to the Authority for an interim 
measure or protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:- 

(a) the detention, preservation, inte rim custody or sale of any asset or 
property which is regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance; 
(b) securing any pension funds, monies and other assets and properties 
owned by or under the control of the pension fund; 
(c) interim injunction or appointment of an administrator; and 
(d) such other interim measures as may appear to the Authority to be 
just and necessary, and the Authority shall have power  to make such orders 
including an order for attachment of assets of the pension fund as it deems 
fit in this regard. 
(2) Where, on a complaint received by the Authority or suo moto, the 
Authority, after conducting an enquiry  comes to a conclusion that the 
governing board or board of directors,  by whatever name called, or the 
persons in control of any intermediary to the extent regulated under this Bill 
are indulging in any activity which is in  contravention of the provisions of 
this Bill or regulations, it may supers ede the governing board or board of 
directors or management of the in termediary in accordance with the 
provisions of the regulations. 
 88. A view point expressed before the Committee has been that an 
alternate governing body or an interim authority should be established in the 
event of supersession of an intermediary in terms of Clause 28 (2). 

89. The Committee note that under clause 28, the Authority is to be 
vested with the power of superseding the governing board or board of 
directors or management of an intermediary inter-alia in the event of coming 
to the conclusion that the intermedia ry was indulging in any activity which 
is in contravention of the provision s of this Bill or regulations. The 
Committee, however, find that no menti on under this Clause has been made 
with regard to the appointment of an Administrator in the event of 
dissolution of the Board. The Committee desire that clause 28 be suitably 
amended for enabling the appointment of an Administrator.  
 
Clause 47 - Power to Make Regulations 
90. Clause 47 reads as under: 
(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations consistent 
with this Bill and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provision of this 
Bill. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations ma y provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-- 
(a) the times and places of mee tings of the Authority and the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) under sub-section (1) of section 10; 

(b) the terms and othe r conditions of service of the officers and 
other employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(c) the regulations to be made by th e Authority in respect of pension 
schemes referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 and the 
time within which such schemes shoul d conform to the regulations, made 
under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(d) the establishing of mechanisms for redressing grievances of 
subscribers under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(e) the form and manner in which books of account shall be 
maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by intermediaries 
under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(f) the duties and functions of cen tral recordkeeping agency under 
sub-section (2) of section 21; 
(g) the determination of compensati on of fair value of the regulated 
assets payable to central recordkeepi ng agency under proviso to sub-section 
(3) of section 21; 
(h) the manner of receiving contri butions and instructions and 
transmitting them to the central recordkeeping agency and paying out the 
benefits to the subscribers, under sub-section (1) and the regulations 

governing functioning of points of pr esence under sub-section (2) of section 
22; 
(i) the manner in which a pension fund may receive contributions, 
accumulate them and make payments to the subscriber under sub-section (1), 
the number of pension funds under sub-section (2), the functioning of the 
pension fund under sub-section (3),  and the manner of managing the 
schemes by the pension fund under sub-section (4), of section 23; 
(j) the form and manner in which an application for grant of certificate 
of registration shall be made and the fee which shall accompany such 
application under sub-section (2) of section 24; 
(k) the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration may be 
granted to an intermediary under sub-section (3) of section 24; 
(l) the procedure and manner of  suspension or cancellation of 
certificate of registration of intermedia ries under sub-section (4) of section 
24; 
(m) the procedure for holding inquiry by an adjudicating officer under 
sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(n) the supersession of the governin g board or board of directors of 
the intermediary under sub-section (2) of section 28; 

(o) the manner of administering and utilising the Subscribers 
Education and Protection Fund under sub-section (3) of section 38; 
(p) delegation of powers and functions of the Authority to Committees 
under sub-section (2) of section 50; 
(q) any other matter which is require d to be or may be specified by 
regulations or in respect of which pr ovision is to be or may be made by 
regulations. 
91. The Committee note that the pow er of the Authority to make 
regulations encompasses a very wide range of areas, which include, granting 
of certificates of registration to interm ediaries subject to the conditions as 
may be specified; suspension or can cellation of such certificates of 
registration; manner of receiving cont ributions and accumulating them by 
pension funds; procedure for holding an enquiry by and adjudicating officer; 
and establishing mechanism for redressing grievances of subscribers.  
92. The  Insurance Regulatory an d Development Authority Act, 
1999 – on the basis of which the PFRDA Bill, 2005, is modeled -  provides 
for constitution of an Advisory Comm ittee consisting of not more than 25 
members to represent the interests of commerce, industry etc., to advise the 
authority on matters relating to regul ations. The Committee have received 
suggestions that a similar committee or a board should be constituted for 

advising the Pension Fund Regulat ory and Development Authority on 
various matters. 
93. On this specific issue the Mini stry have informed that Clause 
50 of the Bill provides, inter alia, that the Authority may form committees of 
the members and delegate to them the powers and functions of the Authority 
as may be specified by the regulations.  It has also been informed that ‘the 
subscribers’ representatives could be invited to join  these committees.’ 
 
94. The Committee are of the opin ion that constitution of an 
Advisory Committee, as provided in th e case of IRDA would be beneficial 
in enabling the authority in making regu lations under section 47.  Moreover, 
as admitted by the Ministry, the Pension sector or market is in a very nascent 
stage of development and firming up of regulatory aspects would be 
witnessed in course of time. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that a 
Pension Fund Advisory Committee on lines similar to that of IRDA may be 
set up, with the representatives of th e employees and  subscribers co-opted 
into it.  This would enable in safegua rding the interests of the subscribers 
and help the authority in discharging the multifarious func tions of regulating 
the pension funds and schemes.    
95.  The Committee are also of th e view that the initial or broad 
contours of the regulations governin g the implementation of the New 

Pension System under the infrastructure of PFRDA should be framed and 
made clear in the public domain prior to the enactment of the PFRDA Bill. 
 
Clause 50 - Delegation of Powers 
 
96.  Clause 50 reads as under: 
 (1) The Authority may, by gene ral or special order in writing, 
delegate to any member, officer of th e Authority or any other person subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its 
powers and functions under this Bill (e xcept the powers under section 47) as 
it may deem necessary. 
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also 
form committees of the members and delegate to them the powers and 
functions of the Authority as may be specified by the regulations. 
97. The Committee note that Clau se 50 empowers the PFRDA to 
constitute special committees to whom powers and functions of the 
Authority could be delegate d.  With a view to protect the interests of the 
subscribers the Committee recommend that the representatives of the 
employees associations and subscribers should be co-opted in the special 
committees to be set up by the Authority. 
 
 

NEW DELHI;                    (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. 
KHANDURI), 
22 July, 2005        C h a i r m a n ,  
31 Asadha, 1927 (Saka)       Standing  Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

             

            

             

 
IDENTICAL NOTE  OF  DISSENT  
 
 
        
Submitted by S/Shri Rupchand Pal,  
   Laxman Seth, Bir Singh Mahato, 
MPs 
 
 The Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA) 
Bill – 2005 was referred to the Sta nding Committee on Finance for scrutiny 
and recommendation.  
 
 But unfortunately there was an element of “fate accompli” in the 
exercise.  This becomes obvious if we look at the first sentence of Statement 
of Objects and Reasons of the Pens ion Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority Bill, 2005. 
 
Statement of Objects and Reasons says “The Central Govt. 
operationalised the New Pension System (NPS) from 1 st January, 2004” 
through a notification dated 22nd December, 2003. The NPS is mandatory for 
new Central Government services (excep t to the Armed Forces in the first 
stage) and “an early legislative manda te was considered necessary as the 
NPS was already in place without th e full architecture and statutory 
regulatory mechanism”.  
 
 It suggests that NPS was al ready in place and the Standing 
Committee on Finance was to consider the full architecture and a statutory 
regulatory mechanism as the already set-up mechanism was non statutory. 
 
 There was so much urgency of the matter that the Government 
promulgated Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Ordinance 2004 on 
29 December, 2004 to provide for establishment of an Authority. 
 
The very methodology adopted by the Govt. deprived the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Fi nance the opportunity to examine 
freely and in detail the merits and deme rits of the already  introduced New 
Pension Scheme. 
 

 It was also very unfortunate th at the Government refrained from 
discussing such an important issue w ith the representatives of their own 
employees who were to be directly affected as a result of this new 
arrangement. 
 
 Besides the above inadequacies, I am constrained to submit the 
following Note of Dissent in respect  of the Draft Report on Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Author ity Bill, 2005 as presented for 
consideration and adoption on 5 th July, 2005 in the meeting of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on the following grounds :- 
 
(a) To say the least, the Draft Re port lacks coherence and suffers from 
inherent contradictions and casualne ss in understanding the problems and 
the issues involved. 
 
(b) My first observation pertaining to the `Background’ (Page 1) of the 
Draft Report is that it should be well understood that while the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons clearly spells ou t the goal of setting up of the 
Authority, the Background dwells on the concern of the Government for the 
unorganized sector. 
 
 The Draft Report says – “a vast ma jority of the work force in the 
unorganized sector is devoid of access to formal channels of old age 
economic support”. (Part I of the Draf t Report). It admits that “India does 
not have a tax financed social security system” (Para 2 of the Draft Report). 
 
In such a backdrop what  can be the immediate need ? Of course, the 
country need to have a Comprehensive National Social Security Policy 
covering all sectors of workers including those in the agricultural and 
unorganized sectors, and setting up of a National Social Security Authority 
to evolve, administer and monitor appropriate schemes catering to various 
social security needs. 
 
 
 
But unfortunately the Government tr ied to find a solution by “starting 
a system of Pension Reforms” which is a move in the wrong direction. 
 
 No one can dispute such concern for the people attaining old age or 
the senior citizens; as also the people in the unorganized sector.  We shall be 

the first to welcome a Comprehensive National Social Security Scheme to be 
adequately funded by the Union Govt. to  take care of the wide sections of 
the population, be it in the unorganized  sector, agricultural workers or the 
elderly people who need income support along with various social security 
measures.  
 
But the concern for the unorganized sector and wide section of the 
population was a camouflage or the cove r up of the Governments’ move to 
dismantle the existing pension system for the Government’s own employees 
and withdrawal of the responsibilities of  supporting its own employees after 
the retirement. 
 
(c) This is a retrograde step and in a Welfare State disowning this 
responsibility is unacceptable; hence my objection and my Note of Dissent 
because the Draft Report has miserably fa iled to underscore this aspect of 
Government’s responsibility and the proposed withdrawal of its obligation to 
its own employees by converting the present `defined benefit scheme’ to 
`defined contribution scheme’ in respect of the pension. 
 
(d) Draft Report mentions in details  the views and reports of various 
expert groups and committees. But un fortunately the provisions of the 
present Bill is not in conformity with any of the recommendations of these 
Committees. Draft Report has ignored this aspect. 
 
(e) The present move of the Government is not be seen in isolation from 
its agenda of economic reforms.  The original idea of pension reforms was 
mooted by international organisations like the World Bank which was later 
on followed up by the Govt. bodies pursuing the neo liberal reforms process. 
 
In fact, the neo liberal regime pr actically want opening up of the 
pension fund to the private operators  (Fund Managers) including foreign 
fund managers. And this is a move which is sought to be resisted the world 
over even in the developed countries. 
 
(f) The international experience about  privatization of pension fund and 
allowing control of private managers on pension fund are having disastrous 
consequences as can be seen from in ternational experience including the 
experience in Chile on whose model the present legislation has been based. 
No other country including OECD c ountries has made the individual 
retirement account based on defined contribution benefit scheme mandatory.  

 
(g) The most important point to be noted and which has been ignored in 
the Draft Report is that neither the Gove rnment of India in immediate future 
nor the employees concerned are goi ng to be benefited by the present 
legislation. The benefit that will accrue  as a result of this Pension Reforms 
will be the private operators who will be free to loot the hard earned savings 
of thousands of our Government employees. 
 
 As because the present legislation excludes the Defence Forces (and 
of course the para-military forces) wh ich constitute about two-third of the 
total pension obligation of the Union Government. It is not going to be 
benefited or relieved of the financial stress in immediate future.  
 
(h) Pension has been held to be  a statutory, inalienable and legally 
enforceable right on the strength of Supreme Court Judgment as referred to 
in Para 38 of the Draft. Draft has fa iled to take note of  the above Supreme 
Court Judgment. 
 
(i) According to an estimate, the Government’s obligation will go on 
increasing till 2038 when there may be  a situation of neutrilisation. 
Meanwhile the employees hard earned savi ngs will be left to the mercy of 
new fund managers who will benefit by the high cost of services and also 
various other dubious ways while the empl oyees’ future in their old age will 
be left to the vagaries of the market.   
 
(j) Section 20 (f) in the New Pension System as mentioned in the Bill 
clearly says “There shall not be any implicit or expl icit assurance of benefit 
except market based guarantee mech anism to be purchased by the 
subscriber”.   
 
This means the fate of the empl oyees in their old age will be 
determined by the vagaries of the market  and in the Indian situation there is 
the recent UTI experience which can be reminder to what it can be like. 
 
(k) The Draft Report in para 79 mentions on the one hand that “the new 
pension system leaves the likely return  benefits of the subscribers to be 
determined by the market but in the sa me breathe the Committee in its Draft 
Report recommends that the availability of default (optio n) involving 100% 
investment of the funds in Governme nt securities as a choice to the 
subscribers should be specifically mentioned in clause 20C. 

 
But the interest in respect of Govern ment securities is also determined 
by market and that can never reach a level by which a monthly retirement 
income of 50% of the average of final wage can be made available.  That 
means even in the case of availability of 100% default option, investment of 
fund in Government securities, the retirement benefit will be too meagre and 
will hardly provide the required income security even at the existing level. 
 
(l) Had Pension Fund arranged to be  deposited in some scheme like 
Senior Citizens Scheme or Monthly Income Scheme (Postal) with better 
interest rate, then the retirees could be provided support to protect their 
savings and having minimum income to the level of 50 per cent of the 
average final wages.  But this has not been proposed. Hence my Note of 
Dissent.  
 
(m) The major plunk of the argument  for introduction of this Pension 
Reforms Bill is unsustainability of th e existing pension scheme and growing 
burden as a result of demographic cha nges. But the Government’s argument 
is based on flimsy grounds. Firstly, ther e is a considerable decline (after the 
adoption of the Gitakrishnan Committ ee Report) in the overall salary 
obligation of the Government.  Secondl y, the Government  has never tried 
seriously to address the issue of evas ion of tax and full compliance of tax by 
the richer and very rich sections of the society and the corporate sector to 
mobilise more resources (the number of billioniers in the country are 
increasing at a faster rate than many industrial countries of the world since 
the reform process was initiated. 
 
(n) Here it may be mentioned that G overnment has not cared to accept the 
core recommendation of the Bhattacharya Committee set up by the 
Government itself; what can be more unfortunate than this. 
 
(o) While submitting my Note of Dissent once again I would earnestly 
request the Government to desist from pushing forward such an anti-
employee Bill rather Government s hould discuss the matter with all 
concerned trade unions and taking the views of others including the views of 
some of the supporting parties of the Government. 
 

(p) As regards, the concern of the G overnment for the unorganized sector, 
I would urge upon the Government to expedite the introduction  
of a bill covering national comprehens ive National Social Security Scheme 
for the unorganized sector, elderly citizens and others.  We are told that one 
Committee is working towards that end, the same may be expedited. 
 
(q) As regards other issues as ment ioned in the Bill about the composition 
of the Regulatory Authority, the re lationship between the Pension Fund 
Regulatory Authority (PFR&A) and Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA), the details regard ing scope of withdrawal by the 
employees from pension fund, central record keeping, cost of services, 
criteria for selection of fund managers , their investment pattern, FDI, initial 
set of regulations should be given along with cons ideration of the Bill and 
such issues which are not at all relevant in the present context as the 
proposed goal of the Bill is itself unacceptable to me.  
 
(r) So I submit my Note of Dissent which may be incorporated in the 
Report being submitted by the Finance Standing Committee to Parliament.                              
 
           Sd/-            Sd/-            Sd/- 
(Shri Rupchand Pal, MP)     (Shri Laxman Seth, MP)     (Shri Bir Singh 
Mahato, MP) 
 

 


 

Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector.  Even that 
draft Bill suffers from various in firmities and inadequacies, which 
have to be addressed by factoring in the unanimous inputs jointly 
furnished by the central trade unions.  I urge that this process may be 
expedited. 
 
z) As regards other issues as mentioned in the Bill, about the 
composition of the Regulatory Authority, the relationship between the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Deve lopment Authority (PFRDA) and 
Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent Authority (IRDA), the details 
regarding scope of withdrawal by the employees from pension fund, 
central record keeping cost of serv ices, criteria for selection of fund 
managers, their investment patter, FDI, initial set of regulations 
should be given along with consideration of the Bill and such issues, 
are not at all relevant in the present ocntext as the proposed goal of the 
Bill is itself unacceptable to me. 
 
 
 
Sd/- 
(CHITTABRATA MAJUMDAR) 

 MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 17th May 2005 from 1500 to 1815 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
6. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
9. Shri K.S. Rao 
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
12. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 

1. Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Secr etary, (Economic Affairs) 
2. Shri Dhirendra Swarup, Chairperson, PFRDA 
3. Shri Ashok Chawla, Additiona l Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
4. Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secret ary (CM), (Economic Affairs) 
5. Dr. Ajay Shah, Consultant, (Economic Affairs) 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed  the representatives of Ministry 
of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affair s) to the sitting of  the Committee and 
invited their attention to Direction 55 of the directions by the Speaker. 
3.   Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. 
of  Economic Affairs) briefed the Co mmittee on the provisions of the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2005. 
4. After the briefing, Members sought clarifications on various 
provisions of the Bill. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the officials of the 
Ministry to furnish written information/ replies to the queries raised by the 
Members in respect of which information was not readily available with them. 
5.  The briefing was concluded. 
6.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   
        The witnesses then withdrew. 

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 18th May 2005 from 1100 to 1300 
hours and again from 1500 to 1630 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
7. Shri K.S. Rao 
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
10. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
11. Shri Amar Singh 
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary   - Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 

 
Part I 
AT 1100 HOURS 
 INDIAN NATIONAL TRADE UNION CONGRESS (INTUC) 
 
  1. Shri M. Raghavaiah, Vice-President, INTUC 
 
HIND MAZDOOR SABHA (HMS) 
 
1. Shri Umraomal Purohit, General Secretary 
2. Shri A.D. Nagpal, Secretary  
 
Part II 
AT 1500 HOURS 
 
 ALL INDIA TRADE UNION CONGRESS (AITUC) 
 
Shri G.L. Dhar, Secretary 
Shri D.L. Sachdeva, Secretary 
Shri S.N. Thakur, Secretary 
 
BHARATIYA MAZDOOR SANGH (BMS) 
 
Shri Girish Awasthi, President (BMS) 
Shri P.J. Soundrajan, Secretary (Kendriya Karamchari Sangh) 
 
Part I 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed representatives of Indian 
National Trade Union (INTUC) and Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS) to the sitting 
of the Committee and invited their attentio n to Direction 55 of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the vi ews of representatives of Indian 
National Trade Union Congress (INTUC)  and Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS) on 
the provisions of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought  clarifications and the Chairman 

asked the representatives to furnish wr itten information/replies to the queries 
raised by the Members in respect of  which information was not readily 
available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
 
2.  The Chairman welcomed repres entatives of All India Trade Union 
Congress (AITUC) and Bhar tiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) to the sitting of the 
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the views of representatives of All 
India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) and Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) on 
the provisions of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought  clarifications and the Chairman 
asked the representatives to furnish wr itten information/replies to the queries 
raised by the Members in respect of  which information was not readily 
available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
                                    The witnesses withdrew.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 19th May 2005 from 1100 to 1330 hours and  
again from 1500 to 1730 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
7. Shri K.S. Rao 
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
9. Shri Ajit Singh 
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
14. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 

 
Part I 
1100 HOURS 
 
Shri Kirit Parikh, Member, Planning Commission 
Shri Gautam Bhardwaj, Director, Invest India Economic Foundation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II 
1500 HOURS 
Shri N. Rangachary, Former Chai rman, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDA)  
2. Dr. S.A. Dave, Chairman, Centre  for Monitoring the Indian Economy 
(CMIE) 
 
Part I 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed Shri Kirit Parikh and Shri 
Gautam Bhardwaj to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the vi ews of Shri Kirit Parikh and Shri 
Gautam Bhardwaj on the provisions of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought 
clarifications and the Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written 
information/replies to the queries rais ed by the Members in respect of which 
information was not readily available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
 
2.  The Chairman welcomed Shri N. Rangachary and Dr. S.A. Dave  
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard th e views of Shri N. Rangachary and 
Dr. S.A. Dave on the provisions of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought 
clarifications and the Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written 
information/replies to the queries rais ed by the Members in respect of which 
information was not readily available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 

 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 1st June 2005 from 1100 to 1330 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Shri K.S. Rao 
Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
Shri Lakshman Seth 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Murli Deora 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
CENTRE OF INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (CITU) 

 
Shri W.R. Varada Rajan, Secretary     
 
ALL INDIA STATE GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES’ FEDERATION 
 
1. Shri R.G. Karnik, Chairman 
2. Shri Ajoy Mukherjee, Vice President 
3. Shri Sukomal Sen,  General Secretary 
4. Shri Lallan Pandey, Secretary 
5. Shri R. Muthusundaram, Secretary 
 
 
 
2.  The Chairman welcomed repr esentatives of Centre of Indian 
Trade Unions (CITU) and All India St ate Government Employees’ Federation 
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the vi ews of representatives of Centre 
of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) and All India State Government Employees’ 
Federation on the provisions of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Me mbers sought clarifications and the 
Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written information/replies to the 
queries raised by the Members in respect  of which information was not readily 
available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
                                    The witnesses then withdrew. 

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 2nd  June 2005 from 1100 to 1330 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.        Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
Shri K.S. Rao 
Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
Shri Lakshman Seth 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Murli Deora 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 

 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri B.K. Bhattacharya, Chairman,  
High Level Expert Group on Pension 
2.   Shri Anand Bordia, Former Member (Finance),  
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed Shri B.K. Bhattacharya and 
Shri Anand Bordia to the sitting of th e Committee and invited their attention to 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the views of Shri B.K. Bhattacharya 
and Shri Anand Bordia on the provision s of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought 
clarifications and the Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written 
information/replies to the queries rais ed by the Members in respect of which 
information was not readily available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 13th June 2005 from 1030 to 1330 hours and 
again from 1500 to 1700 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri R.P. Goenka 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
      WITNESSES 
 
     Part I                At 1030 hours 

 
FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (FICCI) 
 
1. Shri A.K. Shukla, Current -in-Char ge- Chairman, LIC of India     
 
2. Ms. Shikha Sharma, CEO, ICICI Pru  Life Insurance Co. Ltd. and Co-
Chairman, FICCI’s Insurance and Pension Committee 
 
3. Shri N.N. Joshi, Chief Representativ e, ING Insurance International and 
Advisor, FICCI’s Insurance and Pensions Committee 
 
 
 
 
     
    4. Shri S.V. Mony, Vice Chairman, AMP Sanmar 
 
    5. Shri Sanjay Parikh, Head Produ ct Management, Birla Sunlife Insurance Co. 
Ltd. 
 
    6. Shri Anil Jhala, CFO, Birla Sunlife Insurance Co. Ltd. 
 
7.  Shri Mahim Bisht, VP-Busine ss Development, Principal Financial 
Group  
 
8. Shri S.P. Subhedar, Sr. Advisor, Prudential Corporation Asia Ltd. 
 
9. Shri Vivek Bharti, Advisor, FICCI 
 
 
 
CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (CII) 
 
1. Dr. Rajiv Kumar, Chief Economist, CII  
2. Shri Vikram Badshah, Senior Consultant, CII  
3. Shri Ashvin Parekh, Partner Deloittetouche Tohmatshundi Pvt. Ltd.  
4. Shri Dennis Pedini, CEO, Max New York Life Insurance 
5. Shri Anil Mehta, Dir ector, Business Group, Max New York Life Insurance  

6. Shri N.B. Mathur, Advisor, CII  
 
Part II    At 1500 hours 
 
CONFEDERATION OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES & WORKERS 
 
1. Shri C.C. Pillai, Chairman 
2. Shri V. Bhattacharya, Vice Chairman 
3. Shri S.K. Vyas, Secretary General 
4. Shri A.B. Sen, Finance Secretary 
 
Part I 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Indust ry (FICCI) and 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII )  to the sitting of the Committee and 
invited their attention to Direction 55  of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. 
 
3.  The Committee then heard the views of the representatives of 
FICCI and CII on the provisions of  the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members sought 
clarifications and the Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written 
information/replies to the queries rais ed by the Members in respect of which 
information was not readily available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 

Part II 
 
    2.  The Chairman welcomed th e representatives of Confederation of 
Central Government Employees and Wo rkers to the sitting of the Committee 
and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then heard the views of the representatives of 
Central Government Employees and Work ers on the provisions of the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Aut hority Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the 
Members sought clarifications and the Chairman asked the representatives to 
furnish written information/replies to the queries raised by the Members in 
respect of which information was not readily available with them. 
4.   The evidence was concluded. 
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
                                    The witnesses then withdrew. 

 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY THIRD SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 14th  June 2005 from 1030 to 1330 hours  
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.        Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3.        Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
Shri K.S. Rao 
Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
  2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 

MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Secretary (Eco. Affairs) 
Shri Dhirendra Swarup, Chairperson, PFRDA 
3. Shri C.S. Rao, Chairman, Insuranc e Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA) 
4.  Shri Ashok Chawla, Addl. Secretary (Eco. Affairs) 
5. Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (Capital Markets), Eco. Affairs 
6. Dr. Ajay Shah, Consultant, Economic Affairs 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
representatives of Ministry of Finance to the sitting of the 
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then took oral  evidence of representatives of 
Ministry of Finance on the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. 
4. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various provisions of 
the Bill. Then the Chairman asked the offi cials of the Ministry to furnish written 
information/replies to the queries rais ed by the Members in respect of which 
information was not readily available with them. 
5.  The evidence was concluded. 
6.   A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   
        The witnesses then withdrew. 

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FOURTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 22nd   June, 2005 from 1030 to 1315 hours  
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat, 
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mahato 
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
9. Shri Rupchand Pal 
10. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
12. Shri K.S. Rao 
13. Shri Jyotiradiya Madhavarao Scindia 
14. Shri Lakshman Seth 
Shri Ajit Singh 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Murli Deora 
Shri R.P. Goenka 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 

Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  -  Secretary 
  2.       Dr. (Smt) P.K. Sandhu      -           Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri R.K Jain            -   Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
2.  The Chairman invited suggesti ons from Members for incorporation 
in the draft report  of the Committee on the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Au thority Bill, 2005.  After 
Members gave their views/sugges tions, the Chairman  informed 
the Members that  they could also submit their 
suggestions/recommendations in writing.  
 3.      A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
   

Minutes of the Thirty-Sixth sitting of Standing Committee 
on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 5th July, 2005 from 1030 to 1230 hours 
 
PRESENT 
 
    Maj. Gen (Retd.)  B.C. Khanduri – Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.          Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Gurudas Kamat 
Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
Shri Rupchand Pal 
Shri K.S. Rao 
Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
Shri Lakshman Seth 
Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
Shri Murli Deora 
Shri R.P. Goenka 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri Yashwant Sinha 
Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 

3.    Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and 
requested the Members to give their suggestions on the recommendations 
contained in the draft report on the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2005. 
3. The Committee then  took up for consideration the draft 
report on the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 
2005.  The Committee after deliberation adopted the same with 
modifications/amendments as shown in the Annexure. 
4. As some Members did not  agree to some of the 
recommendations contained in the draft report, they desired to submit 
notes of dissent.  The Chairman informed them that they could sent their 
notes of dissent by 12 July, 2005. 
5. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the report in the light of the amendments/suggestions received 
from the Members and also to make consequential verbal changes and 
present the same to Hon’ble Speaker/both Houses of the Parliament. 
(The Committee then adjourned) 

ANNEXURE 
 
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE  BY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT RE PORT ON THE PENSION FUND 
REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BILL, 2005 AT THEIR 
SITTING HELD ON 5 JULY, 2005] 
 
* * * * 
 
Page No. 33,  
For Para No. 57 
 
 
Substitute New Para    “The Committee, having considered the diverse 
views expressed and the cl arifications given by the 
Ministry of Finance are of the opinion that the reform 
process in the pension sector involving the setting up 
of the PFRDA as a statutory regulatory body for 
managing the NPS is an urgent necessity mainly on 
account of burgeoning fiscal stress of pension 
payments on the Central and State revenues and the 
need to provide a viable alternative to the populace at 
large to save for old age in come security.   This, the 
Committee feel, notwithstanding the fact that the 
positive affect of lessening the fiscal stress on the 
Central revenues on account of the switchover to the 
New Pension System is to be witnessed probably 
only from the year 2038.   The Committee would, 
however, also hasten to a dd that the apprehensions 
expressed by the concerne d sections on the new 
contributory pension system are born out of genuine 
concerns.  The Committee feel that such 
apprehensions can be minimised, if not totally 
eliminated, if proper safeguards are introduced in the 
larger interest of the subscribers- both the 
Government employees who are compulsorily 
covered under the scheme as  well as the others.  
After having considered the PFRDA Bill clause wise, 
the Committee approve the same for enactment 
subject to the modifications/amendments/ 
recommendations as detailed in the subsequent 

paragraphs of the report.” 
 
Page 34, Para 59 
Line 4 from bottom 
 
For “The Committee further desire  that selection of both 
whole-time and part-time members of the Authority 
should be confined to  professionals having 
experience in economics, finance and law only.”   
 
Substitute “The Committee further desire  that selection of both 
whole-time and part-time members of the Authority 
should be confined to  professionals having 
experience in economics or finance or law only.  The 
Committee are also of the op inion that if the Central 
Government so desire, one of the part time members 
in the Authority could be their nominee.” 
 
Delete Para Nos. 60 to 64 and re number subsequent Paras 
accordingly 
 
Page Nos. 49 to 52, For Para Nos. 79 to 83  
 
Substitute New Para 
Nos. 73 to 76 
“73.   The Committee not e that a major cause 
of concern for the employees  is the fact that unlike 
the present pension system which guarantees a 
monthly retirement income of  50% of the average of 
the last ten months pay, devoid of any risk, the New 
Pension System leaves the likely retirement benefits 
of the subscribers to be determined by the market.  
The Committee’s attempt to address this issue inter 
alia evoked the response that the Government was 
open to the ideas of permitting or giving preference 
to such pension fund managers also who guarantee 
returns to operate in the market; and making 

available to the subscribers the option of 100% 
investment of pension funds in Government 
securities.   
 74.  The Committee recommend that the 
option of 100% investment of the pension funds in 
Government Securities be made available to the 
subscribers and this aspect be indicated in clear terms 
in Clause 20 (c) of the PFRDA Bill. 
 75.  The projections of likely returns or 
benefits that may accrue  to the subscribers under 
different possible investment options as furnished by 
the Ministry reveal that returns from an investment 
option involving equities would amount to much 
more than the returns on investments in Government 
Securities.  Even in the case of pessimistic asset 
return assumptions, the returns to an employee are 
expected to be more bene ficial than the present 
pension scheme of Central Government employees 
which provides for a monthly pension amounting to 
50% of the average of the pay drawn in the last ten 
months of service and the facility of commutation. 
However, with the specific intention of minimizing, 
if not totally eliminating the apprehensions or fears 
expressed about market based returns; the Committee 
recommend that in the matter  of selection of pension 
fund managers preference be given to such 
companies which offer guarant ees on returns.  At the 
same time, it needs to be ensured that the subscribers 
have sufficient options of choosing funds/schemes 

that may fetch high return s on the basis of market 
performance.   
 76.  As regards the coverage of the 
unorganised sector, the Committee note that the New 
Pension System only offers an option to the 
workforce to join.  The Committee desire that the 
Government must bring forward a comprehensive 
legislation in order to cater to the social security of 
the unorganised sector inclusive of pension coverage 
of the workforce simultaneous to the setting up of 
PFRDA as a statutory body.”   
 
After Para 83 
 
Insert new Para Nos. 
77,78 & 79  
  
 
         77.  Clause 23 reads as under: 
 
“The Authority may, by granting a certificate 
of registration under sub-s ection (3) of section 24, 
permit one or more persons to act as a pension fund 
for the purpose of receiving contributions, 
accumulating them and making payments to the 
subscriber in such manne r as may be specified by 
regulations. 
(2) The number of pension funds shall be 
determined by regulations and the Authority may, in 
public interest, vary the number of pension funds. 
(3) The pension fund shall function in 
accordance with the term s of its certificate of 
registration and the regulations made under this Act. 
(4) The pension fund shall manage the 
schemes in accordance with the regulations. 
 78.   On the issue of ‘pension funds’ under the 
New Pension System the Jo int Secretary stated as 

under during the course of evidence: 
 “….  There will be multiple pension 
funds, one of which ha s to be in the public 
sector.  There can be more than one.  It is one of 
the decisions of the Government that at least one 
of them must be in the public sector.”   
 
 79.  The Committee note that in terms of the 
provisions of Clause 23, the PFRDA is entitled to 
grant a certificate of regi stration to one or more 
pension funds for the purpose of receiving 
contributions, accumulating them and making 
payments to the subscribers.  As informed to the 
Committee, the Government have decided that one 
such pension fund would be from the public sector. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that this 
aspect about one of the pension funds being from the 
public sector be specified in clear terms in Clause 23 
of the PFRDA Bill which would be in the interest of 
subscribers.” 
 
 
Page Nos. 55-56, For 
Para 90 
 
Substitute New Para 
No. 86 
“The Committee note that unlike the case of 
the insurance sector, the permissibility or otherwise 
of FDI in the pension sector - to be promoted and 
regulated under the aegis of PFRDA – as well as 
limitations or restrictions on deployment of pension 
funds outside the country have not been specified.  
The Committee understand that  the Government are 
yet to decide on the matt er.  The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that any decision relating to 
permitting FDI in the pension sector should be 
implemented only by way of bringing forward 
suitable amendment in the present legislation. They 
are further of the view that  the decisions relating to 
permitting FDI in the pension sector and deployment 

of pension funds outside the Country, should, in no 
way be in variance with  the related provisions 
applicable to the insurance sector.” 
 
Page 61, Para 98, Line 9 
For “…with the representatives of the subscribers co-
opted into it.”  
Substitute “…with the representatives of the employees and  
subscribers co-opted into it.” 
 
After Para 98 
Insert New Para “ The Committee are also of the view that the 
initial or broad contours of  the regulations governing 
the implementation of the New Pension System 
under the infrastructure of PFRDA should be framed 
and made clear in the public domain prior to the 
enactment of the PFRDA Bill.” 
 
Page 62, Para 100, 
Line 3 
 
For “With a view to protect the interests of the 
subscribers the Committee recommend that the 
representatives of the subscribers should be co-opted 
to join the special committees to be set up by the 
Authority.” 
 
Substitute  “With a view to protect the interests of the 
subscribers the Committee recommend that the 
representatives of the employees associations and 
subscribers should be co-opted in the special 
committees to be set up by the Authority.” 
 
 
 

THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY  AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
BILL, 2005 
[Bill No. 36 of 2005] 
 
 
 
  
 
 to provide for the establishment of an Authority to promote old age income 
security by establishing, developing and regulating pension funds, to protect 
the interests of subscribers to schemes of pension funds and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth year of the Republic of 
India as follows :- 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Short Title Extent and Commencement: 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and  Development Authority Act, 2004. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have  come into force on the 29th day 
of December, 2004. 
 
 
Definitions: 
 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
 
(a) "Authority" means the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 3; 

(b) "central recordkeeping agency" means an agency registered under 
section 24 to perform the functi ons of recordkeeping, accounting, 
administration and customer service for subscribers to schemes; 
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority; 
(d) "individual pension account" means an account of a subscriber, 
executed by a contract setting out th e terms and conditions under the New 
Pension System; 
(e) "intermediary" includes pension fund, central recordkeeping 
agency, pension fund adviser, retirement advisor, point of presence and such 
other person or entity connected with  collection, management, record 
keeping and distribution of accumulations; 
(f) "member" means a member of the Authority and includes its 
Chairperson; 
(g) "New Pension System" means the contributory pension system 
referred to in section 20 whereby contributions from a subscriber are 
collected in an individual pension account using points of presence and 
central recordkeeping agency and accumulated by pension funds for pay offs 
as specified by regulations; 
(h) "notification" means a notifi cation published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(i) "pension fund" means an entity registered with the Authority under 
sub-section (3) of section 24 as a pension fund for receiving contributions, 
accumulating them and making payments  to the subscriber in the manner 
specified by regulations; 
(j) "Pension Regulatory and Development Fund" means the fund 
constituted under sub-section (1) section 37; 

(k) "point of presence" means an entity registered with the Authority 
under sub-section (3) of section 24 as a point of presence and capable of 
electronic connectivity with the central recordkeeping agency for the 
purposes of receiving and transmitting funds and instructions and pay out of 
funds; 
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(m) "regulated assets" means the assets and properties, both tangible 
and intangible, owned, leased or devel oped by and other rights belonging to, 
the central recordkeeping agency; 
(n) "regulations" means regulations made by the Authority under this 
Act; 
(o) "scheme" means a scheme of  pension fund approved by the 
Authority under this Act; 
(p) "Securities Appellate Tribunal"  means a Securities Appellate 
Tribunal established under s ub-section (1) of section 15K of the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992(15 of 1992); 
(q) "subscriber" includes a person wh o subscribes to a scheme of a 
pension fund; 
(r) "Subscriber Education and Pro tection Fund" means the fund 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 38; 
 
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act, but defined in- 
 
(i)    the Insurance Act, 1938(4 of 1938);  
(ii)   the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956);  
(iii) the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956(42 of 1956) 
(iv) the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992(15 of 
1992); 
 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them under those Acts. 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Establishment and Incorporation of Authority: 
 
3.(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Bill, 
an Authority to be called the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a comm on seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Bill, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract  and shall, by the said name, sue or 
be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Authorit y shall be in the National Capital 
Region referred to in clause (f) of s ection 2 of the National Capital Region 
Planning Board Act, 1985(2 of 1985). 
(4) The Authority may establish offices at other places in India. 
 
 
 
Composition of Authority: 
 
4. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than 
five members, of whom at least three shall be whole-time members, to be 
appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, 
integrity and standing and having experience and knowledge in economics, 
finance, law or administrative matters with at least one person from each 
discipline. 

 
 
Term of office and Conditions of Serv ice of Chairperson and Members of 
Authority: 
 
5. (1) The Chairperson and ever y whole-time member shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office and shall be eligible for reappointment: 
 
Provided that no person shall hold of fice as the Chairperson after he 
has attained the age of sixty-five years: 
 
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a whole-time 
member after he has attained the age of sixty-two years. 
(2) A part-time member shall hold office as such for a term not 
exceeding five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), a member may- 
(a) relinquish his office, by gi ving in writing to the Central 
Government, a notice of not less than thirty days; or 
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of 
section 6. 
 
 
 
Removal of Members from Office: 
 
6. (1) The Central Government may re move from office the Chairperson 
or any other member who- 
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as insolvent; or 

(b) has become physically or ment ally incapable of acting as a 
member; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offe nce which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) has acquired such fina ncial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a member; or 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Ce ntral Government, so abused his 
position as to render his continuance in  office detrimental to the public 
interest. 
(2) No such Chairperson or othe r member shall be removed under 
clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-s ection (1) unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
 Salary and Allowances of Chairperson and Members: 
 
7. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the members ot her than part-time members shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(2) The part-time members shall rece ive such allowances as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The salary, allowances and ot her conditions of service of a 
member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
 
 
 
Bar on Future Employment of Members: 
 
8. The Chairperson and the whol e-time members shall not, for a 
period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office as such, 
except with the previous approval of the Central Government, accept- 

(a) any employment either under the Central Government or under 
any State Government; or 
(b) any appointment in any regulated entity in the pension sector. 
 
 
Administrative Powers of Chairperson: 
 
9. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence 
and direction in respect of all administrative matters of the Authority. 
 
 
Meetings of the Authority: 
 
10. (1) The Authority shall meet at  such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard  to the transaction of business at its 
meetings (including quorum at such  meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations. 
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a 
meeting of the Authority, any other me mber chosen by the members present 
from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up befo re any meeting of the Authority 
shall be decided by a majority of vo tes by the members present and voting, 
and in the event of an equality of votes , the Chairperson or in his absence, 
the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote. 
(4) If any member, who is a director  of a company and who as such 
director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming 
up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, he shall, as soon as 
possible after relevant circumstances ha ve come to his knowledge, disclose 
the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be 
recorded in the proceedings of the Au thority, and the member shall not take 

part in any deliberation or decision of  the Authority with  respect to that 
matter. 
(5) The Authority may make regul ations for the transaction of 
business at its meetings. 
 
 
Vacancies etc. not to Invalidate Proceedings of the Authority: 
 
11. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by 
reason of- 
 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; 
or 
 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of 
the Authority; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the 
merits of the case. 
 
 
 
Officers and Employees of the Authority: 
 
12. (1) The Authority may appoi nt such officers and other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Bill. 
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of officers and other 
employees of the Authority appointed un der sub-section (1) shall be such as 
may be determined by regulations. 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER III 
 
EXTENT AND APPLICATION 
 
Extent and Application: 
 
13. (1) This Bill shall apply to- 
 
(a) the New Pension System; 
 
(b) any other pension scheme not regulated by any other enactment. 
 
(2) Every pension scheme referred to  in clause (b) shall conform to 
the regulations made by the Authority within such time as may be specified 
in the regulations. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
provisions of this Bill shall not apply to- 
(a) the schemes or funds under- 
(i) the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952(19 of 1952); 
(ii) the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1948(46 of 1948); 
(iii) the Assam Tea Plantations Pr ovident Fund a nd Pension Fund 
Scheme Act, 1955(Assam Act X of 1955); 
(iv) the Jammu and Kashmir Em ployees' Provident Funds Act, 
1961(Jammu and Kashmir Act XV of 1961); and 
(v) the Seamen's Provident Fund Act, 1966(4 of 1966); 
(b) contracts referred to in sub-s ection (11) of section 2 of the 
Insurance Act, 1938(4 of 1938); 
(c) any other pension scheme, whic h the Central Government may, by 
notification, exempt from the application of this Bill; 

(d) persons appointed before the 1st day of January, 2004 to public 
services in connection with the affairs of  the Union, or to All-India Services 
constituted under section 2A of the All-India Services Act, 1951(61 of 
1951); 
(e) persons appointed to public serv ices in connection with the affairs 
of any State, or such Union territories as may be specified by notification by 
the Central Government. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), any State 
Government may, by notification, extend the New Pension System to its 
employees. 
(5) Any person governed under any of the schemes or funds referred 
to in sub-section (3) may, at his option, join the New Pension System. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY 
 
 Duties, Powers and Functions of Authority: 
 
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for 
the time being in force, the Authority shall have the duty, to regulate, 
promote and ensure orderly growth of the New Pension System and pension 
schemes to which this Act applies and, to protect the interests of subscribers 
of such System and schemes. 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the genera lity of the provisions contained in 
sub-section (1), the powers and functions of the Authority shall include- 
 
(a) regulating the New Pension Syst em and the pension schemes to 
which this Act applies; 
(b) approving schemes, the terms and conditions thereof and laying 
down norms for the management of the corpus of the pension funds, 
including investment guidelines under such schemes; 
(c) registering and regulating intermediaries; 
(d) issuing to an intermediary, on application, a certificate of 
registration and renewing, modifyi ng, withdrawing, suspending or 
cancelling such registration; 
(e) protecting the interests of subscribers to the pension funds; 
(f) establishing mechanism for redressi ng grievances of subscribers to 
be determined by regulations; 
(g) promoting professional organisa tions connected with the pension 
system; 

(h) adjudication of disputes betw een intermediaries and between 
intermediaries and subscribers; 
(i) collecting data and requiring the in termediaries to collect such data 
and undertaking and commissioning studies, research and projects; 
(j) undertaking steps for educating subscribers and the general public 
on issues relating to pension, retirem ent savings and related issues and 
training of intermediaries; 
(k) standardising dissemination of information about performance of 
pension funds and performance bench marks; 
(l) regulating the regulated assets; 
(m) levying fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act; 
(n) specifying by regulations the fo rm and manner in which books of 
account shall be maintained and stat ement of accounts shall be rendered by 
intermediaries; 
(o) calling for information fro m, undertaking inspection of, 
conducting inquiries and investigations including audit of, intermediaries 
and other entities or organisations connected with pension funds; 
(p) exercising such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, while exercising the po wers under clause (o) of sub-section 
(2), the Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908(5  of 1908) while trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:- 

(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other 
documents, at such place and at such  time as may be specified by the 
Authority; 
 
(ii) summoning and enforcing th e attendance of  persons and 
examining them on oath; 
(iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any 
person or entity referred to in section 24, at any place; 
(iv) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; 
(v) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1), 
(2) and (3) and section 15, the Authorit y may, by order, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, in the interests of  subscribers, take any of the following 
measures, either pending investigation or inquiry, namely:- 
 
(i) restrain persons from participating in any scheme; 
(ii) restrain any office bearer of an intermediary from acting as such; 
(iii) impound and retain the proceed s under the scheme in respect of 
any activity which is under investigation; 
 
(iv) attach, after passing an orde r, on an application made for 
approval, by the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for 
a period not exceeding one month, one or more bank account or accounts of 
any intermediary or any person associated with the scheme in any manner 
involved in violation of any of the provis ions of this Act or the rules or the 
regulations made thereunder: 

 
Provided that only the bank account or accounts or any transaction 
entered therein, relating to the proceeds actually involved in the violation of 
any of the provisions of this Act or  the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder shall be allowed to be attached; 
(v) direct any intermediary or any person associated with the scheme 
in any manner not to dispose of or alienate an asset forming part of any 
activity which is under investigation: 
 
Provided that the Authority shall, either before or after, passing such 
orders, under this section, give to su ch intermediaries or persons concerned 
an opportunity of being heard. 
 
 
 Power to Issue Directions: 
 
15. Save as otherwise provided in section 14, if after making, or 
causing to be made, an inquiry, the Authority is satisfied that it is necessary- 
(i) in the interests of subscriber s or orderly development of New 
Pension System or a pension scheme to which this Act applies; or 
(ii) to prevent the affairs of any intermediary or other persons or 
entities referred to in section 24 bein g conducted in a manner detrimental to 
the interests of subscribers; or 
(iii) to secure the proper management of any such intermediary or 
person or entity, it may issue such dir ections to such intermediaries or 
entities or to any person or class of pe rsons referred to in section 24, or 
associated with the pension fund, as it may deem fit: 

Provided that the Authority shall, either before or after passing such 
orders, give an opportunity of hearing to such intermediaries, entities or 
persons concerned. 
 
 Powers of Investigation: 
 
16.(1) Where the Authority has a reasonable ground to believe that- 
 
(a) the activities of the pension f und are being conduc ted in a manner 
detrimental to the interest of the subscriber; or 
(b) any intermediary or any person a ssociated with the schemes of the 
pension fund has violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or the 
regulations made or directions issued by the Authority thereunder, it may, at 
any time, by order in writing, direct a ny person (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the Investigating Authority) specified in the order to 
investigate the affairs of such intermed iary or persons associated with the 
pension fund and to report thereon to the Authority. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 to 241 of the 
Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956), it sh all be the duty of every manager, 
managing director, officer and other em ployee of the company, in case of a 
company and every intermediary referre d to in section 24 or every person 
associated with the pension fund to  preserve and to produce to the 
Investigating Authority or any person authorised by him in this behalf, all 
the books, registers, other documents and record of, or relating to, the 
company or as the case may be, of or relating to, the intermediary or such 
person, which are in their custody or power. 
(3) The Investigating Authority may require any intermediary or any 
person associated with the pension fu nd in any manner to furnish such 

information to, or produce such books, or  other documents, or record before 
him or any person authorised by him in  this behalf as he may consider 
necessary if the furnishing of such information or the production of such 
books, or register, or other documents, or  record is relevant or necessary for 
the purposes of its investigation. 
(4) The Investigating Authority ma y keep in its custody any books, 
registers, other documents and record produced under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) for six months and thereaf ter shall return the same to any 
intermediary or any person associated with the pension fund by whom or on 
whose behalf the books, registers, other documents and record are produced: 
 
Provided that the Investigating Authority may call for any book, 
register, other documents and record if they are needed again: 
 
Provided further that if the pe rson on whose behalf the books, 
registers, other documents and record  are produced requires certified copies 
of the books, registers, other documen ts or record produced before the 
Investigating Authority, it shall give certified copies of such books, registers, 
other documents or, as the case may be, record to such person or on whose 
behalf the books, registers, other documents and record were produced. 
(5) Any person, directed to make an investigation under sub-section 
(1), may examine on oath any intermediary or any person associated with the 
pension fund in any manner, in relation to the affairs of his business and may 
administer an oath accordingly and for that purpose may require any of those 
persons to appear before him personally. 
(6) Notes of any examination under sub-section (5) shall be taken 
down in writing and shall be read over to, or by, and signed by, the person 
examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence against him. 

(7) If any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses- 
(a) to produce to an Investigating Authority or any person authorised 
by him in this behalf any book, register, other document or record which it is 
his duty under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) to furnish; or 
 
(b) to furnish any information wh ich it is his duty under sub-section 
(3) to furnish; or 
(c) to appear before the Investigating Authority personally when 
required to do so under sub-section (3) or to answer any question which is 
put to him by the Investigating Authority in pursuance of that sub-section; or 
(d) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub-section (6); 
 
he shall be punishable with imprisonm ent for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, which may extend to twenty five crore rupees, or with 
both, and also with a further fine wh ich may extend to ten lakh rupees for 
every day after the first day during which the failure or refusal continues. 
 
Search and Seizure: 
 
17. (1) Where the Authority, in c onsequence of information in its 
possession, has reason to believe that- 
 
(a) any person who has b een required under sub-section (3) of section 
16 to produce, or cause to be produced, any books, accounts or other 
documents in his custody or power has omitted or failed to produce, or cause 
to be produced, such books, accounts or other documents; or 
(b) any person to whom a requisitio n to produce any books, accounts 
or other documents as aforesaid has b een or might be issued will not, or 

would not, produce or cause to be pr oduced, any books, accounts or other 
documents which will be useful for, or  relevant to, an investigation under 
sub-section (1) of section 16; or 
(c) a contravention of any provision of this Act has been committed or 
is likely to be committed by an intermediary, or 
(d) any claim which is due to be se ttled by the intermediary, has been 
or is likely to be rejected or settled at a figure higher than a reasonable 
amount, or 
(e) any claim which is due to be se ttled by an intermediary, has been 
or is likely to be rejected or se ttled at a figure lower than a reasonable 
amount, or 
(f) any illegal fees and charges have been transacted or are likely to be 
transacted by an intermediary, or 
(g) any books, accounts, papers, rece ipts, vouchers, survey reports or 
other documents, belonging to an inte rmediary are likely to be tampered 
with, falsified or manufactured,  
 
it may authorise any officer of the Au thority, not below the rank equivalent 
to that of a Gazetted Officer of the G overnment (hereafter referred to as the 
authorised officer), to- 
(i) enter and search any building or place where he has reason to 
suspect that such books, accounts or other documents, or any books or 
papers relating to any claim, rebate or commission or any receipts, vouchers, 
reports or other documents are kept; 
(ii) break open the lock of any bo x, locker, safe, almirah or other 
receptacle for exercising the powers c onferred by clause (i) where the keys 
thereof are not available. 

(iii) seize all or any such books, accounts or other documents, found 
as a result of such search; 
(iv) place marks of identificati on on such books, accounts or other 
documents or make or cause to be made extracts or copies therefrom. 
(2) The authorised officer may requisition the services of any police 
officer or of any officer of the Central Government, or of both, to assist him 
for all or any of the purposes specified in sub-section (1) and it shall be the 
duty of every such police officer or officer to comply with such requisition. 
(3) The authorised officer may, where it is not practicable to seize any 
such book, account or other document, sp ecified in sub-section (1), serve an 
order on the person who is in immediate possession or control thereof that he 
shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with it except with the previous 
permission of such officer and such of ficer may take such steps as may be 
necessary for ensuring compliance with this sub-section. 
(4) The authorised officer may, dur ing the course of the search or 
seizure, examine on oath any person wh o is found to be in possession or 
control of any books, accounts or othe r documents, and a ny statement made 
by such person during such examination may thereafter be used in evidence 
in any proceeding under this Act. 
(5) The books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other 
documents seized under sub-section (1) shall not be retained by the 
authorised officer for a period exceeding one hundred and eighty days from 
the date of the seizure unless the reasons for retaining the same are recorded 
by him in writing and the approval of the Authority for such retention is 
obtained: 
Provided that the Authority shall not  authorise the retention of the 
books, accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, reports, or other documents for a 

period exceeding thirty days after all the proceedings under this Act, for 
which the books, accounts, papers, rece ipts, vouchers, reports, or other 
documents are relevant, are completed. 
(6) The person from whose cust ody the books, accounts, papers, 
receipts, vouchers, reports, or other do cuments are seized under sub-section 
(1) may make copies thereo f, or take extracts there from, in the presence of 
the authorised officer or any other person empowered by him in this behalf 
at such place and time as the authorised officer may appoint in this behalf. 
(7) If a person legally entitled to th e books, accounts, papers, receipts, 
vouchers, reports or other documents seized under sub-section (1) objects for 
any reason to the approva l given by the Authority unde r sub-section (5), he 
may make an application to the Cent ral Government stating therein the 
reason for such objection and request ing for the return of the books, 
accounts, papers, receipts, vouchers, report or other documents. 
(8) On receipt of the application under sub-section (7), the Central 
Government may, after giving the app licant an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as it thinks fit. 
 
(9) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 
1974) relating to searches and seizures shall apply, so far as may be, to every 
search and seizure made under sub-section (1). 
(10) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules in 
relation to any search or seizure under this section and in particular, and 
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the procedure to be followed by the authorised officer,- 
(i) for obtaining ingress into such  building or place to be searched 
where free ingress thereto is not available; 

(ii) for ensuring safe custody of a ny books, accounts, papers, receipts 
vouchers, reports, or other documents seized under this section. 
 
 
Power of Authority to Ensure Compliance: 
 
18. If the Authority finds, after causi ng an inquiry to be made, that 
any person has violated, or is likely to vi olate, any provisions of this Act, or 
any rule or regulation ma de thereunder, the Auth ority may pass an order 
requiring such person to cease and de sist from committing or causing such 
violation. 
 
Management by Administrator: 
 
19. (1) If at any time the Authority has reason to believe that the 
central recordkeeping agency or pensio n fund is acting in a manner likely to 
be prejudicial to the interests of subs cribers, it may, after giving the central 
recordkeeping agency or pension fund, as the case may be, an opportunity of 
being heard, make a report thereon to the Central Government. 
(2) If the Central Government, afte r considering the report made 
under sub-section (1) is of the opinion, that it is necessary or proper to do so, 
it may appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of the central 
recordkeeping agency or pension f und, as the case may be, under the 
direction and control of the Authority,  in such manner as may be specified 
by notification. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
NEW PENSION SYSTEM 
 
New Pension System: 
 
20. The contributory pension system  notified by the Government of 
India in the Ministry of Finance vide  notification number F. No. 5/7/2003-
ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, as amended from time to time, 
and having the following basic features, shall, form the New Pension System 
under this Bill, namely:- 
 
(a) every subscriber shall have an individual pension account; 
(b) the functions of recordkeep ing, accounting and switching of 
options by the subscriber shall be effected by the centr al recordkeeping 
agency; 
(c) there shall be a choice of mu ltiple pension fund managers and 
multiple schemes; 
(d) there shall be portability of i ndividual pension accounts in case of 
change of employment; 
(e) collection and transmission of c ontributions and instructions shall 
be through points of presence to the central recordkeeping agency; 
(f) there shall not be any implicit or  explicit assuran ce of benefits 
except market based guarantee mech anism to be purchased by the 
subscriber; 
(g) a subscriber shall not exit from the New Pension System except as 
specified by the Central Government by, notification; 
(h) at exit, the subscriber sha ll purchase an annuity from a life 
insurance company as specified under the New Pension System. 

 
 
Central Record keeping Agency: 
 
21. (1) The Authority shall, by granting a certificate of registration 
under sub-section (3) of section 24, appoint a central recordkeeping agency: 
Provided that the Authority may, in public interest, appoint more than 
one central recordkeeping agency. 
(2) The central recordkeeping ag ency shall be responsible for 
receiving funds and instructions from subscribers through the points of 
presence, transmitting such instructio ns and transferring such funds to 
pension funds, effecting switching inst ructions received from subscribers 
and discharging such other duties and functions, as may be assigned to it 
under the certificate of registration or as may be determined by regulations. 
(3) All the assets and properties ow ned, leased or developed by the 
central recordkeeping agency, shall constitute regulated assets and upon 
expiry of certificate of registrati on or earlier revocation thereof, the 
Authority shall be entitled to appropriate and take over the regulated assets, 
either by itself or through an administrator or a person nominated by it in 
this behalf: 
Provided that the central recordkeep ing agency shall be entitled to be 
compensated the fair value, to be as certained by the Authority, of such 
regulated assets as determined by regulations: 
Provided further that where the earlie r revocation of the certificate of 
registration is based on violation of the conditions in the certificate of 
registration or the provisions of this  Bill or regulations , unless otherwise 

determined by the Authority, the central recordkeeping agency shall not be 
entitled to claim any compensation in respect of such regulated assets. 
 
 
22.  Point of Presence: 
 
22. (1) The Authority may, by gran ting a certificate of registration 
under sub-section (3) of section 24, perm it one or more persons to act as a 
point of presence or points of pr esence for the purpose of receiving 
contributions and instructions, transm itting them to the central record 
keeping agency and paying out benefits  to subscribers in  accordance with 
the regulations made by the Authority from time to time in this regard. 
(2) A point of presence shall function in accordance with the terms of 
its certificate of registration and the regulations made under this Bill. 
 
Pension Funds: 
 
23. (1) The Authority may, by gran ting a certificate of registration 
under sub-section (3) of section 24, perm it one or more persons to act as a 
pension fund for the purpose of recei ving contributions, accumulating them 
and making payments to the subscriber in such manner as may be specified 
by regulations. 
(2) The number of pension funds shall be determined  by regulations 
and the Authority may, in public interest, vary the number of pension funds. 
(3) The pension fund shall function in accordance with the terms of its 
certificate of registration and the regulations made under this Bill. 

(4) The pension fund shall manage  the schemes in accordance with 
the regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER VI 
 
REGISTRATION OF INTERMEDIARIES 
 
Registration of Central Record Keeping agency, Pension Fund, Point of 
Presence etc.: 
 
24. (1) No intermediary, including a pe nsion fund or a poi nt of presence 
to the extent regulated under this Ac t, shall commence any activity relating 
to a pension fund except under and in accordance with the conditions of a 
certificate of registration granted by  the Authority in accordance with 
provisions of this Act and the regulations: 
Provided that any intermediary, incl uding any point of presence, who 
may be associated with a scheme of pension fund immediately before the 
establishment of the Authority for which no registration certificate was 
necessary prior to such esta blishment, may continue to  do so for a period of 
three months from such establishment or, if he has made an application for 
such registration within the said period  of three months till the disposal of 
such application. 
(2) Every application for grant of a certificate of registration under 
this Act shall be in such form and manner and shall be accompanied by such 
fees as may be determined by regulations; 
(3) The Authority may, after considering the application and subject 
to such terms and conditions as it may specify, grant a certificate of 
registration as a central record keepi ng agency, point of presence, pension 
fund or such other intermediary, as the case may be. 

(4) The Authority may, by order, suspend or cancel a certificate of 
registration granted under sub-section (3) in such manner as may be 
determined by regulations: 
Provided that no order under this sub- section shall be made unless the 
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER VII 
 
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION 
 
Penalty for Failure by an Intermediary or any other Person to comply with 
Provision of the Act, Rules, Regulations and Directions: 
 
25. (1) Any person, who is required under this Act or  any rules or 
regulations made thereunder,- 
(a) to obtain a certificate of regi stration from the Authority for 
carrying on any activity under this Ac t, carries on such activities without 
obtaining such certificate of registration,  he shall be liable to a penalty of 
one lakh rupees for each day during whic h the failure continues or one crore 
rupees, whichever is less; 
(b) to comply with the terms and conditions of certificate of 
registration fails to do so, he shall be liable to a pe nalty of one lakh rupees 
for each day during which the failure continues or one crore rupees, 
whichever is less; 
(c) to furnish any information, doc ument, books, returns or report to 
the Authority, fails to fu rnish the same within the time specified by the 
Authority, he shall be liable to a pe nalty which may exte nd to one crore 
rupees or five times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever 
is higher: 
(d) to maintain books pf accounts or records, fails to maintain the 
same, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during 
which the failure continues or five times the amount of profits made or 
losses avoided, whichever is higher. 

(2) If any person, who is required under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made thereunder, to enter into an agreem ent with his client, fails 
to enter into such agreement, he sh all be liable to a penalty of one lakh 
rupees for each day during which the failure continues or five times the 
amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher. 
(3) If any intermediary registered  with the Authority, after having 
been called upon by the Authority, in wr iting, to redress the grievances of 
subscribers, fails to redress such grieva nces within the time stipulated by the 
Authority, he shall be liable to a pena lty of not more than one crore rupees 
or five times the amount of profits ma de or losses avoided, whichever is 
higher. 
 
(4) If any person, who is registered under this Act as an intermediary, 
fails to segregate moneys of the client  or clients or uses the moneys of a 
client or clients for self or for any other client, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding one crore rupees or five times the amount of profits made or 
losses avoided, whichever is higher. 
(5) Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this Act, the rules 
or the regulations made or the directions issued by the Authority under the 
provisions of this Act for which no sepa rate penalty has been provided, he 
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees or five 
times the amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher. 
 
Crediting Sums Realised by way of Pe nalties ot Subscriber Education and 
Protection Fund: 
 

26. All sums realised by way of penalties under this  Act shall be 
credited to the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund established under 
sub-section (1) of section 38. 
 
27. Power to Adjudicate: 
 
27. (1) For the purposes of adjudging under section 25, the Authority 
shall appoint any of its officers not below the rank specified by regulations 
to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry as determined by 
regulations, after giving the person c oncerned a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard for the purpose of imposing any penalty. 
 
(2) While holding an inquiry, the ad judicating officer shall have the 
power to summon and enforce the attenda nce of any person acquainted with 
the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any 
document which, in the opinion of th e adjudicating officer, may be useful 
for or relevant to the subj ect matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he 
is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the matters referred to 
in section 25, he may recommend such pe nalty as he thinks fit in accordance 
with the provisions of that section, to the member in charge  of investigation 
and surveillance. 
 
(3) The penalty shall be imposed by a member other than the member 
in charge of investigation and surveillance: 
 
Provided that while adjudging the quantum of penalty under section 
25, the member shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:- 

(a) amount of disproportionate gain  or unfair advantage, wherever 
quantifiable, made as a result of the default; 
(b) amount of loss caused to a subscriber or group of subscribers; and 
(c) the repetitive nature of the default. 
 
28. Attachment of Assets and Supercession of Management of Intermediary: 
 
28. (1) Any person a ggrieved may apply to the Authority for an 
interim measure or protection in resp ect of any of the following matters, 
namely:- 
(a) the detention, preservation, inte rim custody or sale of any asset or 
property which is regulated by the provisions of this Act; 
 
(b) securing any pension funds, monies and other assets and properties 
owned by or under the control of the pension fund; 
(c) interim injunction or appointment of an administrator; and 
(d) such other interim measures as may appear to the Authority to be 
just and necessary, and the Authority shall have power  to make such orders 
including an order for attachment of assets of the pension fund as it deems 
fit in this regard. 
(2) Where, on a complaint received by the Authority or suo motu, the 
Authority, after conducting an enquiry  comes to a conclusion that the 
governing board or board of directors,  by whatever name called, or the 
persons in control of any intermediary to the extent  regulated under this Act 
are indulging in any activity which is in  contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or regulations, it may supers ede the governing board or board of 

directors or management of the in termediary in accordance with the 
provisions of the regulations. 
 
 
29. Offences: 
 
29. (1) Without prejudice to any award of penalty by the member 
under this Act, if any pers on contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets 
the contravention of the provisions of th is Act or of any rules or regulations 
made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to ten years, or with fine , which may extend to twenty five crore 
rupees or with both. 
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the member or 
fails to comply with any of the directions or orders issued by the member, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a term which shall not be less 
than one month but which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may 
extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both. 
 
 
30. Power of Grant Immunity: 
 
30. (1) The Central Government may, on the recommendation by the 
Authority, if satisfied, that any person,  who is alleged to have violated any 
of the provisions of this Act or the ru les or the regulations made thereunder, 
has made a full and true di sclosure in respect of alleged violation, grant to 
such person, subject to such conditi ons as it may think fit to impose, 
immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act, or the rules or the 

regulations made thereunder and also  from the imposition of any penalty 
under this Act with respect to the alleged violation: 
Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Central 
Government in cases where the proceedings for the prosecution for any such 
offence have been instituted before th e date of receipt of application for 
grant of such immunity: 
Provided further that the recommendation of the Authority under this 
sub-section shall not be binding upon the Central Government. 
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) may, at 
any time, be withdrawn by the Central Government, if it is satisfied that such 
person had, in the course of the proceedings, not complied with the 
condition on which the immunity was gr anted or had given false evidence, 
and thereupon such person may be trie d for the offence with respect to 
which the immunity was granted or for any other offence of which he 
appears to have been guilty in connection with the contravention and shall 
also become liable to the imposition of  any penalty under th is Act to which 
such person would have been liable, had no such immunity been granted. 
 
Exemption from Tax on Wealth, Income, Profits and Gains: 
 
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in- 
(i) the Wealth Tax Act, 1957(27 of 1957); 
(ii) the Income Tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961), or 
(iii) any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on 
wealth, income, profits or gains, the Authority shall not be liable to pay 
wealth-tax, income-tax or any other ta x in respect of its wealth, income, 
profits or gains derived. 

 
Cognizance of Offences by Court: 
 
32. (1) No court shall take cogni zance of any offence punishable 
under this Act or any rules or regul ations made thereunder, save on a 
complaint made by the Authority. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Court of Session shall try any offence 
punishable under this Act. 
 
 Appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal: 
 
33. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Authority or by 
an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal before the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal which shall have jurisdiction over the matter. 
 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of 
forty-five days from the da te of receipt of the order appealed against and it 
shall be in such form and manner and shall be ac companied by such fee as 
may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Securities Appe llate Tribunal may entertain an 
appeal after the expiry of the said pe riod, if it is satisfied that there was 
sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal unde r sub-section (1), the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity 
being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying 
or setting aside the order appealed against. 

(4) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order 
made by it to the Authorit y, the parties to the app eal and to the adjudicating 
officers concerned. 
(5) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under 
sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and 
endeavour shall be made by it to dispos e of the appeal finally within six 
months from the date on which the appeal is presented to it. 
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 15T and 15U of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of Indi a Act, 1992, the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal shall deal with an appeal under this section in accordance with such 
procedure as may be as prescribed. 
 
 Civil Court Not to have Jurisdiction: 
 
34.  No civil court shall have ju risdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter wh ich an adjudicating officer appointed 
under this Act or a Securities Appella te Tribunal is empowered by or under 
this Act to determine and no injunctio n shall be granted by any court or 
other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of 
any power conferred by or under this Act. 
 
 
 Appeal to Supreme Court; 
 
35. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal under th is Act may file an app eal to the Supreme Court 
within sixty days from the date of comm unication of the decision or order of 

the Securities Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out 
of such order: 
Provided that the Supreme Court ma y, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the 
said period, allow it to be filed with in a further period not exceeding sixty 
days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER VIII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
Grants by Central Government : 
  
36. The Central Government may,  after due appr opriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Author ity grants of such sums 
of money as that Government may think fit for being utilised for the 
purposes of this Bill. 
 
 
 
37. Constitution of Pension Regulatory and Development Fund: 
 
37. (1) There shall be constitute d a fund to be called the Pension 
Regulatory and Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto- 
 
(a) all Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority; 
(b) all sums received by the Authority  from such other source as may 
be decided upon by the Central Government. 
 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting- 
 
(a) the salaries, allowances and ot her remuneration of the Chairperson 
and other members and officers and other employees of the Authority; 
(b) other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge 
of its functions and for the purposes of this Bill. 
 

 
Constitution of Subscriber Education and Protection Fund: 
 
38. (1) The Authority shall establish a fund to be called the Subscriber 
Education and Protection Fund. 
(2) There shall be credited to the Subscriber Education and Protection 
Fund the following amounts, namely:- 
 
(a) grants and donations given to  the Subscriber Education and 
Protection Fund by the Central Government, State Governments, companies 
or any other institutions for the purposes of the Subscriber Education and 
Protection Fund; 
(b) the interest or other income received out of the investments made 
from the Subscriber Education and Protection Fund; 
(c) the sums realised by way of  penalties by the Authority under 
section 26. 
(3) The Subscriber Education and Protection Fund shall be 
administered and utilised by the Authority for protection of the interests of 
subscribers in accordance with regulations made for the purpose. 
 
 Accounts and Audit: 
 
39. (1) The Authority shall ma intain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 

(2) The accounts of the Authority shal l be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him 
and any expenditure incurre d in connection with such audit shall be payable 
by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Authority shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Gove rnment accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the pr oduction of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Authority. 
(4) The Accounts of the Authority as  certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf 
together with the audit-report there on shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government and that Government  shall cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IX 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Power of Central Government to Issue Directions on Issues of Policy: 
 
40. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoi ng provisions of this Act, the 
Authority shall, in exercise of its pow ers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such direc tions on questions of policy, other 
than those relating to technical and administrative matters, as the Central 
Government may give, in writing to it, from time to time: 
 
Provided that the Authority shall, as  far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-
section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one 
of policy or not, shall be final. 
 
Power of Central Government to Supercede the Authority: 
 
(1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that- 
 
(a) on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it 
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Bill; or 
(b) the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any 
direction issued by the Central Governme nt that the Central Government is 
entitled to issue under this Bill or in  the discharge of the functions or 
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this 

Bill and as a result of such default th e financial position of the Authority or 
the administration of the Authority has deteriorated; or 
(c) circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest 
so to do, the Central Government may,  by notification and for reasons to be 
specified therein, supersede the Author ity for such period, not exceeding six 
months, as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central 
Government shall give a reasonable opp ortunity to the Authority to make 
representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Authority. 
 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) 
superseding the Authority-- 
 
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of 
supersession, vacate their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the 
provisions of this Bill, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the 
Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be 
exercised and discharged by the Central Government; and 
(c) all properties owned or controlle d by the Authority shall, until the 
Authority is reconstituted under sub- section (3), vest in the Central 
Government. 
 
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified 
in the notification issued under sub- section (1), the Central Government 
shall reconstitute the Authority. 

(4) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause a copy of 
the notification issued under sub-secti on (1) and a full report of any action 
taken by it, to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Furnishing of Returns, etc. to Central Government: 
 
42. (1) The Authority shall furnish to  the Central Government at such 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central 
Government may direct to furnish su ch returns, statements and other 
particulars in regard to any prop osed or existing programme for the 
promotion and development of the pension industry as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the prov isions of sub-section (1), the 
Authority shall, within ni ne months after the close of each financial year, 
submit to the Central Government a re port giving a true and full account of 
its activities including the activities for promotion and development of 
schemes of pension funds regulated under this Bill during the previous 
financial year. 
(3) Copies of the reports received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, 
as soon as may be, after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Members, Officers and Employees of The Authority to be Public Servants: 
 
43.The Chairperson and other me mbers and officers and other 
employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to 
act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Bill,  to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21(45 of 1860) of the Indian Penal Code. 

 
Protection of Action Taken in Good Faith: 
 
44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Authority or  any officer of Central Government 
or any member, officer or other employees of the Authority for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Bill or the rules 
or regulations made there under. 
 
Offences by Companies: 
 
45. (1) Where an offence under th is Bill has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time  the offence was committed was in 
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as th e company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment pr ovided in this Bill if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under this Bill has been comm itted by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with  the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such di rector, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty  of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 

 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section- 
 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
 
Power to Make Rules: 
 
46. (1) The Central Government may,  by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Bill. 
 
(2) In particular and without pr ejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide  for all or any of the following 
matters, namely;- 
(a) the salary and allowances paya ble to and the other conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and whole-time members under sub-section (1) of 
section 7; 
(b) the allowances payable to pa rt-time members under sub-section 
(2) of section 7; 
(c) the additional functions which may be performed by the Authority 
under clause (p) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(d) any other matter in respect of  which the Authority may exercise 
the powers of a civil court under clause (v) of sub-section (3) of section 14; 
(e) the procedure to be followed by the authorised officer under sub-
section (10) of section 17; 

(f) the form and manner in which an appeal may be filed before the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal and th e fee which shall accompany such 
appeal, under sub-section (2) of section 33; 
(g) the procedure to be followed by the Securities Appellate Tribunal 
in dealing with an appeal, under sub-section (6) of section 33; 
 
(h) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be 
maintained by the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 39; 
(i) the time within which and the fo rm and manner in which returns 
and reports are to be made by the Au thority to the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 42; 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect 
of which provision is to be made, by rules. 
 
 Power to Make Regulations: 
 
47. (1) The Authority may, by not ification, make regulations 
consistent with this Bill and the ru les made thereunder to carry out the 
provision of this Bill. 
 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations ma y provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-- 
 
(a) the times and places of mee tings of the Authority and the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) under sub-section (1) of section 10; 

(b) the transactions of business at the meetings of the Authority under 
sub-section (5) of section 10; 
(c) the terms and other conditions of  service of the officers and other 
employees of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(d) the regulations to be made by th e Authority in respect of pension 
schemes referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 and the 
time within which such schemes shoul d conform to the regulations, made 
under sub-section (2) of that section; 
 
(e) the establishing of mechanisms for redressing grievances of 
subscribers under clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(f) the form and manner in which books of account shall be 
maintained and statement of accounts shall be rendered by intermediaries 
under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(g) the duties and functions of central recordkeeping agency under 
sub-section (2) of section 21; 
(h) the determination of compensati on of fair value of the regulated 
assets payable to central recordkeepi ng agency under proviso to sub-section 
(3) of section 21; 
(i) the manner of receiving contributions and instructions and 
transmitting them to the central recordkeeping agency and paying out the 
benefits to the subscribers, under sub-section (1) and the regulations 
governing functioning of points of pr esence under sub-section (2) of section 
22; 
(j) the manner in which a pension fund may receive contributions, 
accumulate them and make payments to the subscriber under sub-section (1), 
the number of pension funds under sub-section (2), the functioning of the 

pension fund under sub-section (3),  and the manner of managing the 
schemes by the pension fund under sub-section (4), of section 23; 
(k) the form and manner in which an application for grant of 
certificate of registration shall be ma de and the fee which shall accompany 
such application under sub-section (2) of section 24; 
(l) the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration may be 
granted to an intermediary under sub-section (3) of section 24; 
(m) the procedure and manner of suspension or cancellation of 
certificate of registration of intermedia ries under sub-section (4) of section 
24; 
(n) the procedure for holding inquiry by an adjudicating officer under 
sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(o) the supersession of the governin g board or board of directors of 
the intermediary under sub-section (2) of section 28; 
 
(p) the manner of administering and utilising the Subscribers 
Education and Protection Fund under sub-section (3) of section 38; 
(q) delegation of powers and functions of the Authority to Committees 
under sub-section (2) of section 50; 
(r) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified by 
regulations or in respect of which pr ovision is to be or may be made by 
regulations. 
 
Rules and Regulations to be Laid Before Parliament: 
 
48. Every rule and every regulation made under this Bill shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it 

is in session, for a total period of thir ty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the se ssion or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall th ereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as  the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
 
Power to Remove Difficulties: 
 
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Bill, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not incons istent with the provisions of this 
Bill as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be ma de under this s ection after the 
expiry of five years from the commencement of this Bill. 
 
(2) Every order made under this secti on shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Delegation of Powers: 
 
50. (1) The Authority may, by gene ral or special order in writing, 
delegate to any member, officer of th e Authority or any other person subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its 

powers and functions under this Bill (e xcept the powers under section 47) as 
it may deem necessary. 
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also 
form committees of the members and delegate to them the powers and 
functions of the Authority as may be specified by the regulations. 
 
 
 Application of other Laws not Barred: 
 
51. The provisions of this Bill shall be in addition to and not in 
derogation of any other law for the time being in force. 
 
Savings: 
 
52. Anything done or any action ta ken by the Central Government 
under the Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance 
number F.No. 5/7/2003-ECB&PR dated the 10th October, 2003 and 
notification number F. No. 5/7/2003- ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 
2003, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Bill. 
 
 Repeal and Saving 
 
53. (1)    The Pension Fund Re gulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 2004 is hereby repealed   

(2)    Notwithstanding such repeal , anything done or any action taken 
under the said Act shall be deemed to  have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 

  
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
The Central Government operationa lised the New Pension System 
(NPS) from 1st January, 2004 through a notification dated the 22nd 
December, 2003. The NPS is mandatory  for new recruits to the Central 
Government services (except to the armed forces in the first stage). 
 
2. An early legislative mandate was considered necessary as the NPS 
was already in place wit hout the full architecture and a statutory regulatory 
mechanism. Contributions are not being invested as envisaged under the NPS 
and are being credited, in the interi m, into the public account, earning an 
administered rate of return equal to the rate on the Gene ral Provident Fund. 
Further, more than 40,000 new Central  Government employees are already 
mandatorily covered by the NPS since 1st January, 2004 and it became 
imperative to quickly replace the interim arrangements with proper 
infrastructure under a regulatory fram ework in order to avoid future 
complications. 
 
3. Seven State Governments, na mely, the Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Rajasthan and 
Tamil Nadu have already notified and introduced defined contribution pension 
schemes and intend to join the NPS. Some of the other State Governments 
have also evinced interest in joining the NPS as and when its architecture and 
mechanism are ready. It is, therefore,  crucial that the full architecture and 
regulatory mechanism are quickly put in place. 
 

4. In view of the urgency of the matter, the Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 2004 (Ord. 8 of 2004) was promulgated on 
the 29th December, 2004 to provide for th e establishment of an Authority to 
promote old age income security by establishing, developing and regulating 
pension funds, to protect the interests of subscribers to schemes of pension 
funds and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
5. The aforesaid Act, inter alia, provides for-- 
 
(i) establishing a statutory regulat ory body to be called the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Auth ority (PFRDA) which will undertake 
promotional, developmenta l and regulatory functions in respect of pension 
funds; 
 
(ii) empowering PFRDA to regulat e the New Pension System, as 
amended from time to time by the Central Government; 
 
(iii) empowering PFRDA to perform promotional, developmental and 
regulatory functions relating to pension funds (including authorising and 
regulating intermediaries) through regu lations or guidelines, prescribing 
disclosure standards, protecting the interests of subscribers to schemes of 
pension funds; 
 
(iv) authorising PFRDA to levy fees fo r services rendered, etc., to meet 
its expenses; 
 

(v) empowering PFRDA to impose pe nalties for any vi olation of the 
provisions of the legislation. 
 
6. The Bill seeks to replace the said Act. The notes on clauses explain 
in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
 
P. 
CHIDAMBARAM 
NEW DELHI; 
 
The 12th February, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 ,OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 
 
[Copy of letter No. 5/52/2004-ECB &PR dated the 23rd February, 2005 
from Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok 
Sabha] 
 
The President, having been informed  of the subject matter of the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Devel opment Authority Bill, 2005, has 
recommended, under clause (1) of article 117 and article 274 of the 
Constitution of India, the introduc tion of the Bill in Lok Sabha, and 
consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha u nder clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution. 

 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 1.-- This clause gives the shor t title of the Bill, its extent and 
commencement. Sub-clause (3) provides th at the proposed legislation shall be 
deemed to have come into force on the 29th December, 2004. 
 
Clause 2.-- This clause contains definitions of various expressions used 
in the Bill. The definitions of "Author ity", "central recordkeeping agency", 
"intermediary", "New Pension System", "pension fund" and "point of 
presence" are some of th em. An intermediary includes pension fund, central 
recordkeeping agency, pension fund advi ser, retirement adviser, point of 
presence and such other person or entity connected with collection, 
management, record keeping and distribution of accumulations. 
 
Clause 3.--This clause seeks to provide for the establishment and 
incorporation of an authority to be called the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority. Sub-clause (3) provides that the head office of the 
Authority shall be in the National Cap ital Region. Sub-clause (4) empowers 
the Authority to establish offices at other places in India. 
 
Clause 4.--This clause specifies the composition of the Authority. The 
Authority shall consist of a Chairpers on and not more than five members of 
whom at least three shall be whole- time members to be appointed by the 
Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing 
and having experience and knowledge in economics, finance, law or 
administrative matters with at least one member from each discipline. 
 

Clause 5.--This clause contains pr ovisions in respect of the term of 
office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the 
Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that the Chairperson and every whole-time 
member will hold office for a term of fi ve years or till attaining the age of 
sixty-five years in case of the Chairperson and sixty-two years in case of other 
members, whichever is earlier and they  will be eligible for reappointment. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that part-time members shall be entitled to hold office 
as such for a term not exceeding five years. Sub-clause (3) provides that a 
member can relinquish his office by giving notice of at least thirty days in 
writing to the Central Government or he may be removed by the Central 
Government as per the provisions of clause 6. 
 
Clause 6.--This clause lays down the various grounds on which the 
members of the authority can be removed from office. Sub-clause (1) 
empowers the Central Government to re move the Chairperson or any other 
member on grounds of insolvency, physical or mental incapacity, conviction 
of an offence involving moral turpitud e, acquisition of fi nancial or other 
interest prejudicial to his functions as  a member or abuse of position. Sub-
clause (2) provides that where the gro unds for removal of the Chairperson or 
other member are acquisition of financial or other prejudicial interest or abuse 
of position, he shall not be removed unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
Clause 7.--This clause provides that  the salary, allowances and other 
terms and conditions of se rvice of the Chairperson and whole-time members 
and the allowances of pa rt-time members shall be laid down by the Central 

Government, by rules and that they sha ll not be varied to their disadvantage 
after their appointment. 
 
Clause 8.--This clause provides for bar on future employment of 
Chairperson and whole-time members unde r the Central Government or any 
State Government or in any regulated en tity in the pension sector, for a period 
of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, except with the 
prior approval of the Central Government. 
 
Clause 9.--This clause provides that  the Chairperson shall have the 
powers of general superintendence a nd directions in respect of all 
administrative matters of the Authority. 
 
Clause 10.--This clause contains detailed provisions regarding conduct 
of meetings of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to frame 
regulations regarding rule s of procedure for transaction of business at its 
meetings (including the quorum at such  meetings) and the time and places of 
such meetings. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Chairperson will preside at the 
meetings of the Authority and in hi s absence, the members present may 
choose any other member from amongst themselves to preside over. Sub-
clause (3) provides that the decisions at  the meetings of the Authority will be 
taken by a majority of votes and the Chairperson or the member presiding 
over will have a second or casting vote . Sub-clause (4) provides that any 
member who is a director of a company will disclose any direct or indirect 
pecuniary interest in any matters to be discussed at a meeting of the Authority 
and will not take part in a ny related deliberations or decisions. Further, such 
disclosure is to be recorded in the proceedings of the meeting. 

 
Clause 11.--This clause seeks to pr ovide that mere existence of any 
vacancy or defect in the constitution of  the Authority or any irregularity in 
procedure which does not affect the merits of the case will not invalidate any 
act or proceeding of the Authority. 
 
Clause 12.--This clause empowers  the Authority to appoint such 
officers and other employees as may be necessary for its efficient functioning 
under the proposed legislation. The Au thority is also empowered to make 
regulations providing for laying down th e detailed terms a nd other conditions 
of service of its officers and employees. 
Clause 13.--This clause provides for the extent and application of the 
proposed legislation. The proposed le gislation will apply to the New Pension 
System notified by the Government of I ndia in the Ministry of Finance vide 
notification number 5/7/2003-ECB & PR dated 22nd December, 2003 and any 
other pension scheme not regulated by any other enactme nt. The Authority 
shall make regulations for these pens ion schemes and specify the time limit 
within which these schemes have to c onform to such regulations. Sub-clause 
(3) specifically excludes from the provisi ons of the proposed legislation, the 
schemes or funds under the Coal Mi nes Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1948, the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, the Seamen's Pr ovident Fund Act, 1966, the Assam Tea 
Plantations Provident Fund and Pensi on Fund Scheme Act, 1955, the Jammu 
and Kashmir Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1961, contracts referred to in 
sub-section (11) of section 2 of th e Insurance Act, 1938, and any other 
pension scheme, which the Central Govern ment may, by notification, exempt 
from the application of this the propose d legislation. Further the said sub-

clause excludes from the purview of the proposed legislation, Central 
Government employees appointed be fore 1st January, 2004, persons 
appointed to All-India Services and to pe rsons in public services appointed in 
connection with the affairs of any State,  or such Union territories as may be 
specified by the Central Government by notification. Sub-clause (4), however, 
provides that any State Government may, by notification, extend the New 
Pension System to its employees. S ub-clause (5) enables any person 
specifically excluded under sub-clause (3) to voluntarily join the New Pension 
System. 
 
Clause 14.--This clause contains provisions regarding the duties, 
powers and functions of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that the 
Authority shall have the duty to regul ate, promote and ensure the orderly 
growth of the New Pension System a nd pension schemes to which this Act 
applies and, to protect the interests of subscribers of such System and 
schemes. Sub-clause (2) specifies the powers and functions of the Authority. 
These, inter alia, include regulation of the New Pension System and the 
pension schemes to which the proposed legislation shall apply; approving 
schemes and their terms and condition s, laying down of norms for the 
management of the corpus of the pension funds including investment 
guidelines; registration and regulation of  intermediaries; protection of the 
interests of subscribers to pension funds, establishment of a grievance 
redressal mechanism, adjudication of disputes between intermediaries and 
between intermediaries and subscribers and standardization of information 
dissemination regarding performance of pension funds and performance bench 
marks. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Au thority to exercise certain powers 
which are vested in a civil court unde r the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 

while trying a suit, in respect of (i) the discovery and prod uction of books of 
account and other documents, at places  and times specified by the Authority; 
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attend ance of persons and examining them 
on oath; (iii) inspection of  any books, registers and other documents of 
intermediaries, at any place; (iv) issu ing commissions for the examination of 
witnesses or documents; and (v) any ot her matter which may be specified by 
Central Government by rules. Sub-clause (4) provides that pending enquiry or 
investigation, the Authority may, by an order, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, in the interests of subscribers (i) restrain persons from participating in 
any scheme; (ii) restrain any office bearer of an intermediary from acting as 
such; (iii) impound and retain the proceeds under the scheme in respect of any 
activity which is under investigation;  (iv) attach bank accounts of any 
intermediary or any person associated with the scheme who is in any manner 
involved in violation of any of the prov isions of the proposed legislation or 
the rules or regulations made thereunde r. This can be done for a period not 
exceeding one month, with the approval of  a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class having jurisdiction. However, only the bank account or any transaction 
entered therein, relating to the proceeds actually involved in the violation of 
any of the provisions of the proposed le gislation or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder can be attached. Furt her, the Authority can direct any 
intermediary or any person associated with the scheme in any manner not to 
dispose of or alienate an asset form ing part of any ac tivity which is under 
investigation. However, the Authority has to give such intermediaries or 
persons concerned an opportunity of being heard. 
 
Clause 15.--This clause seeks to empower the Authority to issue 
directions to intermediaries or pers ons or entities associated with pension 

funds if it is satisfied, after an inquiry, that it is necessary to do so in the 
interests of subscribers or orderly de velopment of New Pension System or a 
pension scheme to which the proposed le gislation applies or to prevent the 
conduct of affairs of any su ch intermediary or othe r persons or entities in a 
manner detrimental to the interests of subscribers or to secure the proper 
management of any such intermediary or  person or entity. However, before or 
after passing such orders, the Authority has to give an opportunity of hearing 
to such intermediaries, entities or persons concerned. 
 
Clause 16.--This clause contains provisions relating to powers to 
investigation. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to direct a person 
(Investigating Authority) to inves tigate and report on the affairs of 
intermediaries or persons associated with a pension fund if the Authority has a 
reasonable ground to believe that the activities of the pension fund are being 
conducted in a manner detrimen tal to the interests of subscribers or that any 
intermediary or any person associated with the schemes of the pension fund 
has violated any of the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules, 
regulations made thereunder or directi ons issued by the Authority. Sub-clause 
(2) seeks to provide that without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 to 
241 of the Companies Act, 1956, in cas e of companies, every employee and 
every intermediary or every person asso ciated with the pension fund has to 
preserve and produce all the books, re gisters and other documents of, or 
relating to the company, the intermediary  or such person, which are in their 
custody or power, to the Investigating Authority or authorised person. Sub-
clause (3) empowers the Investigating Au thority to require any intermediary 
or person associated with the pension fund to furnish any material which is 
relevant or necessary for the purposes of its investigation. Sub-clause (4) 

provides that the Investigating Authority can keep such material in its custody 
for six months and thereafter it has to return the same. However, the 
Investigating Authority can call for the material if needed again. Further, if the 
person on whose behalf the material is  produced requires certified copies of 
the same, then the Investigating Author ity has to give certified copies. Sub-
clause (5) empowers the Investigati ng Authority to examine on oath, any 
intermediary or any person associated with the pension fund in any manner, in 
relation to the affairs of his business. Sub-clause (6) of the proposed section 
requires that notes of any examination under have to be taken down in writing, 
read over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be 
used in evidence against him.  Sub-clause (7) provides that if any person fails 
without reasonable cause to produce any relevant material or information to 
the Investigating Authority or authoris ed person or to appear before the 
Investigating Authority personally when required to do so or to answer any 
question which is put to him by the Investigating Authority while under 
examination; or to sign the notes of any examination, then he will be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term  which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, which may extend to twenty five crore rupees, or with both, and 
also with a further fine which may ex tend to ten lakh rupees for every day 
after the first day during which the failure or refusal continues. 
 
Clause 17.--This clause contains provisions relating to powers of search 
and seizure of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that if the Authority has 
information causing it to believe that any person, who is required to do so, 
does not or will not provide  books, documents or othe r material relevant for 
an investigation; or that the provision s of this Act have been or may be 
contravened; or that any cl aim to be settled by the inte rmediary is likely to be 

rejected or settled at a figure higher or lower than a reasonable amount; or that 
any illegal fees and charges have been tran sacted or are likely to be transacted 
by an intermediary; or that relevant mate rial are likely to be tampered with, 
falsified or manufactured, then the Aut hority can authorise any officer of the 
Authority, who is equivalent in rank to that of a Gazetted Officer of the 
Government, to enter and search any bui lding or place where he suspects such 
books, documents and other material ma y be kept, seize all such material, 
place marks of identification on them, take extracts from them or make copies. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that the authorised officer may requisition the services 
of any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government, or of both, 
to assist him in the exercising the powers of search and seizure. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that if it is not practicable to seize any relevant book, document and 
other material, the authorised officer  can serve an order on the person in 
immediate possession or control of the relevant book, document or other 
material, as the case may be, that he sh all not remove, part with or otherwise 
deal with them except with the previ ous permission of such officer. Sub-
clause (4) empowers the authorised of ficer to examine on oath any person 
who is found to be in possession or co ntrol of any books, accounts or other 
documents, and any statement made by such person during such examination 
may thereafter be used in evidence in any proceeding under the proposed 
legislation. Sub-clause (5) provides th at the books, accounts, papers and other 
documents seized shall not be retained by the authorised officer for more than 
one hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless he records the 
reasons in writing and obtains the approval of the Authority. However, the 
Authority cannot authorise the retention of  the same for more than thirty days 
after all the related proceedings under th e proposed legislation are completed. 
Sub-clause (6) provides that the person from whose custody the books, 

accounts and other documents are seized may make copies of the same and 
take extracts from them, in the presence of the authorised officer or any other 
person empowered by him. Sub-clause (7 ) provides that if a person legally 
entitled to the books, and other documents seized objects for any reason to the 
approval given by the Authority for rete ntion of the same, he may make an 
application to the Central Government for their return. Sub-clause (8) 
provides that on receipt of the above application the Central Government may, 
after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it 
thinks fit. Sub-clause (9) provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 relating to searches and seizures shall apply to the extent 
possible, to every search and seizure. Sub-clause (10) empowers the Central 
Government to make rules in relation to search or seizure. 
 
Clause 18.--This clause empowers th e Authority to ensure compliance 
with the provisions of the proposed le gislation. If the Authority finds, after 
causing an inquiry to be made, that any person has violated, or is likely to 
violate, any provisions of the proposed le gislation, or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder, the Authority may pass  an order requiring such person to 
cease and desist from committing or causing such violation. 
 
Clause 19.--This clause contains pr ovisions regarding management of 
central recordkeeping agency or pens ion funds by an Admi nistrator to be 
appointed by the Central Government. Sub-clause (1) provides that if at any 
time the Authority has reason to believe that the central recordkeeping agency 
or pension fund is acting in a manner likely to be prejudicial to the interests of 
subscribers, it may, after giving an oppo rtunity to it of being heard, make a 
report to the Central Government. Sub-cl ause (2) provides that if the Central 

Government, after considering the above report considers that it is necessary 
or proper to do so, it may appoint an Administrator to manage the affairs of 
the central recordkeeping agency or pe nsion fund, as the case may be, under 
the direction and control of the Au thority, in a manner specified by 
notification. 
 
Clause 20.--This clause describes th e New Pension System as notified 
by the Government of India in the Mi nistry of Finance vide notification 
number F. No. 5/7/2003-ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, as 
amended from time to time. It also sp ecifies the basic features of the New 
Pension System. These are- (a) every subscriber shall have an individual 
pension account; (b) the functions of recordkeeping, accounting and switching 
of options by the subscriber shall be effected by the central recordkeeping 
agency; (c) there shall be a choice of multiple pension funds and schemes; (d) 
individual pension accounts will be portable in case of change of employment; 
(e) collection and transmission of cont ributions and instructions shall be 
through points of presence to the cent ral recordkeeping agency; (f) there shall 
not be any implicit or explicit assura nce of benefits except market based 
guarantee mechanism to be purchased by the subscriber; (g) a subscriber shall 
not exit from the New Pension System  except as specified by the Central 
Government by, notification; and (h) at exit, the subscriber shall purchase an 
annuity from a life insurance compa ny as specified under the New Pension 
System. 
 
Clause 21.--This clause contains provisions regarding the Central 
Recordkeeping Agency. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to appoint a 
central recordkeeping agency by granting a certificate of registration. The 

Authority may, in public interest, appoint more than one central recordkeeping 
agency. Sub-clause (2) provides that the central recordkeeping agency shall be 
responsible for receiving funds and inst ructions from subscribers through the 
points of presence, transmitting such inst ructions and transferring such funds 
to pension funds, effecting switching in structions received from subscribers 
and discharging such other duties and functions, as may be assigned to it 
under the certificate of registration or as may be determined by regulations. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that all the assets and properties of the central 
recordkeeping agency are regulated assets. When the certificate of registration 
of the central recordkeepi ng agency expires or is revoked then the Authority 
can appropriate and take over the regu lated assets. However, the central 
recordkeeping agency will be entitled to be compensated the fair value of the 
regulated assets, as determined by re gulations, unless the revocation is on 
account of any violation of the conditions  of the certificate of registration or 
the provisions of the proposed legislation or the regulations. 
 
Clause 22.--This clause contains  provisions regarding points of 
presence. Sub-clause (1) empowers the Authority to permit points of presence, 
by granting them registration certificat es, to receive contributions and 
instructions, transmit them to the central recordkeeping agency and pay out 
benefits to subscribers in accordance  with the regulations made by the 
Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that  a point of presence shall function in 
accordance with the terms of its regist ration certificate and regulations made 
under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 23.--This clause contains provisions regarding pension funds. 
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Au thority may, by granting registration 

certificates, permit persons to act as  pension funds for the purpose of 
receiving contributions, accumulating th em and making payments to the 
subscriber as specified by regulations. Sub-clause (2) provides that the 
number of pension funds shall be determined by regulations and the Authority 
may, in public interest, vary the num ber of pension funds. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that a pension fund shall functio n in accordance with the terms of its 
registration certificate and regulations made under the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause (4) provides that the pe nsion fund shall manage schemes in 
accordance with the regulations. 
 
Clause 24.--This clause provides for the registration of intermediaries 
including central recordkeeping agency, pension funds and points of presence. 
Sub-clause (1) provides that no intermedia ry, to the extent regulated under the 
proposed legislation, can commence a ny activity relating to a pension fund 
except as provided in the registration certif icate. Sub-clause (2) provides that 
every application for grant of a registration certificate under the proposed 
legislation shall be in the form and manner and accompanied by such fees as 
determined by the Authority by regula tions made by it. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that the Authority may gran t the registration certificate, after 
considering the application and subject to  such terms and conditions as it may 
specify. Sub-clause (4) provides that th e Authority may, by order, suspend or 
cancel a certificate of registration in  a manner determined by regulations. 
However, it can only do so after givi ng a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the person concerned. 
 
Clause 25.--This clause contains provisions regarding penalties for 
failure by an intermediary or any other person to comply with provisions of 

this proposed legislation, rules, regul ations and other directions. Sub-clause 
(1) lays down certain penalties. If a ny person, who is required under the 
proposed legislation or rules or regul ations made thereunder to obtain a 
certificate of registration from the Authority for carrying on any activity under 
the proposed legislation, carries on such  activities without doing so, he shall 
be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each da y during which the failure 
continues or one crore rupees, whichever is less. Further, if any person who is 
required to comply with the terms and conditions of certificate of registration 
fails to do so, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for each day 
during which the failure continues or one  crore rupees, whichever is less. If 
any person who is required to furnis h any information,  document, books, 
returns or report to the Authority, fails to furnish the same within the time 
specified by the Authority, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
one crore rupees or five times the amount  of profits made or losses avoided, 
whichever is higher. If any person who is required to maintain books of 
accounts or records, fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
of one lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues or five 
times the amount of profits made or loss es avoided, whichever is higher. Sub-
clause (2) provides that if any person, who is required under the proposed 
legislation or the rules or regulations  made thereunder, to enter into an 
agreement with his client, fails to do so , he shall be liable to a penalty of one 
lakh rupees for each day during which the failure continues or  five times the 
amount of profits made or losses avoide d, whichever is higher. Sub-clause (3) 
provides that if any intermediary regist ered with the Authority, after having 
been called upon by the Authority, in writi ng, to redress the grievances of 
subscribers, fails to do so within the tim e stipulated by the Authority, he shall 
be liable to a penalty of not more than  one crore rupees or five times the 

amount of profits made or losses avoide d, whichever is higher. Sub-clause (4) 
provides that if any pers on, who is registered under this Act as an 
intermediary, fails to segregate moneys of the client or clients or uses the 
moneys for self or for any other client , he shall be liable to a penalty not 
exceeding one crore rupees or five times  the amount of profits made or losses 
avoided, whichever is higher. Sub-clause (5) pr ovides that whoever fails to 
comply with any provision of this Act, rules, regulations or  directions issued 
by the Authority for which no separate penalty has been provided, shall be 
liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees or five times the 
amount of profits made or losses avoided, whichever is higher. 
 
Clause 26.--This clause provides that all sums realised by way of 
penalties under the proposed legislation shall be credited to the Subscriber 
Education and Protection Fund. 
 
Clause 27.--This clause empowers the Authority to adjudicate on 
matters relating to penalties. 
 
Sub-clause (1) provides that for the purposes of adjudging on penalties, 
the Authority shall appoint any of its officers not below the rank specified by 
regulations to be an adjudicating officer  for holding an inquiry as determined 
by regulations, after giving the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard for the purpose of imposing any penalty. Sub-clause (2) provides 
the adjudicating officer with the power  to summon and enforce the attendance 
of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give 
evidence or to produce any relevant doc ument. If, on such inquiry, he is 
satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the matters referred to in the 

section on penalties, he may recommend a penalty to the member in charge of 
investigation and surveillance. Sub-clause  (3) provides that the penalty shall 
be imposed by a member other than the member in charge of investigation and 
surveillance. Further, while adjudging the quantum of penalty the member has 
to take into account the amount of di sproportionate gain or unfair advantage 
made as a result of the default the am ount of loss caused to subscribers and 
the repetitive nature of the default. 
 
Clause 28.--This clause provides for attachment of assets and 
supersession of management of intermed iaries. Sub-clause (1) provides that 
on receiving an application from aggrieve d persons for an interim measure of 
protection, the Authority can pass an or der for the detention, preservation, 
interim custody or sale of any asset or property which is regulated by the 
provisions of the proposed legislation,  securing any pension funds, monies 
and other assets and properties of th e pension fund interim injunction or 
appointment of an administrator, the attachment of assets of the pension fund 
and such other interim meas ures as the Authority may consider it to be just 
and necessary. Sub-clause (2) provides that if on a complaint received by the 
Authority or suo motu, the Authority, after conducting an enquiry comes to a 
conclusion that the governing board or board of directors or the persons in 
control of any intermediary, to the extent regulated under the proposed 
legislation, are indulging in any activ ity which is in contravention of the 
provisions of the proposed legislation or  the regulations made thereunder, it 
may supersede the governing board or bo ard of directors or management of 
the intermediary in accordance with the provisions of the regulations. 
 

Clause 29.--This clause deals with offences. Sub-clause (1) provides 
that if any person contravenes or at tempts to contravene or abets the 
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder,  he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty 
five crore rupees or with both. Sub-clau se (2) provides that if any person fails 
to pay the penalty imposed by the member or fails to comply with any of the 
directions or orders issued by the member, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term of at least one month, which may extend to ten years, 
or with fine, which may extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both. 
 
Clause 30.--This clause empowers th e Central Government to grant 
immunity. Sub-clause (1) provides th at the Central Government, on the 
recommendation of the Authority, ma y grant immunity from prosecution and 
from the imposition of penalties, to any pe rson alleged to have violated any of 
the provisions of the proposed legislati on or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder, if he makes a full and true  disclosure regarding the violation. 
However, the recommendati on of the Authority is not binding on Central 
Government, and moreover, if the pros ecution proceedings were instituted 
before the application for immunity  was received, then the Central 
Government cannot grant immunity. Sub-clause (2) empo wers the Central 
Government to withdraw the immunity if it is satisfied that the person 
concerned had, during th e proceedings, not complie d with the condition on 
which the immunity was granted or had given false evidence. 
 
Clause 31.--This clause seeks to exempt the Authority from tax on 
wealth, income, profits and gains. 

 
Clause 32.--This clause provides fo r cognizance of offences by court. 
Sub-clause (1) provides that no cour t can take cognizance  of any offence 
punishable under the proposed legislatio n or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder, except on a complaint made  by the Authority. Sub-clause (2) 
provides that no court inferior to that of a Court of Session can try any offence 
punishable under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 33.--This clause provides for appeal to the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) provides that any person aggrieved by an order made 
by the Authority or by an adjudicati ng officer may appeal before the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal.  Sub-clause (2) provides that such appeals have 
to be filed within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the order appealed 
against and also empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding 
the form, manner and fees for such appeals. However, the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that on receipt of an appeal, the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal may pass orders after giving th e parties to the appeal an opportunity 
being heard. Sub-clause (4) provides that the Securities Appellate Tribunal 
has to send a copy of every order made by it to the Authority, the parties to the 
appeal and to the adjudicating officers concerned. Sub-clause (5) provides that 
the Securities Appellate Tribunal has to deal with an appeal filed before it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour to dispose of it finally within six 
months from the date on which it received the appeal. Sub-clause (6) provides 
empowers the Central Government to ma ke rules regarding the procedure to 
be followed by the Securities Appellate Tribunal for dealing with an appeal. 

 
Clause 34.--This clause lays down th at no civil court can entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer 
appointed under the proposed legislation or a Securities Appellate Tribunal is 
empowered to determine under the proposed  legislation. Further, no court or 
other authority shall be competent to grant an injunction in respect of any 
action taken or to be taken as empowered under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 35.--This clause provides that any person aggrieved by any 
decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal under the proposed 
legislation may file an appeal to th e Supreme Court on any question of law 
arising out of such order. This has to be done within sixty days from the date 
of communication of the decision or or der. However, the Supreme Court may 
allow an appeal to be filed within a furt her sixty days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within sixty 
days. 
 
Clause 36.--This clause provides th at the Central Government may 
sanction grants to the Authority afte r due appropriation made by Parliament, 
to be utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 37.--This clause contains provisions regarding the Pension 
Regulatory and Development Fund. Sub-clause (1) provides for the 
constitution of the Fund into which all Government grants, fees and charges 
received by the Authority and all sums received by the Authority from other 
sources decided by the Central Governme nt, will be credited. Sub-clause (2) 
provides that the Fund is to be used fo r meeting the salaries, allowances and 

other remuneration of the Chairpers on and other members and officers and 
other employees of the Authority and other expenses of the Authority in 
connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the 
proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 38.--This clause contains pr ovisions regarding the Subscriber 
Education and Protection Fund. Sub-clause  (1) provides for the establishment 
of the Subscriber Education and Protec tion Fund. Sub-clause (2) provides that 
all grants and donations given to the Fund by the Central Government, State 
Governments, companies or any other institutions for the purposes of the 
Fund, the interest or other income re ceived out of the investments made from 
the Fund and penalties received by the Aut hority will be credited to the Fund. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Fund shall be administered and utilised by the 
Authority for protection of the interest s of subscribers in accordance with 
regulations made for the purpose. 
 
Clause 39.--This clause contains provisions regarding accounts and 
audit of the Authority. Sub-clause (1 ) provides that the Authority has to 
maintain proper accounts and other rele vant records and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts according to rules made by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comp troller and Auditor-General of India. Sub-clause 
(2) provides that the accounts of th e Authority shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of Indi a. Sub-clause (3) provides that the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of I ndia and any other person-appointed by 
him of the Authority shall have the same rights, privileges and authority as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General, genera lly has in connection with the audit 
of Government accounts and can dema nd the production of books, accounts 

and other documents and in spect any of the offices of the Authority. Sub-
clause (4) provides that the audited ac counts of the Authority have to be 
forwarded annually to the Central Gove rnment which then has to lay them 
before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 40.--This clause empowers Central Government to issue 
directions on matters of policy. Sub-clause (1) provides that directions on 
matters of policy issued, in writing, by Central Government will be binding on 
the Authority. As far as practicable, Central Government should give the 
Authority an opportunity to express its views before giving any such direction. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that the decision of the Cen tral Government, whether 
a question is one of policy or not, shall be final. 
 
Clause 41.--This clause contains provisions regarding supersession of 
the Authority by Central Government . Sub-clause (1) empowers Central 
Government to supersede the Authority  for a maximum period of six months 
by issuing a notification, specifying the reasons. However, be fore issuing any 
such notification, the Central Government has to give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed 
supersession and consider any representati ons of the Authority. This step can 
be taken by Central Government if it is  of the opinion that the Authority is 
unable to discharge its functions or perform its duties on account of 
circumstances beyond its control or if th e Authority has pers istently defaulted 
in complying with any direction issued by the Central Government or in the 
discharge of its functions or performance of its duties and as a result of such 
default, the financial posit ion of the Authority or the administration of the 
Authority has deteriorated; or in public  interest. Sub-clause (2) provides that 

when the notification superseding the Au thority is published, the Chairperson 
and other members have to vacate th eir offices as from the date of 
supersession. Further, a ll the powers, functions an d duties of the Authority 
shall be exercised and discharged by the Central Government and all 
properties owned or controlled by the Au thority shall vest in the Central 
Government, until the Authority is reconstituted. Sub-clause (3) provides that 
the Central Government shall reconstit ute the Authority on or before the 
expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification. Sub-
clause (4) provides that the Central Government shall, as soon as possible 
place a copy of the notification regardin g supersession of the Authority and a 
full report of any action taken by it, before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 42.--This clause contains pr ovisions regarding furnishing of 
returns, etc., to Central Government. Sub-clause (1) provides that the 
Authority shall furnish to the Central Government returns, statements and 
other particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the 
promotion and development of the pension industry as required by Central 
Government. The Central Government sh all by rules, lay down the form and 
manner of making such returns, statements , etc. Sub-clause (2) provides that 
the Authority shall, within nine months after the close of each financial year, 
submit to the Central Government a report on its activities during the previous 
financial year, including the activities for promotion and development of 
schemes of pension funds regulated under the proposed legislation. Sub-clause 
(3) provides that copies of the reports sh all be laid, as soon as possible, after 
they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 

Clause 43.--This clause provides that the Chairperson, other members, 
officers and other employees of the Aut hority shall be deemed to be public 
servants, when carrying out any of the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 44.--This clause provides that prosecution or other legal 
proceedings can be taken against the Ce ntral Government or the Authority or 
any of their officers, etc., for anythi ng done in good faith under the proposed 
legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder. 
 
Clause 45.--This clause contains  provisions regarding offences by 
companies. Sub-clause (1) provides th at if an offence under the proposed 
legislation has been committed by a compa ny, then every person in charge of 
or responsible for the conduct of busi ness of the company at the time the 
offence was committed shall be deemed to  be guilty of the offence and can be 
proceeded against and punished accordingl y. However, if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of su ch offence, then he shall not be 
liable to any punishment. Sub-clause (2), however, provides that if any 
offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a company and 
it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the consent or 
connivance of any officer of the company, then he shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and can be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
 
Clause 46.--This clause empower s the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various 
matters in respect of whic h Central Government may ma ke rules. These, inter 

alia, include, the salary, allowances a nd the other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, whole-time members and part-time members; functions which 
may be performed by the Authority in addition to those already mentioned in 
this Act; the procedure to be followed by the authorised officer for searches 
and seizures; the form, manner and the fee for appeals before the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal; the procedure to be  followed by the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal in dealing with an appeal and; the form in which the Authority shall 
maintain an annual statement of account s and provide returns and reports to 
the Central Government. 
 
Clause 47.--This clause empowers the Authority to make, by 
notification in the Official Gazette regul ations for carrying out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. Such regulations should be consistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder. Sub-
clause (2) enumerates the various matte rs in respect of which the Authority 
can make regulations. These inter alia, include, the time, places and procedure 
for meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Authority, the 
terms and other conditions of service of  the officers and other employees of 
the Authority, regulations for pensio n schemes not regulated by any other 
enactment; mechanisms for redressing grievances of subscribers, the form and 
manner in which books of account shall be maintained and statement of 
accounts shall be rendere d by intermediaries; the duties and functions of 
central recordkeeping agency, the determination of compensation of fair value 
of the regulated assets payable to cen tral recordkeeping agency, regulations 
governing the functioning of pension funds and points of presence, the manner 
of managing schemes by pension funds, the form and manner of application 

for grant of registration certificate, c onditions for grant of the certificate and 
the accompanying fee. 
 
Clause 48.--This clause provides th at every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Authority under the proposed 
legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 49.--This clause seeks to em power the Central Government to 
remove difficulties. Sub-clause (1) provid es that if any difficulty arises in 
giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central 
Government may make provisions, by order, published in the Official Gazette, 
for removing the difficulty. These orde rs must be consistent with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation. However, no order shall be made under 
this clause after the expiry of fi ve years from the commencement of the 
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) provides that every order made under this 
clause shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, be fore each House of 
Parliament. 
 
Clause 50.--This clause provides for delegation of powers by the 
Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that the Authority may delegate its powers 
(other than the power to make regulati ons) and functions by general or special 
order in writing, to any member, officer  of the Authority or any other person 
subject to conditions, if any, specified in the order. Sub-clause (2) provides 
that the Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also form 
committees of the members and delegate to them the powers and functions of 
the Authority as may be specified by the regulations. 
 

Clause 51.--This clause provides th at the provisions of the proposed 
legislation shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of 
any other law for the time being in force. 
 
Clause 52.--This clause is a savings clause providing that anything done 
or any action taken by the Central G overnment under the Resolution of the 
Government of India in the Ministry  of Finance number F.No. 5/7/2003-
ECB&PR dated the 10th October, 2003 and notification number F. No. 
5/7/2003-ECB & PR dated the 22nd December, 2003, shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corre sponding provisions of the proposed 
legislation. 
 
Clause 53.--This clause seeks to repeal the Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 2004 (Ord. 8 of 2004).  Sub-clause (2) saves 
all things done and all ac tions taken under the said Act by deeming it to have 
been done or taken under the corre sponding provisions of the proposed 
legislation. 

 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that  the Central Government may, from 
such date as may be appointed by it, establish for the purposes of the proposed 
legislation an authority to be ca lled the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority. In terms of clause 7 of the Bill, the Central 
Government will prescribe the salary, allowances and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairpers on and other members of the Authority. 
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that th e Authority will appoint officers and 
other employees as it considers necessary  for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under the proposed legislation and frame regulations regarding their 
terms and other conditions of service. 
 
2. Clause 36 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may 
make grants to the Authority to be utilized for the purposes of the proposed 
legislation, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law. 
 
3. Clause 37 of the Bill provides fo r the constitution of a fund to be 
called the Pension Regulatory and De velopment Fund into which all 
Government grants, fees and charges received by the Authority and all sums 
received by the Authority from othe r sources decided by the Central 
Government shall be credited. The Fund is  to be used for meeting the salaries, 
allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, other members and 
officers and other employees of the Au thority and other expenses of the 
Authority in connection with the disc harge of its functions and for the 
purposes of the proposed legislation. 

 
4. Clause 38 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Subscriber 
Education and Protection Fund into whic h all grants and donations given to 
the Fund by the Central Government, St ate Governments, companies or any 
other institutions for the purposes of th e Fund, the interest or other income 
received out of the investments made  from the Fund and the amount by way 
of penalties received by the Authority will be credited. The Fund is to be 
administered and utilised by the Authority for the protection of the interests of 
subscribers in accordance with the regu lations made by the Authority for the 
purpose. 
 
5. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately 
eight crores of rupees in the first y ear of establishment of the Authority, 
including grants given to the Author ity, to be borne by the Central 
Government, for the purposes mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4 above. This 
would include non-recurring capital expenditure of three crores of rupees and 
a further recurring expenditure of five cr ores of rupees on salaries, rent for 
office accommodation, etc. Eventually, it is expected that major recurring 
expenses of the Authority would be funde d out of the fees and charges as may 
be received by the Authority. 
 
6. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve 
any other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, rule s for carrying out the provisions of the 
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of 
which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia , include matters 
relating to the salary, allowances and ot her terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and other members of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority, the powers and functions of the Authority in addition 
to those already specified in the Bill, the procedure and other matters related 
to the exercise of powers  of search and seizure by the Authority, the form, 
manner and fee for filing an appeal be fore the Securities Appellate Tribunal 
and the procedure to be followed by th e Securities Appellate Tribunal in 
dealing with appeals, the form in wh ich the Authority shall maintain annual 
statement of accounts and the time with in which and the form and manner in 
which returns and reports are to be made by the Authority to the Central 
Government. 
 
2. Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority to make, by no tification in the Official Gazette, 
regulations for carrying out the provision s of the proposed legislation. Such 
regulations should be consistent with the provisions of the proposed 
legislation and the rules ma de thereunder. The matters in respect of which the 
Authority may make regulations, inter alia, include matters relating to the 
transaction of business of the Authority at its meetings (including the quorum 
at such meetings) and the time and plac es for such meetings, the terms and 

conditions of service of the officer s and employees of the Authority, 
regulations for pension schemes not regulated by any other enactment, 
establishing a grievance redressal mech anism for subscribers, the form and 
manner of maintaining books and statement of accounts by intermediaries, the 
duties and functions of the central recordkeeping agency and the 
determination of compensation of fair va lue of the regulated assets payable to 
the central recordkeeping agency, the f unctioning of point of presence and the 
manner of receiving contributions and in structions and transmitting them to 
the central recordkeeping agency and paying out benefits to subscribers, the 
number of pension funds and the manner in which a pension fund may receive 
contributions, accumulate them and make payments to  the subscribers and the 
manner of managing schemes by the pension funds, registration of 
intermediaries, the procedure for hol ding inquiry by adjudicating officers, 
matters relating to supercession of the governing board or board of directors 
of intermediaries, the manner of administering and utilising the Subscriber 
Education and Protection Fund and delegation of powers and functions to 
committees of members of the Authority. 
 
3. The rules and regulations made under the proposed legislation shall 
be required to be laid before the Parliament. 
 
4. The matters in respect of which ru les or regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. Th e delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 

 
Memorandum explaining the modifica tions contained in the Bill to 
replace the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2004 
 
Apart from changes of a formal drafting nature, the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority B ill, 2005 which seeks to repeal and 
replace the Pension Fund Regulatory an d Development Authority Act, 2004 
closely follows the said Act with slight modifications as explained below:-- 
 
(1) Sub-clause (2) of clause 2 of th e Bill has been modified rearranging 
the various Central Acts mentioned therein. 
 
(2) Clause 10 of the Bill correspon ds to section 10 of the Act. 
Subsection (5) of section 10 of the Act has been omitted as the provisions of 
the same are contained in sub-section (1) thereof. Consequential modifications 
have been made in sub-clause (2) of clause 47 of the Bill. 
 
(3) Sub-clause (3) of clause 13 of the Bill has been revised rearranging 
the enactments mentioned therein. Sub- clause (4) of clause 13 has been 
modified so as to make the intention more clear. 
 
(4) Sub-clauses (6) and (7) of clau se 16 of the Bill correspond to sub-
sections (7) and (6) respectively of s ection 16 of the Act.  The re-arrangement 
of provisions has been made for clarity and elegance. 
 
 
 