23
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
TWENTY THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2005/ Bhadra, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2004-2005)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.8.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 29.8.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2005/Bhadra, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 23
Price : Rs. 23.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER IR eport .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................. 27
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 34
C
HAPTER VR ecommendations/observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 45
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 22 August,
2004 .............................................................................................. 46
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report
of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment) .......................... 48
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
(iii)

26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Twenty-Third Report on action taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure
and Disinvestment).
2. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
20 August, 2004. The Government furnished the written replies
indicating action taken on the recommendations in batches on
19 October 2004, 20 October 2004, 25 January 2005, 8 February 2005
and 3 March 2005 respectively. The draft action taken report was
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
22nd August, 2005.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
25 August, 2005 Chairman,
03 Bhadra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
Action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their First Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2004-2005) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.8.04.
1.2 Action taken notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 13
(Para Nos. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 36, 61, 83, 84, 85, 87,
99, 100, 138)
(Total 16) (Chapter II)
(ii) R ecommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12
(Para Nos. 40, 41, 45, 46, 55, 101, 109, 110, 111, 135)
(Total 10) (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 7, 8, 11
(Para Nos. 27, 56, 74, 75, 76, 84, 85, 86, 124, 125, 126)
(Total 11) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited
(Nil) (Chapter (V)

2
1.3 The Committee desire that replies in respect of the
recommendations contained in Chapter I should be furnished to the
Committee expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Inflation
Recommendation (No. 1, Para No. 27)
The Committee were of the view that inflation had hit the senior
citizens the most and they desired the Government to ensure that
there were attractive saving schemes for them. Tax free RBI bonds,
offering annual interest of 6.5% was one such instrument which enabled
people to park their savings, however, the same had since been
withdrawn. It had resulted in causing much distress, particularly to
the senior citizens many of whom were availing this facility. The
Committee, therefore, recommended the Government to consider
reintroducing these tax free bonds, apart from the scheme which had
recently been introduced for the senior citizens and for those who had
attained the age of 55 years and taken VRS.
2. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance
replied as follows:
“Inflation hurts everyday particularly the poor whose incomes are
not indexed to prices. High inflation puts a pressure on interest
rates leading to a rise in project costs and investment. It also
reduces real interest rates affecting adversely savings rates.
Therefore, containment of inflation remains high on the agenda of
the government. Anti-inflationary policies of the government include
strict fiscal and monetary discipline, rationalisation of excise and
import duties of essential commodities so that there is no undue
burden on the poor, effective supply-demand management of
essential items through liberal tariff and trade policies, and
strengthening the public distribution system.
On the 18th August 2004 government reduced customs and excise
duties on selected petroleum products to keep their domestic retail
prices in check in the face of the global oil price surge to a record
high. Customs duty on petrol, diesel, LPG and kerosene were
reduced by 5 per cent each, while excise duty was reduced by 3
per cent each for petrol and diesel and 4 per cent for kerosene.

3
Duty Concessions
(In per cent)
Customs Excise
New Old New Old
Petrol 15 20 23 26
Diesel 15 20 8 11
Kerosene 5 10 12 16
LPG 5 10 8 8
• On the 20th August 2004 government reduced customs
duties on non-alloy steel and ships for breaking to 5 per
cent from 10 and 15 per cent respectively in order to check
high inflation in metals and metal products. Melting scrap
of iron and steel was fully exempted from customs duty.
Customs Duty
 Product category New Old
Non alloy steel 5 10
Ships for 5 15
breaking
Iron and Steel Nil 5
scrap
•T o check the liquidity overhang in the system. On September
11, 2004 the Reserve Bank of India has hiked the cash reserve
ratio (CRR) to be maintained by banks, by 50 basis points
to 5 per cent of their demand and time liabilities. The CRR
will be raised in two stages by 25 basis points each: First,
from the fortnight beginning September 18 and then from
October 2. The move is expected to take out around
$s 8,000 crore worth of liquidity from the system. The money
supply has been hovering at 16.6 per cent as compared to
14 per cent last year.
• In a bid to control on the prices of edible oils and make its
availability easily, the Government on September 16, 2004
cut tariff values on many vegetable oils by around $ 50 per
tonne. The tariff value on crude palm oil was cut to
$454 a ton from $504/ton; RBD palm oil to $489/ton from
$543/ton from $532/ton; RBD palmolein to $497/ton from
$552/ton; palmolein to $488/ton form $542/ton and crude
soybean oil to $565/ton form $628/ton.”

4
3. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply of the
Government is silent on the issue pertaining to reintroduction of
saving schemes for senior citizens and persons who have attained
the age of 55 years and availed VRS. Taking note of the fact that
inflation had affected the senior citizens the most and after realizing
their financial plight the Committee had desired the Government to
introduce some attractive savings schemes and tax free bonds for
senior citizens after the withdrawal of Tax Free Bonds Schemes. The
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the
Government to consider the reintroduction of tax free bonds and
formulate attractive savings schemes for senior citizens expeditiously.
Non-Life Insurance—Fall in market share of Public Sector Insurance
Companies
Recommendation (No. 5, Para No. 56)
4. The Committee were distressed to note that the management
expenses of General Insurance Companies continued to be in excess of
stipulated amount. Only New India Insurance Company had managed
to limit these expenses within the permissible limit during the years
2001-02 and 2002-03. But thereafter it had increased tremendously. It
was particularly regrettable to note that the insurance companies
continued to incur excessive expenditure on management and IRDA
had failed to effectively regulate this despite Committee’s earlier
recommendation to this effect. The Committee, therefore, recommended
that this issue should be taken by IRDA on priority basis. The
Government should hasten the process of modernisation/
computerisation of the general insurance companies so that such
expenses were reduced and their services were improved Besides, they
(insurance companies) should introduce new products to attract the
masses and approach the untapped areas in a big way.
5. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs and Expenditure) have stated as under:
“The public sector insurance companies have already initiated the
process of computerisation and networking of their offices. It is
expected that implementation and use of IT in the public sector
general insurance companies would help in controlling management
expenses. Further, with an effort to cut down the wage bill, which
forms a substantial portion of management expenses, the companies
have implemented Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme to right
size their employees strength. All these measures are expected to
reduce the management expenses in the long run. Apart from the
cost cutting measures, the companies have also initiated steps for
increasing their business through corporate tie ups, opening of
extension counters in rural areas and introduction in innovative

5
products. With the control of expenses and increase in business, it
is expected that management expenses ratio will be brought down
to the permissible limit.”
6. The Committee are constrained to find that their repeated
recommendations for cutting the management expenses have not been
taken by Government/IRDA seriously. They take note of the
Government reply that the public sector general insurance companies
have initiated computerisation/modernisation drive in order to cut
the management expenses. They are of the view that this will not
be sufficient unless time-bound target is fixed for completing the
work of computerisation/modernisation. They desire the Government
to fix the time frame within which the public sector general insurance
companies should complete this work and would like to be apprised
of the progress on a half yearly basis.
Subsidy
Recommendation (No. 7, Para Nos. 74, 75, 76)
7. The Committee noted that subsidies were an important fiscal
instrument for correcting or modifying market determined outcomes
to achieve specified objectives. The trend of providing subsidy had
started since 1951-52 in the form of food subsidy. The subsidies had
successively grown over the years and had been budgeted at Rs. 43,516
crore in 2004-05 (BE). The major portion of subsidy was accounted for
by food subsidy. Its share in total subsidy in the current year had
been kept at Rs. 25,800 crore.
8. The Committee were informed that a number of Committees
had examined the issue of reforming subsidies and had suggested
measures in this regard. Consequent upon this several measures had
been taken viz. targeted approach to food subsidy (BPL families and
Antyodaya Anna Yojana) under Public Distribution System, allowing
Food Corporation of India to access market loans carrying lower interest
rates, encouraging private trade in food grains, liquidating excess food
grains stocks, modifying the Retention Price Scheme based subsidy on
fertilisers as per the recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms
Commission, and proposed phasing out of subsidies on PDS kerosene
and LPG. They were given to understand that recently the National
Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) had been asked to
prepare a blue print to ensure better targeting of subsidies.
9. The Committee expressed their deep concern over the fact that
despite provision of huge sums by way of subsidies, objectives had
not been fulfilled due to serious shortcomings in the delivery
mechanism. Therefore, the Committee recommended that the
Government should formulate a strategy to reduce pilferages and
ensure benefits of subsidy to the really needy people. The study being
conducted by NIPFP was to be expedited and the Committee should

6
be apprised of the recommendations and action taken by the
Government at the earliest.
10. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted the
following:
“In order to facilitate better targeting of subsidies, the Ministry of
Finance has instituted a study in mid July 2004 to be undertaken
by National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), with
the following terms of reference:
(i) Examination of implicit and explicit subsidies under different
budget heads and classifying them in to merit and non-
merit categories.
(ii) Examining the design of major non-merit subsidies with a
view to better target them to intended groups.
(iii) Analyzing the food subsidies in greater detail to improve
the functioning of Food Corporation of India.
(iv) Quantifying the subsidy amount incurred on schemes for
the poor, like small and marginal farmers, farm labour and
the urban poor.
(v) Presenting a design to target, subsidies at the poor, like
small and marginal farmers, or labour, urban poor, etc.
The National Institute of Public Finance & Policy (NIPFP) has
submitted an Interim Report to the Ministry and the Report is
under examination.”
11. Expressing concern over the growing subsidy bill and poor
delivery mechanism, the Committee had recommended to the
Government to take effective measures so as to ensure better targeting
of subsidies. They are given to understand that the National Institute
of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) which was entrusted the job
has since submitted an interim report. They would like to know the
contents of the report and action taken by the Government thereon.
Besides, they desire that the final report of the NIPFP should be
expedited and the Committee be apprised of the developments from
time-to-time.
Fall of Global Trust Bank (GTB) and role of RBI as regulator
Recommendation (No. 8, Para Nos. 84, 85, 86)
12. The Committee took note of the fact that while undertaking a
review of the Global Trust Bank’s performance by way of annual
inspections for the years ending 31st March 2001 and 2003, the RBI
had noted wide variance in the key indicators which had been wrongly
certified by the Statutory Auditors, however, no action seemed to have

7
been initiated against them, since the Statutory Auditors came under
the strict vigil of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, which
failed to take action against them. The Committee found that this was
a very serious and anomalous situation under which the RBI which
was mainly responsible for monitoring the working of the banks had
no control to take action against the erring auditors at the same time
RBI as a strict regulator could not be absolved of their responsibility.
13. Besides, amalgamating the unhealthy banks with those which
were performing well was not a healthy practice by any means, as
this practice on the contrary encourages the unscrupulous entities to
score their own vested interests by playing with the public money in
a reckless and surreptitious manner.
14. In order to ensure that such happenings were not repeated in
the future, sufficient safeguards, both legislative as well as
administrative had to be built into the system. At the same time those
who were responsible for such a failure should not be spared and
suitable action including criminal action ought to be taken against
them without further loss of time, so that such actions provide
deterrence to other as well. The Committee desired to be apprised of
the action in this regard at the earliest.
15. In their written submission the Ministry furnished inter-alia
following reply:
“(i) The continuance of Shri Gelli as CEO was not considered
prudent or desirable and on RBI’s advice, Shri Gelli stepped down
from the position of the CMD with effect from April 12, 2001 and
subsequently resigned from the Board as a Director on June 16,
2001.
In February 2004, when Shri Gelli re-entered the Board of GTB,
RBI expressed serious discomfort and the same was communicated
to the Board/Government. Shri Gelli resigned from the Board of
Directors of the bank in its meeting held on March 12, 2004.
RBI’s action of asking Shri Gelli to step down from the
chairmanship and directorship was expected to send strong signals
to the shareholders and the market forces should have disciplined
the errant behaviour. However, despite the regulator’s actions, the
market did not respond and continued to repose its faith in the
bank as reflected in its market valuation.
(ii) Other actions taken in this regard include:—
(a) In terms of the scheme of amalgamation, all the employees
of erstwhile GTB continue in service and are deemed to

8
have been appointed in OBC. As such, irregularities if any,
committed by the staff of the erstwhile GTB would have to
be looked into by OBC for fixing staff accountability and
initiating appropriate disciplinary and other proceedings. We
have advised OBC in this regard.
(b) RBI complained against M/s. Lovelock and Lewes and
M/s Pricewaterhouse, who were the statutory auditors for
GTB for the years 2001-02 and 2002-03 respectively for
making wrong classification of NPAs.
(c) RBI is examining the feasibility of initiating criminal action
against the promoters/directors of the erstwhile GTB for
misrepresenting/misreporting the financial statements for the
period ended March 31, 2002 and 2003.
(iii) The important measures taken to strengthen the banking
sector and prevent such recurrences in future are briefly,
the following:
(a) As reported earlier, the following prudential/supervisory
actions were taken:
• Introduction of capital adequacy standards on the lines of
the Basel norms.
•P rudential norms on asset classification, income recognition
and provisioning.
• Introduction of valuation norms and capital for market risk
for investments.
• Enhancing transparency and disclosure requirements for
published accounts.
• Aligning exposure/capital market exposure norms, single
borrower and group-borrower ceiling with international best
practices.
• Introduction of off-site monitoring system and strengthening
of the supervisory framework/introduction of Risk Based
Supervision for banks.
• The accounting treatment for impaired assets has been made
closer to the international best practices and the final
accounts of banks are transparent and more amenable to
meaningful interpretation of their performance.
• Introduction of a framework for prompt corrective action.
(b) Further, RBI has taken measures to improve corporate
governance in banks. RBI has put in place a system to ensure the ‘fit
and proper’ status of CEOs of banks through a due diligence process.
To ensure the continuing ‘fit and proper’ status of the Board of

9
Directors, RBI issued a directive to banks on June 25, 2004, in terms
of which the Boards of the banks should constitute Nomination
Committees to scrutinize the declarations relating to qualifications,
expertise, track record, integrity, and other ‘fit and proper’ criteria of
directors periodically .
(c) In the draft guidelines on ownership and governance issued
on July 2, 2004 RBI has reiterated ‘fit and proper’ criteria for
appointment of directors and CEO, so that the suitability of persons
for appointments/continuation as directors/CEO is ensured.
(d) The draft guidelines on ownership and governance also
envisage that the capital requirement of existing private
sector banks should be on par with the entry level capital
requirement for new private sector banks prescribed in RBI
guidelines of January 3, 2001, which is initially Rs. 200 crore,
with a commitment to increase to Rs. 300 crore within three
years so that they have sufficient minimum size for financial
stability. In order to meet this requirement, all banks in
private sector should have a net worth of Rs. 300 crore at
all times and those falling below the level will be required
to submit to RBI for approval, a time bound programme
for capital augmentation.
(iv) As regards legislative measures, the status is as follows:
(a) Section 30 of the Banking Regulation Act relates to audit of
a banking company. Presently, there is no obligation on the
auditors of a banking company to report any violation of
the provisions of B.R. Act and regulations or directions
issued thereunder while auditing books of the banks. Under
the core principles of international accounting standards, the
auditors are obliged to report to the supervisor the matters
of significance, which are likely to have an adverse effect
on the working of the banking company. Section 45MA of
the RBI Act already casts an obligation on the auditors of
the non-banking financial companies to report to the Reserve
Bank any violation of any provision of RBI Act or direction
issued thereunder.
In the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Miscellaneous
Provisions Bill, 2003, which was tabled in the Parliament in
August, 2003 but lapsed due to dissolution of Parliament, it
was proposed to amend Section 30 of B.R. Act to provide
that the RBI may direct the auditor in the matter relating to

10
balance sheet, profit and loss account, disclosure of liabilities
in the books of account or any other matter relating thereto.
It was also proposed to provide that it would be the duty
of the auditor to enquire and state in the report whether or
not the banking company has complied with the provisions
of this Act or any direction or notification or order issued
thereunder. The Auditors should also enquire whether the
information or statements called for by the RBI have been
furnished to it or not and in case the bank has not complied
with this requirement, the auditor would make a report to
the RBI. The Bill is now being re-examined/reviewed.”
16. The Committee find that after the fall of Global Trust Bank
the RBI has taken several measures against the erring parties viz.
Chairman and Managing Director, Statutory Auditors, Promoters and
Directors of the erstwhile Global Trust Bank (GTB). Besides, the
RBI also took various prudential and supervisory actions and
measures to improve corporate governance in the Banks, so that such
incidents do not take place in future. However, the Committee are
surprised to find that Section 30 of the Banking Regulation (BR) Act
which relates to audit of a banking company, does not cast any
obligation on the auditors of a banking company to report any
violation of the provisions of BR Act and regulations or directions
issued thereunder while auditing books of the banks. They are given
to understand that the Banking Regulation (Amendment) and
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2003, which was introduced in
Lok Sabha in August 2003 but lapsed due to dissolution of
Lok Sabha, proposed to amend Section 30 of BR Act to empower
the RBI to direct auditors of banking companies in the matter relating
to balance sheet, profit and loss account, disclosure of liabilities in
the books of account or any other matter relating thereto. Under the
above mentioned Bill, the Auditors were also required to enquire
whether the information or statements called for by the RBI have
been furnished to it or not and in case the bank concerned had not
complied with this requirement, the auditor would make a report to
the RBI. They take note of the fact that such a provision is already
available in the relevant chapters of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 which deals with non banking financial companies but the
absence thereof in the Banking Regulation Act is conspicuous.
17. The Committee note that though a new Bill, viz., the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has been introduced recently and
referred to them for examination and report, unlike the earlier Bill
of 2003 that lapsed, it does not seek to amend Section 30 for

11
empowering RBI in connection with audit of Banking companies. In
this regard, they have been informed that only such of the
amendments that were felt to be of critical importance in the Bill
proposed earlier were finally incorporated in the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Committee are unable to understand as
to why this important provision aimed at empowering RBI in the
matter of audit of banking companies has not been considered to be
of priority. The Committee, therefore, desire that provisions for
enabling RBI to regulate auditors by amending Section 30 should
be incorporated in the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
Disinvestment Policy Document
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para Nos. 124, 125 and 126)
18. The Committee had expressed their serious concern over the
fact that despite their repeated recommendations in their earlier reports
on Demands for Grants in 2001-2002, 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, urging
the Government to bring out a comprehensive disinvestment policy
document which should be laid before the Parliament for its approval,
the Government had neither complied with the recommendations nor
did they submit convincing reasons as to why the recommendations
of the Committee were not implemented. The Committee had also
regretted to recall that in their reply in September, 2002 vide OM No.
45011/3/2000-Parl (Vol. II) dated 6.9.2002, the Government had made
a request to the Committee to allow some more time to prepare and
bring out a policy document which had not been materialised till
date. The Committee were deeply concerned that in the absence of a
uniform Comprehensive Policy, disinvestment of PSUs was being done
on case-to-case basis thus subjecting disinvestment programme
volunerable to public comments and apprehensions. The Committee
strongly urge the Government to shun its case-to-case basis approach
and adopt a cohesive and uniform approach so that the policy might
gain more transparency and credibility.
19. The Committee had been informed that the policy as stated in
the NCMP was the policy of the Government towards disinvestment.
The Committee were not able to understand as to why the Government
was wary of bringing forward a Comprehensive Policy Document
which might address all the aspects such as valuation, employees
welfare, etc. and which would deal with all types of PSUs. In the
absence of a clear cut policy, the Government had to evolve a new
methodology every time to deal with a particular situation. They were
not convinced by the Government’s reply that adequate publicity had

12
been given to the policy as stated in NCMP in the Budget Speech,
interviews of the Finance Minister on TV and print media. They could
see no reason why the Government could not bring the policy
document before Parliament in deference to the wishes of the
Committee.
20. The Committee therefore reiterated their earlier
recommendations urging the Government to bring out a comprehensive
document on disinvestment policy to be placed before the Parliament
for its approval without further delay.
21. In their reply the Ministry have stated as under:
“The policy of the Government with respect to the public sector
has been laid down in the National Common Minimum Programme
and the Government is following these principles while
implementing disinvestment on a case-by-case basis. A paper
outlining the implementation strategy for disinvestment is under
consideration.”
22. On being asked about the factual position on the preparation
of disinvestment policy document, the Ministry of Finance, Department
of Disinvestment—replied as below:
“The undersigned is directed to refer to OM No. 11/1/13/2004-FC
dated 23.2.005 of the Lok Sabha Secretariat on the above subject
and to say that preparation of white paper on Disinvestment has
already been identified by the Government as one of the thrust
areas for implementation by the Department of Disinvestment and
the work is under progress.”
23. The Committee are not satisfied with the casual reply of the
Government that the policy as stated in NCMP constitutes the
disinvestment policy of the Government. They take note of the fact
that Government are preparing a White Paper on the subject. They
are of the view that neither the principles laid down in NCMP nor
the White Paper can be a substitute for a comprehensive
disinvestment policy covering all aspects such as valuation and
employees welfare etc. The Committee cannot help noting that the
Government chose to give a stereotyped reply on the subject. Hence,
they reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government
should come out with a comprehensive disinvestment policy
document without further delay and desire that the preparation of
the White Paper be expedited.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 & 26)
It could be seen that inflation rate (based on WPI) had a noticeable
increase in the year 2002-03. Thereafter it had reduced to 4.6 per cent
in 2002-04. It remained below 5 per cent till the middle of May 2004.
Subsequently this rate has increased and reached the level of 7.61 per
cent during the week ending July 31, 2004. Retail price inflation, as
measured by the Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers
(CPI-IW) stood at 3.5 per cent in March 2004. The annual rate of
inflation based on CPI-IW was 3.0 per cent during June 2004.
The Committee further noticed that computation of CPI-IW and
WPI differ substantially in terms of base year, weightage given to
different items etc. It is further seen that CPI-IW is more sensitive to
changes in food prices while changes in petroleum product prices are
better reflected in WPI. They find that work on constructing a separate
price index for services has been started.
The basic reasons furnished for rise in inflation are increase in the
prices of potatoes by 40.6%, tea by 24%, minerals by 153%, coal by
15.9%, petroleum products by 14.2 per cent, sugar, gur and khandsari
by 11.9%, basic metals and metal products by 29.2% and iron and
steel by 45%.
The Committee are unable to comprehend the lower growth in
inflation rate based on CPI-IW, which was 3.0% in June 2004 as
compared to WPI which was 5.8% in the same period, when much of
the price rise is in respect of food and minerals. In case of petroleum
products it is only 14.2%. The Committee desire that this should be
further explained.
They are also of the opinion that the base year for computing
CPI-IW should be updated to make it truly representative of
retail price. The work of preparing a service price index should be
expedited.

14
They apprehend that growing inflation will frustrate the
achievement made by decade old reforms process. The Government
should tackle this menace tactfully by employing its resources to the
full extent. They expect that the Government would come out with
adequate fiscal and monetary measures to handle this situation. The
reasons causing present inflation need to be identified and dealt with
effectively . The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to
maintain the tempo of growth the Government must tackle the situation
without delay.
Reply of the Government
The WPI and CPI (IW) series differ significantly in terms of their
weighting diagram. While food articles have a weight of 57 percent in
the CPI (IW) series, food articles in the primary group and food
products in the manufactured products group in the WPI series together
have a weight of only 27 percent. The CPI (IW) series is therefore,
more sensitive to changes in food prices. The fuel group on the other
hand gets a much higher weight in the WPI series (14.23) than in the
CPI (IW) series (6.28). International price movements of crude oil
would, therefore, have a greater bearing on the WPI series than on
the CPI (IW) series in terms of their direct impact.
Weighting diagram of Major groups of WPI
Item WPI
12
All commodities 100.00
Primary articles 22.03
Fuel, power, light & lubricants 14.23
Manufactured products 63.74
Primary articles (22.03)
Food articles 15.40
Food-grains 5.01
Rice 2.45
Wheat 1.38
Fruits & vegetables 2.92
Non-food articles 6.14

15
12
Fuel, power light & lubricants (14.23)
Coal Mining 1.75
Minerals Oils 6.99
Liquefied petroleum gas 1.84
Kerosene 0.69
Petrol 0.89
High speed diesel oil 2.02
Electricity 5.48
Manufactured products (63.74)
Food products 11.54
Sugar 3.62
Edible oils 2.76
Weighting diagram of Major groups of CPI (IW)
CPI (IW) General 100.00
Food 57.00
Pan, supari, tobacco and intoxicants 3.15
Fuel & light 6.28
Housing 8.67
Clothing, bedding and footwear 8.54
Miscellaneous group 16.36
Items responsible for high inflation
The current high inflation in terms of WPI is partly statistical due
to the fact the WPI base was low at this time last year. In fact, WPI
for all commodities remained in the narrow band of 173.7 to 174.1 for
19 weeks during 26 April to 30 August 2003 and the annual WPI
inflation declined from 6.7% to 3.9% during this period. On contrast,
in the current year the WPI increased from 181.2 on 24 April, 2004 to
187.2 on 7 August, 2004 driven by sharp increases in the prices of
petroleum products and some manufactured products, and annual
inflation has increased from 4.3% to 8% during this period.

16
In addition to statistical reasons mentioned above, high rate of
inflation in the current year is due to substantial price rise (more than
10%) in nine items/groups viz. potatoes (46.9%), tea (26.1%), minerals
(15.3%), coal (15.9%), petroleum products (17.4%), sugar-gur-khandsari
(11.2%), coconut oil (24.3%), iron and steel (46.2%), and other basic
metals and products (17.6%). These items/groups have total weights
of only 21.8% in the WPI, but contributed 69% to the current annual
inflation compared to their contribution of only 34.6% last year. Though
the prices of food articles remained moderate, the other group of WPI
like Fuel and Manufactured products have substantially contributed in
the high inflation rate which are not reflected at the same rate in CPI.
In fact, Iron & steel, with weights of only 3.6%, contributed 20.2%
to the inflation. If we add minerals, coal, POL and other metals,
composite weights of these five groups become 17.6%, and their
contribution amounts to 62.7% of the overall inflation.
Consumer Price Index
In the opinion of some economists, WPI inflation is not an
appropriate measure to determine the impact of price rise on the cost
of living of the common man. Rather, the Consumer Price Index for
Industrial Workers (CPI), which includes selected services and is
measured on the basis of retail prices and also used to determine the
dearness allowance (DA) of industrial workers in both the public and
private sectors, would be an appropriate indicator of general inflation.
In sharp contrast to the WPI, the CPI inflation had been stable and
moderate. This is because food and primary products constitute higher
weights in CPI than in WPI and in general the price increases of these
items have been moderate in the current year.
Annual point-to-point inflation in terms of the CPI-IW declined
significantly from 5.1 per cent in April 2003-04 to 3.5 per cent in
March 2003-04 and further to 2.2 per cent in April 2004. Although the
inflation rate increased to 2.8 per cent in May 2004, 3 per cent in June
2004 and further 3.2 per cent in July 2004, it is still lower than 4.2 per
cent recorded in July 2003 and lower than the average WPI inflation
at 7.0% in July 2004.
The current series of CPI (IW) are estimated with 1982 as the base
year. An expert group constituted by the Government to revise the
CPI-IW base is at a very advanced stage of submitting their report.

17
Anti-inflationary measures
Inflation hurts everybody particularly the poor whose incomes are
not indexed to prices. High inflation puts a pressure on interest rates
leading to a rise in project costs and investment. It also reduces real
interest rates affecting adversely savings rates. Therefore, containment
of inflation remains high on the agenda of the government. Anti-
inflationary policies of the government include strict fiscal and
monetary discipline, rationalisation of excise and import duties of
essential commodities so that there is no undue burden on the poor,
effective supply-demand management of essential items through liberal
tariff and trade policies, and strengthening the public distribution
system.
• On the 18th August 2004 government reduced customs and
excise duties on selected petroleum products to keep their
domestic retail prices in check in the face of the global oil
price surge to a record high. Customs duty on petrol, diesel,
LPG and kerosene were reduced by 5% each, while excise
duty was reduced by 3% each for petrol and diesel and 4%
for kerosene.
   DUTY CONCESSIONS
(In per cent)
Customs Excise
New Old New Old
Petrol 15 20 23 26
Diesel 15 20 8 11
Kerosene 5 10 12 16
LPG 5 10 8 8
• On the 20th August 2004 government reduced customs
duties on non-alloy steel and ships for breaking to 5 per
cent from 10 and 15 per cent respectively in order to check
high inflation in metals and metal products. Melting scrap
of iron and steel was fully exempted from customs duty.
Custom Duty
Product category New Old
Non-alloy steel 5 10
Ships for breaking 5 15
Iron and steel Scrap Nil 5

18
•T o check the liquidity overhang in the system. On September 11,
2004 the Reserve Bank of India has hiked the cash reserve
ratio (CRR) to be maintained by banks, by 50 basis points
to 5 per cent of their demand and time liabilities. The CRR
will be raised in two stages by 25 basis points each: First,
from the fortnight beginning September 18 and then from
October 2. The move is expected to take out around
Rs. 8,000 crore worth of liquidity from the system. The
money supply has been hovering at 16.6 per cent as
compared to 14 per cent last year.
• In a bid to control on the prices of edible oils and made its
availability easily, the Government on September 16, 2004
cut tariff values on many vegetable oils by around $50 per
ton. The tariff value on crude palm oil was cut to $454 a
ton from $504/ton; RBD palm oil to $489/ton from $543/
ton; Palm oil to $471/ton from $523/ton; crude palmolein
to $479/ton from $532/ton; RBD palmolein to $497/ton from
$552/ton; palmolein to $488/ton from $542/ton and crude
soyabean oil to $565/ton from $628/ton.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 35)
It is observed that different cesses have been imposed from time
to time on various items and products, such as coal and coke, jute,
tea, coffee, tobacco, rubber, sugar etc. The proceeds from these cesses
are deposited in Consolidated Fund of India. The Committee are given
to understand that the proceeds of these cesses are exclusively used
for the development of the industry/cause for which they have been
imposed. They note that the recently imposed induction cess aims to
collect Rs. 5000 crore (Rs. 2400 crores from cess of percent on aggregate
duties on customs, excise and service tax and Rs. 2510 crore from cess
on corporate and income taxes) which is to be spent on elementary
education.
Reply of the Government
Committee’s observations noted as statement of facts.
[Ministry of Finance’s OM No. 9 (5)-W&M/2004
dated the September 29, 2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 36)
The Committee apprehend that the huge amount of cess money
may remain unutilized and could be diverted to other areas. The
Committee, therefore, desire that there should be a non lapsable
dedicated fund where the proceeds should be deposited. They do not
agree with the contention of the Ministry that institution of such a
fund makes sense only when there is surplus budget. Even now, there
are some existing funds like Central Road Fund wherein the proceeds

19
of cess are kept. Therefore, in view of the Committee such a fund of
perpetual nature should be established for education as early as
possible, so that the proceeds are utilized for development of this
sector alone.
Reply of the Government
Government has established a fund titled as ‘Prathmik Shiksha
Kosh’ which will be maintained by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Department of Elementary Education and Literacy on a
proforma basis. The money for it would flow from the education cess.
The receipts will be utilized solely and exclusively for elementary
education, including Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Nutritional Support
to Primary Education (Mid-day Meal Scheme). The fund will be non-
lapsable in nature and balances remaining un-utilised in a year will be
available on a rollover basis for the said purposes.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 9 (5)-W&M/2004
dated the September 29, 2004]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 61)
The Committee find that there has been constant shortfall in the
actual utilization of funds under this head. The major savings in this
regard have been made by CPWD. The Committee are unable to
comprehend the reasons for huge savings made by CPWD. If the
requirements were lower why provisions at BE stage were always
kept at higher side. The Committee take serious view of such budgetary
allocations and recommend that the Government should take utmost
care while making provisions based on actual requirements. They would
further like to be apprised of details of expenditure made by CPWD
during the last five years.
Reply of the Government
As per the norms of Govt. of India all Major Works of Civil/
Electrical nature are required to be done through CPWD. After the
approval of Competent Authority for any Civil/Electrical Work estimate
is taken from CPWD and based on the estimate and the availability
of funds in the budget the authorization issued through the Pay &
Accounts Office to CPWD. No authorization can be issued unless the
budget provision of equivalent amount exist in the budget in case
where the CPWD fails to complete the job before the end of the
financial year the CPWD is not entitled for drawing the funds even
though it is authorized to them by the PAO and so the funds remains
unutilized to that extent. Since CPWD has its own procedures of
awarding the budget to sub-contractors etc. and there is no control of
CNP over the procedures of CPWD. Therefore, actual expenditure

20
depends on authorization of budget amount to CPWD and at times it
becomes difficult to avoid savings. However, the authorization made
has reduced in subsequent years. The committee’s recommendations is
noted for future compliance. The details of expenditure made by CPWD
during the last five years is as follows:—
(Figures are in thousand)
Year Authorization made Utilization of
fund by CPWD
1999-2000 * *
2000-01 17700 5024
2001-02 12284 5432
2002-03 11000 8160
2003-04 4826 2391
*There is no saving in expenditure under Major Works during the year 1999-2000.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 83)
The Committee note with serious concern the recent developments
that have taken place in the Global Trust Bank ultimately resulting in
placing it under an Order of Moratorium for about three months w.e.f.
July 24, 2004 by the Reserve Bank of India. This step has reportedly
been taken to protect the interest of the depositors as well as the
banking system. In order to further mitigate the problem of the
investors, the Reserve Bank of India has prepared a scheme of
amalgamation of the bank with Oriental Bank of Commerce.
Reply of the Government
(i) On an application of RBI, the Central Government issued
an Order of Moratorium in respect of Global Trust Bank
Ltd. effective from the close of business on July 24, 2004
upto and inclusive of October 23, 2004.
(ii) A proposal was received from Oriental Bank of Commerce
(OBC) for merger of Global Trust Bank Ltd. (GTB) with it.
Taking into account the interests of depositors of GTB, as
well as its strengths and weaknesses, RBI prepared a draft
scheme of amalgamation of GTB with OBC and the draft
scheme of amalgamation was forwarded to both the banks
on July 26, 2004. The banks were given time up to August
7, 2004 to consider the draft Scheme. The draft Scheme was
placed on the website of RBI and notices were also
published inviting objections/suggestions from depositors,
shareholders and others by August 7, 2004.

21
(iii) The suggestions and objections to the draft scheme of
amalgamation received from the Transferor bank, Transferee
bank, depositors, shareholders of the Transferor bank and
others were examined by RBI and the same were forwarded
to Government of India along with a copy of the final draft
Scheme of Amalgamation of the GTB with OBC and
recommended for sanction without further modification or
with such modifications as Government may consider
necessary, in terms of Sub-Section (7) of Section 45 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
(iv) The Government of India sanctioned the Scheme of
Amalgamation of GTB with OBC on August 13, 2004. The
Scheme has come into force in August 14, 2004.
(v) Customers, including depositors of the GTB were able to
operate their accounts as customers of OBC with effect from
August 14, 2004.
(vi) In accordance with the Scheme of Amalgamation, if any
surplus remains after meeting all the liabilities out of the
realisation of assets of the GTB, the shareholders may receive
pro-rata payment.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 84)
The Committee take note of the fact that while undertaking a
review of the bank’s performance by way of annual inspections for
the years ending 31st March 2001 and 2003, the RBI had noted wide
variance in the key indicators which had been wrongly certified by
the statutory auditors, however, no actions seems to have been initiated
against them, since the Statutory Auditors come under the strict vigil
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants for India, which failed to
take action against them. The Committee find that this is a very serious
and anomalous situation under which the RBI, which is mainly
responsible for monitoring the working of the banks, has no control to
take action against the erring auditors at the same time RBI as a strict
regulator cannot be absolved of their responsibility.
Reply of the Government
(i) RBI’s inspection with reference to the bank’s position as on
March 31, 2002, conducted from July to October 2002, revealed
significant variation between the assets classified as non-
performing by the bank and those classified as NPA by the
Inspecting Officers. There was also considerable shortfall in
provisioning. After considering the provisions required to be

22
made by the bank, the IO assessed the net worth to be negative
at (-) Rs. 416.70 crore. In view of the very large variance in
the assessment of the bank’s financial position as reported by
the auditors and as assessed by the RBI inspectors, the RBI
engaged a firm of Chartered Accountants to undertake an
independent assessment and reconcile the position. The
Chartered Accountants’ report dated February 24, 2003
confirmed RBI’s assessment, except for minor differences. A
complaint was filed with ICAI against the statutory auditors
for 2001-02 for wrong classification in respect of NPAs in the
accounts for 2001-02. The bank was put on a monthly
monitoring schedule and the bank was advised to change the
statutory auditors for the year ended March 31, 2003.
(ii) The RBI inspection that was conducted from October 2003 to
January 2004 found that the divergence between the reported
accounts and the assessment of the Inspecting Officers of the
NPAs and of the required level of provisioning continued to
be very large; against the marginally positive net worth
reported by the bank for March 2003 at Rs. 2.42 crore, erosion
in the net worth was in fact Rs. 740 crore. In view of the
large divergence between the NPA figures reported by the
bank duly certified by the statutory auditors and those assessed
by the RBI Inspectors, the explanation of the auditors was
called for. As the explanation provided was not satisfactory,
the matter was reported to the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI), for initiating action.
(iii) Apart from debarring the firms that had audited the bank’s
books for 2001-02 and 2002-03 from statutory audit, banks
and financial institutions have been advised by RBI not to use
the services of the two firms of Chartered Accountants for
any audit related work. CAG has also been advised about the
action taken by RBI for similar action by CAG.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para No. 85)
Besides, amalgamating the unhealthy banks with those which are
performing well is not a healthy practice by any means, as this practice
on the contrary encourages the unscrupulous entities to score their
own vested interests by playing with the public money in a reckless
and surreptitious manner.
Reply of the Government
(i) The amalgamation was done after having given sufficient time
and opportunity to the bank to infuse capital while simultaneously

23
ensuring through directions issued to it, that it did not increase its
risk-weighted assets.
Since the bank failed to either infuse capital or to offer any viable
solution, the option of compulsory merger was resorted to. This option
is exercised only as a last resort in public interest and in the interest
of the depositors. OBC’s proposal to takeover GTB was examined from
the perspective of the strength of the bank and synergies available.
OBC’s financial parameters showed that it had sufficient financial
strength to absorb GTB. So far as the synergies were concerned, the
two banks complemented each other, OBC being north based and GTB
having its branches mainly in the south. They had a common
technology platform (FINACLE). GTB’s strength in non-interest income
portfolio benefited OBC. In view of the strategic advantages available
in the amalgamation of GTB with OBC, this was considered the optimal
solution.
(ii) In this regard, it is useful to note the various remedies and
options available to RBI for dealing with weak banks.
One option is to allow the weak bank to function as a narrow
bank, which inter alia means restricting the growth of risk-weighed
assets. This is unlikely to help a weak bank in the long run since it
would result in (a) absence of growth and loss of customers
(b) mismatch in pricing of assets and liabilities (c) staff attrition/loss
of morale (d) lack of solvency and tight liquidity making the bank
highly vulnerable to large withdrawals.
Second option is to restructure and recapitalised the bank by further
infusion of capital and other corrective measures. Although infusion
of capital is the preferable option for resolution of problem banks, one
of the important concerns in this regard is the source of funds. As
regulators, it is necessary for RBI to ensure that the contributions/
investments are made from genuine and bona-fide sources in a
transparent manner and do not attract domestic and international legal
prohibitions against money laundering and related offences as
applicable. RBI has also to ensure that prudential standards are not
compromised.
Third option would be to merge the weak bank with another bank
under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
(a) Voluntary merger under Section 44A of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949.
“Section 44A sets out of the procedure to be followed in case of
voluntary merger/amalgamation between two banking companies.
Voluntary mergers are the least cost option and take into account
the interests of both depositors and shareholders.”

24
(b) Reconstitution/Amalgamation under Section 45 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
“Section 45 of the Act empowers RBI to apply to the Central
Government for suspension of business by a banking company
and prepare a scheme of reconstitution or amalgamation. The
merger under Section 45 of the Act, ibid is done to protect
the interests of the depositors and in the interest of the banking
system.
Lastly, when all attempts to restructure a weak bank fail, it may
be placed under liquidation. In such a case, the claims of insured
depositor may have to be borne by Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation (DICGC). This option has certain
disadvantages; (a) the pay off by DICGC would be a direct cost
to the exchequer (b) the depositors would lose confidence in the
banking system (c) the investors’ confidence will be shaken
(d) liquidation of a bank may also lead to ‘domino effect’ and
would cause systemic problems.
It may be stated that amongst the various options discussed above,
compulsory merger under Section 45 has been resorted to as a
viable option for resolution of many problem banks, in the interest
of the depositors based on past experiences of RBI.
(iii)  In order to pr event unscrupulous persons from acquiring
control of the banks, RBI is currently insisting on ‘fit and proper’
status of directors both at the time of induction and for their
continuance. RBI has also put in place a mechanism by which it
ensures that shareholders, whose aggregate holdings are above the
specified thresholds, meet the fitness and propriety tests before
grants of acknowledgment of transfer of shares. In determining
whether the applicant (including all entities connected with the
applicant) is fit and proper to hold the position of a shareholder
at the lowest threshold of 5% and above, RBI takes into account
all relevant criteria, including the applicant’s integrity, reputation
and track record in financial matters and compliance with tax laws
which are necessary to protect the interests of the depositors and
the integrity of the financial system.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 87)
The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, which is a very old and
toothless legislation, should be amended forthwith.

25
Reply of the Government
This matter has to be taken up with Department of Company
Affairs for amendment for the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. A
reference has been made to them.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 99)
The Committee note with serious concern the rising trend of public
debt, which is 43.37% of GDP as per the budgetary estimates for the
year 2004-05. The share of internal debt in the total outstanding
domestic debt of the Central Government was 66.4 per cent at the end
of March, 2003. They further find that the large and persistent fiscal
deficit is primarily responsible for increasing internal debt. Further
taking advantage of lower interest rates and large build up of foreign
exchange, the Government prepaid external debt of US$ 2.9 billion
and US$ 3.8 billion in the years 2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively by
borrowing from market. Thus the external debt has been reduced while
internal debt has continued to swell.
Reply of the Government
Committee’s observations are accepted as statement of facts.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 100)
It is further seen that the debt-GDP ratio for the Centre and State
Governments together increased from 70.7% in 2001-02 to 74.7% in
2003-04. The alarming increase in debt-GDP ratio has been on account
of burgeoning fiscal deficit which impacts of inflation and interest
rates adversely. The Committee apprehend that continually increasing
ratio of debt to GDP runs the risk that debt will get on unsustainable
path which can lead to national insolvency.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s observations are noted. The Fiscal Responsibility
and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 seeks to address the
concerns raised by the Committee.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 138)
The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons stated by
the Government for the variations between BE, RE and Actuals. The

26
Government’s reply that the projections were revised on the assessment
of activities to be undertaken by the Department is not convincing.
The Committee are not able to understand why such variations as
above have occurred for four years. In the opinion of the Committee,
the Government could have projected realistic estimates in the following
years based on past experience. The Committee feel that the
Government have not taken due care while making budgetary
allocations over the years. The Government should adhere to fiscal
prudence and avoid violent budgetary variations and make budgetary
projection/allocations more realistic and accurate in future.
Reply of the Government
While submitting the Budget Estimates for the ensuing year, the
estimates of office expenditure are projected on the basis of the
anticipated activities during the year for which the estimates are
submitted. While every effort is made to make realistic estimates, the
actual expenditure depends on the volume of work that is actually
undertaken in the Department during that particular year. The major
factor which governs the patterns and volume of the expenditure in
this Department is the volume of disinvestment cases pursued by the
Department during any particular year. There is increased requirement
of use of office machines and equipments, telephones, staff cars and
stationery, etc., throughout the process and diminishes with the
completion of the transaction.
The activities of the Department being new and without comparable
precedent in the Government, the estimates of the office expenditure
could not be related to any past precedent. The requirements for office
expenditure is reviewed at the time of Revised Estimates keeping in
view the activities in hand and anticipated during the rest of the
relevant Financial year. The actual expenditure over the years, has
gradually come closer to the Revised Estimates. The Government would
in keeping with the spirit of the recommendations of the august
Committee, make additional efforts to ensure that the budgetary
projections are as realistic, actual and accurate as possible.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M. No. 35 (1)
13/2004-Parl. Vol-II dated 19.10.2004]

27
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 40 & 41)
The Committee take note of the fact that from the year 2001-2002
onwards there has been constant savings in expenditure under this
head. They find that in the year 2001-02 funds, as allocated could not
be spent because of cancellation of scheduled tour programmes of
officials and austerity in expenditure. In the subsequent year i.e.
2002-03 again higher budgetary allocations were made in anticipation
of official tours, however they could not materialize due to some
unexplained factor. Again the budgetary estimates were kept at even
higher side in the following year (2003-04). However the actual
expenditure incurred has always been abysmally low compared to the
estimated amount.
It is seen that no austerity has been exercised while making
allocations at budgetary stage. Even while revising allocations, little
consideration has been paid to the actual expenditure incurred in the
past. This shows that budgetary and revised estimates have always
been made without taking into account the actual requirements as
experienced in the previous years. The Committee would therefore
recommend that projection of required funds should be made on a
more realistic basis so that resources are not unnecessarily kept unused
and are allocated more judiciously.
Reply of the Government
It pertains to domestic travel expenses for Central Stamp Depot
(CSD), Nasik Road.
Surrender under Domestic Travel Expenses (DTE) for these years
against BE/RE is mainly due to the reasons that tour programmes of
various officials did not materialize and also because of austerity
observed in expenditure. More provision was made in BE for the year
2003-04 mainly due to increase in air/railway fare. The officials of
Central Stamp Depot (CSD) were to make extensive tours to recover
the huge dues outstanding in various States. However, majority of the
tours did not materialize. The figure for domestic travel expenses for
CSD was reduced in RE 2003-04.
The actual expenditure in the year 2003-04 under domestic travel
expenses for CSD was Rs. 0.58 lakhs only.
The Committee’s recommendation is noted for future compliance.

28
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 45 & 46)
It is seen that throughout the period 2001-02 to 2003-04 the
budgetary allocations for giving Grants-in-Aid to various financial
institutions were revised upwards at RE stage owing to additional
requirements for obligatory transfer of foreign assistance. The actual
expenditure, however, varied depending on actual claims for
reimbursement received from financial institutions. Thus, the budgetary
allocations have always been less than the requirements and had to be
subsequently revised upwards to make up for the shortfall.
The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for keeping
lower outlays when the actual requirement is far higher. This
shortsightedness on the part of the Government may result in undue
diversion of resources. Therefore, the Committee recommend that every
effort should be taken to make realistic estimations of allocations
keeping in view all the anticipated demands.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, Banking Division have conveyed the observations
of the Standing Committee on Finance to the concerned Financial
Institutions and requested them to provide realistic estimates at both
the stages of BE and RE in future. A copy of their letter No. 15(5)
2004-IF.I. dated 6th September, 2004, is enclosed.
In so far as grant assistance to UTI is concerned, the Capital Market
Division has informed that the Non-Plan assistance as mentioned in
para 42 of the Report have been provided to UTI pursuant to the
decision of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs that the
Government will honour the redemption guarantee for the US-64 unit
holders and will also meet any shortfall in the Assured Return Schemes
(ARSs) of the erstwhile UTI. With a view to ring-fence the liability of
the Government of India, the decision to foreclose ARSs have been
taken from time to time after taking into account the economic scenario
and the trends in the interest rates. The exact amount of assistance
required to foreclose ARSs also depends on the net asset value (NAV)
of the scheme as on the date of foreclosure. Although, every effort
have been made to provide a fair estimate of the assistance at the
budgetary stage itself, because of the reasons mentioned above, the
figures had to be revised at RE stage for the period under reference.
During the financial year 2004-05, a provision of Rs. 1200 crore
have been made for assistance to UTI. So far, a total assistance of
Rs. 724 crore (50% as cash and 50% as Bonds) have been provided to
UTI for the foreclosure of two ARSs. It also proposed to foreclose the
balance three ARSs by March, 2005. Although the exact shortfall would
be based on the NAV of the schemes of the date of foreclosure, it is
expected that the requirement would be met out of the budgetary
provisions made during the year.
[MoF/DEA/F. No. 5/15/2004-IFA, dated 23rd Sept. 2004]

29
F.No. 15(5)/2004-IF-1
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
(Banking Division)
JEEVAN DEEP BUILDING, 3RD FLOOR,
PARLIAMENT STREET, NEW DELHI
Dated 6th September, 2004
To
CMD IDBI, Mumbai
CMD, SIDBI, Lucknow
CMD, NABARD, Mumbai
CMD, IIBI, Kolkata
CMD, Exim Bank, Mumbai
CMD, IFCI Ltd., New Delhi
MD & CEO, ICICI Bank, Mumbai
Chief Operating Officer, IDFC, Mumbai
Subject: Examination of Demands for Grants (2004-05)
of M/o Finance
Sir,
I am directed to refer to the above mentioned subject and to convey
the observation of Standing Committee on Finance (Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2004-05) to various financial institutions that
projected outlays in Budget Estimates are lower than the actual
requirement in the Revised Estimates. The Committee has adversely
commented that this shortsightedness may result in undue diversion
of resources. The Committee has recommended that every effort should
be taken to make realistic estimations of allocations keeping in view
all the anticipated demands. You are therefore requested to provide a
realistic estimate at both the BE and RE stages to avoid such adverse
comments from Standing Committee on Finance in future.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Margaret)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.

30
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 55)
The Committee take serious note of the fact that the market share
of non-life public insurance companies has gone down by 4.75 per cent
in the last year. This is due to competitive pressure from private
players, lesser use of technology and inadequate utilization of the
distribution channels. They are constrained to express their anguish
that if such trend is not arrested the day is not too far when the
entire business will be grabbed by private players. They are of the
view that competition per se is not bad as it compels the competitors
to improve the quality of the product/service. The public sector non-
life insurance companies will have to upgrade the quality of the service
in order to be able to face the competition from the private operators.
Reply of the Government
The public sector non-life insurance companies have initiated a
series of measures for improvement in the quality of services to face
the competition from private players effectively. These include
upgradation of information technology through implementation of
“Genesis Enterprise” programme and networking of Branch Offices,
Division Offices and Regional Offices with their Head Office.
Implementation of IT plan would facilitate on-line issue of policies/
documents, quicker settlement of claims leading to greater degree of
customers’ satisfaction. Apart from this, the public sector companies
have entered into tie-up arrangements with corporate clients to ensure
cashless claim settlement at the point of servicing of claims. It is
expected that with the improvement in the quality of services, the
public sector general insurance companies will be able to face
competition from the private players more effectively.
[Ministry of Finance OM. No. 64 (77)/2004-OS) (Ins.)
dated 29th September, 2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 109)
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the major burden
of fiscal adjustment has been borne by capital expenditure and its
share of percentage of GDP was merely 2.5 per cent in 2002-03. The
Committee take note of the fact that in the Budget 2004-05, the share
of plan expenditure has been raised by 20% which is the biggest
increase so far. The non-plan expenditure consists of mainly four items
viz. Interest payment, expenditure on defence (both revenue and
capital), expenditure on subsidies and transfer to the States. These
four components comprise about 85 per cent of the total non-plan
budget of the Central Government.

31
Reply of the Government
The level of capital expenditure in the Central Budget has been
around 2.5 per cent of GDP for past several years. Since a substantial
part of fiscal deficit is used up in financing revenue deficit, the
availability of resources for capital expenditure has been limited. In
fact, time bound elimination of revenue deficit to create fiscal space
for more capital expenditure is one of the prime objectives leading to
the enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
Act, 2003. However, growth in capital expenditure has kept pace with
the GDP growth. There are two developments having a bearing in
this matter which need to be noted. Firstly, Plan Grants to States have
been increasing year after year and since the assets created from such
financing support belong to the State Government, there is capital
expenditure but in the books of the State Government.
Another factor leading to an apparent stagnation in the capital
expenditure of Central Government to GDP ratio is that the Central
Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) are being permitted to avail of
external aid directly rather than through Central Budget. If the external
aid to CPSUs were to be routed through the Budget, the capital
expenditure of the Central Government would have been higher by
way of equity and loans investment.
Therefore, while the capital expenditure in Central Budget appears
to be low or stagnating as per cent of GDP , it is important to
simultaneously note that through its policy of disintermediation of
external aid to CPSUs and a steady rise in the level of grants to
States, the Central Government has been facilitating the incurrence of
capital expenditure.
Other observations of the Committee have been noted.
Recommendation (Sl. No 10, Para No. 110)
They further find that the Government is intending to reduce non-
plan expenditure by reducing interest expenditure, better targetting of
subsidies, lesser expenditure on general administration and by following
FRBM Rules, 2004 strictly. It is further found that in the plan
expenditure itself, the share of expenditure on creating capital assets
is merely 30 per cent.
Reply of the Government
As explained at reply to para 109 above, Plan grants to States are
revenue expenditure of the Central Government, but these are intended

32
to finance the capital expenditure and social sector developmental
expenditure of the States. Therefore, low share of the capital expenditure
in Plan is not necessarily indicative of any lack of productivity or
capital efficiency of the overall Plan Expenditure of the Centre.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 111)
In the view of the Committee, the Government should immediately
formulate strategy to reduce non-plan expenditure and also strictly
adhere to the rules framed under FRBM Act.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s observations have been noted.
[OSD (FRBM), dated 30th September, 2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 135)
From the reply of the Government, the Committee find that the
proposal for creation of Disinvestment Fund has not found favour
with the Government despite the clear commitment made by the
Minister of Disinvestment in 2002 in this regard. The Committee are
constrained to point out that the Committee’s repeated
recommendations for creation of disinvestment proceeds fund have
not been heeded with seriousness by the Government. The Committee
are of the opinion that unless a concrete system is put in place to
manage the revenues collected from disinvestment of PSUs the
disinvestment policy will never be able to acquire the desired impetus.
They are given to understand that Finance Minister has announced in
the Budget (2004-2005) that though the disinvestment proceeds are
credited into Consolidated Fund of India but in 2005-06 Budget he
will be informing about the deployment of this amount to specified
social sector schemes. They are of the view that when the Government
could inform about the deployment of the amounts received from
disinvestment proceeds, there is no reason why it can not create a
separate disinvestment fund which will lend more transparency to the
utilization of the proceeds. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation and urge upon the Government to keep the
objectives of disinvestment clearly in mind and create a non-lapsable,
dedicated Disinvestment Fund without further delay. The Committee
want to be apprised of consistent decision of the Government in this
regard.

33
Reply of the Government
Proposals for creation of a fund to manage disinvestment proceeds
are under consideration. As laid down in the National Common
Minimum Programme, Government believes that there must be a direct
link between privatization and social needs, like for example the use
of privatization revenues for designated social sector schemes.
Accordingly, as assured by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech—
2004-05, the revenue generated through disinvestment will be utilized
for specific social sector schemes and utilization would be reported at
the time of presenting the Budget for the succeeding year.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M.
No. 35(1)/3/2004-Parl. Vol-II dated 25th January, 2005]
Government decided on 27th January, 2005 to constitute a Fund
into which the realisation from sale of minority shareholding of the
Government in profitable PSEs would be channelised. The Fund would
be maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of India and would be
professionally managed by selected Public Sector Financial entities,
which have the requisite experience, to provide sustainable returns to
the Government without affecting the corpus. This Fund would be
called “National Investment Fund” to denote the permanent nature of
the corpus and the objectives to which its income is to be applied. A
detailed plan for the constitution of the Fund and the specific schemes
to be financed from its income would be prepared separately. The
broad investment objectives will be—
(i) Investment in social sector projects which promote education,
health care and employment;
(ii) Capital investment in selected profitable and revivable Public
Sector Enterprises that yield adequate returns, in order to
enlarge their capital base to finance expansion/
diversification.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M. No. 3/18/
2004-DD-II, dated 8 February, 2005]

34
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 27)
The Committee are also of the view that inflation hits the senior
citizens the most and therefore, the Government have to ensure that
there are attractive saving schemes for them. Tax free RBI bonds,
offering annual interest of 6.5% was one such instrument which enabled
people to park their savings, however, the same has since been
withdrawn. It has resulted in causing much distress, particularly to
the senior citizens many of whom were availing this facility. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Government should consider
reintroducing these tax free bonds, apart from the scheme which has
recently been introduced for the senior citizens and for those who
have attained the age of 55 years and taken VRS.
Reply of the Government
Reply of the Government was silent pertaining to the issue
contained in the Committee’s recommendations at Sl. No. 1 Para
No. 27.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 56)
The Committee is distressed to note that the management expenses
of General Insurance Companies continue to be in excess of stipulated
amount. Only New India Insurance Company managed to limit these
expenses within the permissible limit during the years 2001-02 and
2002-03. But thereafter it has increased tremendously. It is particularly
regrettable to note that the insurance companies continue to incur
excessive expenditure on management and IRDA have failed to
effectively regulate this despite Committee’s earlier recommendation
to this effect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this issue
should be taken by IRDA on priority basis. The Government should
hasten the process of modernisation/computerisation of the general
insurance companies so that such expenses are reduced and their
services are improved. Besides, they (insurance companies) should
introduce new products to attract the masses and approach the
untapped areas in a big way.

35
Reply of the Government
The public sector insurance companies have already initiated the
process of computerisation and networking of their offices. It is
expected that implementation and use of IT in the public sector general
insurance companies would help in controlling management expenses.
Further, with an effort to cut down the wage bill, which forms a
substantial portion of management expenses, the companies have
implemented Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme to right size their
employees strength. All these measures are expected to reduce the
management expenses in the long run. Apart from the cost cutting
measures, the companies have also initiated steps for increasing their
business through corporate tie-ups, opening of extension counters in
rural areas and introduction in innovative products. With the control
of expenses and increase in business, it is expected that management
expenses ratio will be brought down to the permissible limit.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 64 (77)/2004-OSD (Ins.),
dated 29th Sept. 2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 74, 75, 76)
The Committee note that subsidies are an important fiscal
instrument for correcting or modifying market determined outcomes
to achieve specified objectives. The trend of providing subsidy started
since 1951-52 in the form of food subsidy. The subsidies have
successively grown over the years and has been budgeted at
Rs. 43,516 crore in 2004-05 (BE). The major portion of subsidy is
accounted for by food subsidy. Its share in total subsidy in the current
year has been kept at Rs. 25,800 crore.
It is further seen that a number of Committees have examined the
issue of reforming subsidies and have suggested measures in this
regard. Consequent upon this several measures have been viz. Targeted
approach to food subsidy (BPL families and Antyodaya Anna Yojana)
under Public Distribution System, allowing Food Corporation of India
to access market loans carrying lower interest rates, encouraging private
trade in food grains, liquidating excess foodgrains stocks, modifying
the Retention Price Scheme based subsidy on fertilisers as per the
recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms Commission, and
proposed phasing out of subsidies on PDS kerosene and LPG. They
are given to understand that recently the National Institute of Public
Finance and Policy (NIPFPO) has been asked to prepare a blue print
to ensure better targetting of subsidies.

36
The Committee note with deep concern that despite provision of
huge sums by way of subsidies, objectives had not been fulfilled due
to serious shortcomings in the delivery mechanism. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that the Government should formulate a
strategy to reduce pilferages and ensure benefits of subsidy to the
really needy people. The study being conducted by NIPFPO be
expedited and the Committee be apprised of the recommendations
and action taken by the Government at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
In order to facilitate better targetting of subsidies, the Ministry of
Finance has instituted a study in mid-July 2004 to be undertaken by
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), with the
following terms of reference:
(i) Examination of implicit and explicit subsidies under different
budget heads and classifying them in to merit and
non-merit categories.
(ii) Examining the design of major non-merit subsidies with a
view to better target them to intended groups.
(iii) Analyzing the food subsidies in greater detail to improve
the functioning of Food Corporation of India.
(iv) Quantifying the subsidy amount incurred on schemes for
the poor, like small and marginal farmers, farm labour and
the urban poor.
(v) Presenting a design to target, subsidies at the poor, like
small and marginal farmers, or labour, urban poor, etc.
The National Institute of Public Finance & Policy (NIPFP) has
submitted and Interim Report to the Ministry and the Report is under
examination.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 84)
The Committee take note of the fact that while undertaking a
review of the bank’s performance by way of annual inspections for
the years ending 31st March 2001 and 2003, the RBI had noted wide
variance in the key indicators which had been wrongly certified by
the statutory auditors, however, no action seems to have been initiated
against them, since the Statutory Auditors come under the strict vigil
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants for India, which failed to
take action against them. The Committee find that this is a very serious

37
and anomalous situation under which the RBI which was mainly
responsible for monitoring the working of the banks, has no control to
take action against the erring auditors at the same time RBI as a strict
regulator cannot be absolved of their responsibility.
Reply of the Government
(i) RBI’s inspection with reference to the bank’s position as on
March 31, 2002, conducted from July to October 2002, revealed
significant variation between the assets classified as non-
performing by the bank and those classified as NPA by the
Inspecting Officers. There was also considerable shortfall in
provisioning. After considering the provisions required to be
made by the bank, the IO assessed the net worth to be negative
at (-) Rs. 416.70 crore. In view of the very large variance in the
assessment of the bank’s financial position as reported by the
auditors and as assessed by the RBI inspectors, the RBI engaged
a firm of Chartered Accountants to undertake an independent
assessment and reconcile the position. The Chartered
Accountants’ report dated February 24, 2003 confirmed RBI’s
assessment, except for minor differences. A complaint was filed
with ICAI against the statutory auditors for 2001-02 for wrong
classification in respect of NPAs in the accounts for 2001-02.
The bank was put on a monthly monitoring schedule and the
bank was advised to change the statutory auditors for the year
ended March 31, 2003.
(ii) The RBI inspection that was conducted from October 2003 to
January 2004 found that the divergence between the reported
accounts and the assessment of the Inspecting Officers of the
NPAs and of the required level of provisioning continued to
be very large; against the marginally positive net worth reported
by the bank for March 2003 at Rs. 2.42 crore, erosion in the net
worth was in fact Rs. 740 crore. In view of the large divergence
between the NPA figures reported by the bank duly certified
by the statutory auditors and those assessed by the RBI
Inspectors, the explanation of the auditors was called for. As
the explanation provided was not satisfactory, the matter was
reported to the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(ICAI), for initiating action.
(iii) Apart from debarring the firms that had audited the bank’s
books for 2001-02 and 2002-03 from statutory audit, banks and
financial institutions have been advised by RBI not to use the
services of the two firms of Chartered Accountants for any

38
audit related work. CAG has also been advised about the action
taken by RBI for similar action by CAG.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 85)
Besides, amalgamating the unhealthy banks with those which are
performing well is not a healthy practice by any means, as this practice
on the contrary encourages the unscrupulous entities to score their
own vested interests by playing with the public money in a reckless
and surreptitious manner.
Reply of the Government
(i) The amalgamation was done after having given sufficient time
and opportunity to the bank to infuse capital while simultaneously
ensuring through directions issued to it, that it did not increase its
risk-weighted assets.
Since the bank failed to either infuse capital or to offer any viable
solution, the option of compulsory merger was resorted to. This option
is exercised only as a last resort in public interest and in the interest
of the depositors. OBC’s proposal to takeover GTB was examined from
the perspective of the strength of the bank and synergies available.
OBC’s financial parameters showed that it had sufficient financial
strength to absorb GTB. So far as the synergies were concerned, the
two banks complemented each other, OBC being north based and GTB
having its branches mainly in the south. They had a common
technology platform (FINACLE). GTB’s strength in non-interest income
portfolio benefited OBC. In view of the strategic advantages available
in the amalgamation of GTB with OBC, this was considered the optimal
solution.
(ii) In this regard, it is useful to note the various remedies and
options available to RBI for dealing with weak banks.
One option is to allow the weak bank to function as a narrow
bank, which inter alia means restricting the growth of risk-weighed
assets. This is unlikely to help a weak bank in the long run since it
would result in (a) absence of growth and loss of customers
(b) mismatch in pricing of assets and liabilities (c) staff attrition/loss
of morale (d) lack of solvency and tight liquidity making the bank
highly vulnerable to large withdrawals.

39
Second option is to restructure and recapitalised the bank by further
infusion of capital and other corrective measures. Although infusion
of capital is the preferable option for resolution of problem banks, one
of the important concerns in this regard is the source of funds. As
regulators, it is necessary for RBI to ensure that the contributions/
investments are made from genuine and bonafide sources in a
transparent manner and do not attract domestic and international legal
prohibitions against money laundering and related offences as
applicable. RBI has also to ensure that prudential standards are not
compromised.
Third option would be to merge the weak bank with another bank
under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
(a) Voluntary merger under Section 44A of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949.
“Section 44A sets out of the procedure to be followed in case of
voluntary merger/amalgamation between two banking companies.
Voluntary mergers are the least cost option and take into account
the interests of both depositors and shareholders.”
(b) Reconstitution/Amalgamation under Section 45 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
“Section 45 of the Act empowers RBI to apply to the Central
Government for suspension of business by a banking company
and prepare a scheme of reconstitution or amalgamation. The
merger under Section 45 of the Act, ibid is done to protect the
interests of the depositors and in the interest of the banking system.
Lastly, when all attempts to restructure a weak bank fail, it may
be placed under liquidation. In such a case, the claims of insured
depositor may have to be borne by Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation (DICGC). This option has certain
disadvantages; (a) the pay off by DICGC would be a direct cost
to the exchequer (b) the depositors would lose confidence in the
banking system (c) the investors’ confidence will be shaken
(d) liquidation of a bank may also lead to ‘domino effect’ and
would cause systemic problems.
It may be stated that amongst the various options discussed above,
compulsory merger under Section 45 has been resorted to as a
viable option for resolution of many problem banks, in the interest
of the depositors based on past experiences of RBI.

40
(iii) In or der to prevent unscrupulous persons from acquiring
control of the banks, RBI is currently insisting on ‘fit and proper’
status of directors both at the time of induction and for their
continuance. RBI has also put in place a mechanism by which it
ensures that shareholders, whose aggregate holdings are above the
specified thresholds, meet the fitness and propriety tests before
grant of acknowledgement of transfer of shares. In determining
whether the applicant (including all entities connected with the
applicant) is fit and proper to hold the position of a shareholder
at the lowest threshold of 5% and above, RBI takes into account
all relevant criteria, including the applicant’s integrity, reputation
and track record in financial matters and compliance with tax laws
which are necessary to protect the interests of the depositors and
the integrity of the financial system.
[Ministry of Finance OM No. 11/19/2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 86)
In order to ensure that such happenings are not repeated in the
future, sufficient safeguards, both legislative as well as administrative
have to be built into the system. At the same time those who are
responsible for such a failure should not be spared and suitable action
including criminal action ought to be taken against them without
further loss of time, so that such actions provide deterrence to others
as well. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action in this
regard at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
(i) The continuance of Shri Gelli as CEO was not considered
prudent or desirable and on RBI’s advice, Shri Gelli stepped down
from the position of the CMD with effect from April 12, 2001 and
subsequently resigned from the Board as a Director on June 16, 2001.
In February 2004, when Shri Gelli re-entered the Board of GTB,
RBI expressed serious discomfort and the same was communicated to
the Board/Government. Shri Gelli resigned from the Board of Directors
of the bank in its meeting held on March 12, 2004.
RBI’s action of asking Shri Gelli to step down from the
chairmanship and directorship was expected to send strong signals to
the shareholders and the market forces should have disciplined the
errant behaviour. However, despite the regulator’s actions, the market
did not respond and continued to repose its faith in the bank as
reflected in its market valuation.

41
(ii) Other actions taken in this regard include:—
(a) In terms of the scheme of amalgamation, all the employees
of erstwhile GTB continue in service and are deemed to
have been appointed in OBC. As such, irregularities if any,
committed by the staff of the erstwhile GTB would have to
be looked into by OBC for fixing staff accountability and
initiating appropriate disciplinary and other proceedings. We
have advised OBC in this regard.
(b) RBI complained against M/s. Lovelock and Lewes and
M/s Pricewaterhouse, who were the statutory auditors for
GTB for the years 2001-02 and 2002-03 respectively for
making wrong classification of NPAs.
(c) RBI is examining the feasibility of initiating criminal action
against the promoters/directors of the erstwhile GTB for
misrepresenting/misreporting the financial statements for the
period ended March 31, 2002 and 2003.
(iii) The important measures taken to strengthen the banking
sector and prevent such recurrences in future are briefly,
the following:
(a) As reported earlier, the following prudential/supervisory
actions were taken:
• Introduction of capital adequacy standards on the lines of
the Basel norms.
•P rudential norms on asset classification, income recognition
and provisioning.
• Introduction of valuation norms and capital for market risk
for investments.
• Enhancing transparency and disclosure requirements for
published accounts.
• Aligning exposure/capital market exposure norms, single
borrower and group-borrower ceiling with international best
practices.
• Introduction of off-site monitoring system and strengthening
of the supervisory framework/introduction of Risk Based
Supervision for banks.
• The accounting treatment for impaired assets has been made
closer to the international best practices and the final

42
accounts of banks are transparent and more amenable to
meaningful interpretation of their performance.
• Introduction of a framework for prompt corrective action.
(b) Further, RBI has taken measures to improve corporate
governance in banks. RBI has put in place a system to
ensure the ‘fit and proper’ status of CEOs of banks through
a due diligence process. To ensure the continuing ‘fit and
proper’ status of the Board of Directors, RBI issued a
directive to banks on June 25, 2004, in terms of which the
Boards of the banks should constitute Nomination
Committees to scrutinize the declarations relating to
qualifications, expertise, track record, integrity, and other
‘fit and proper’ criteria of directors periodically.
(c) In the draft guidelines on ownership and governance issued
on July 2, 2004 RBI has reiterated ‘fit and proper’ criteria
for appointment of directors and CEO, so that the suitability
of persons for appointments/continuation as directors/CEO
is ensured.
(d) The draft guidelines on ownership and governance also
envisage that the capital requirement of existing private
sector banks should be on par with the entry level capital
requirement for new private sector banks prescribed in RBI
guidelines of January 3, 2001, which is initially Rs. 200 crore,
with a commitment to increase to Rs. 300 crore within three
years so that they have sufficient minimum size for financial
stability. In order to meet this requirement, all banks in
private sector should have a net worth of Rs. 300 crore at
all times and those falling below the level will be required
to submit to RBI for approval, a time-bound programme
for capital augmentation.
(iv) As regards legislative measures, the status is as follows:
(a) Section 30 of the Banking Regulation Act relates to audit of
a banking company. Presently, there is no obligation on the
auditors of a banking company to report any violation of
the provisions of B.R. Act and regulations or directions
issued thereunder while auditing books of the banks. Under
the core principles of international accounting standards, the
auditors are obliged to report to the supervisor the matters
of significance, which are likely to have an adverse effect
on the working of the banking company. Section 45MA of

43
the RBI Act already casts an obligation on the auditors of
the non-banking financial companies to report to the Reserve
Bank any violation of any provision of RBI Act or direction
issued thereunder.
(b) In the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Miscellaneous
Provisions Bill, 2003, which was tabled in the Parliament in
August, 2003 but lapsed due to dissolution of Parliament, it
was proposed to amend Section 30 of B.R. Act to provide
that the RBI may direct the auditor in the matter relating to
balance sheet, profit and loss account, disclosure of liabilities
in the books of account or any other matter relating thereto.
It was also proposed to provide that it would be the duty
of the auditor to enquire and state in the report whether or
not the banking company has complied with the provisions
of this Act or any direction or notification or order issued
thereunder. The Auditors should also enquire whether the
information or statements called for by the RBI have been
furnished to it or not and in case the bank has not complied
with this requirement, the auditor would make a report to
the RBI. The Bill is now being re-examined/reviewed.
[Ministry of Finance, O.M. No. 11/19-2004-BOA]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 124)
The Committee are seriously concerned that despite their repeated
recommendations in their earlier reports on Demands for Grants in
2001-2002, 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, urging the Government to bring
out a comprehensive disinvestment policy document which should be
laid before the Parliament for its approval, the Government neither
complied with their recommendations nor did the Government give
convincing reasons why the recommendations of the Committee were
not implemented. The Committee regret to recall that in their reply in
September, 2002 vide OM No. 45011/3/2000-Parl (Vol. II) dated 6.9.2002,
the Government had made a request to the Committee to allow some
more time to prepare and bring out a policy document which has not
materialized till date. The Committee are deeply concerned that in the
absence of a uniform Comprehensive Policy, disinvestment of PSUs is
being done on case-to-case basis thus subjecting disinvestment
programme vulnerable to public comments and apprehensions. The
Committee strongly urged the Government to shun its case-to-case
basis approach and adopt a cohesive and uniform approach so that
the policy may gain more transparency and credibility.

44
The Committee have been informed that the policy as stated in
the NCMP is the policy of the Government towards disinvestment.
The Committee are not able to understand as to why the Government
is wary of bringing forward a Comprehensive Policy Document which
may address all the aspects such as valuation, employees welfare, etc.
and which will deal with all types of PSUs. In the absence of a clear
cut policy, the Government has to evolve a new methodology every
time to deal with a particular situation. They are not convinced by the
Government’s reply that adequate publicity has been given to the policy
as stated in NCMP in the Budget Speech, interviews of the Finance
Minister on TV and print media. They see no reason why the
Government cannot bring the policy document before Parliament in
difference to the wishes of the Committee.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations
urging the Government to bring out a comprehensive documents on
disinvestment policy to be placed before the Parliament for its approval
without further delay.
Reply of the Government (i)
The policy of the Government with respect to the public sector
has been laid down in the National Common Minimum Programme
and the Government is following these principles while implementing
disinvestment on a case-by-case basis. A paper outlining the
implementation strategy for disinvestment is under consideration.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M. No.
35(1)/3/2004-Parl. Vol-II dated 25th January, 2005]
Reply of the Government (ii)
Preparation of White Paper on Disinvestment has already been
identified by the Government as one of the thrust areas for
implementation by the Department of Disinvestment and the work is
under progress.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M. No.
35(1)/3/2004-Parl. dated 3rd March, 2005]

45
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
25 August, 2005 Chairman,
03 Bhadra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

46
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 22nd August, 2005 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** ** **

47
6. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft
reports on (i) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the First Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment) and (ii) The Actuaries Bill, 2005
without any modification/amendment.
7. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
and to make verbal and other consequential changes arising out of the
factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

48
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT OF
THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON  FINANCE (FORTEENTH
LOK SABHA)  ON  DEMANDS  FOR GRANTS (2004-05) OF
THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC
AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 13
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 6 46.12
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,
6, 8, 9, 13)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 6 46.12
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4,
5, 9, 10, 12)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 5 38.4
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 5,
7, 8, 11)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 00.00
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited
(Nil)