STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
4747474747
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
lR;eso t;rs
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Thirty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Planning]
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORTFORTY-SEVENTH REPORTFORTY-SEVENTH REPORTFORTY-SEVENTH REPORTFORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Thirty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Planning]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14 December, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 December, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

C.O.F. No. 47C.O.F. No. 47C.O.F. No. 47C.O.F. No. 47C.O.F. No. 47
Price : Rs. 39.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
12
16
24
29
30
32
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .........................................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report...............................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government..................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies...............................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee...............................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited........
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
7th November, 2006..................................................................
APPENDICES
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Planning.......................................
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-07)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
* 12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
(iii)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Forty-seventh Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry
of Planning.
2. The Thirty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2006. The Government furnished the replies
indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 1 September, 2006.
The draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 7 December, 2006.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on recommenda-
tions contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
 N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
11 December , 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their
Thirty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Planning which was presented to Lok Sabha on
22 May, 2006.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the fourteen recommendations contained in the Report.
These have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Sl. Nos: 1 (Para Nos. 24 & 25), 2 (Para Nos. 41 & 42)
(Chapter-II, Total 4)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Sl. Nos.: 1 (Para No. 26), 3 (Para Nos. 55 & 56), 4 (Para
No. 63), 5 (Para No. 71) and 6 (Para No. 86)
(Chapter-III, Total 6)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos. 3 (Para No. 57), 5 (Para Nos. 69 & 70) and 6 (Para
No. 85)
(Chapter-IV, Total 4)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No.: Nil
(Chapter-V, Nil)
3. The Committee desire that replies in respect of the recommen-
dations contained in Chapter I should be furnished to the Committee
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

2
Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA)
(Mid-Day Meal Scheme)
Recommendation (S.No. 3, Para No. 57)Recommendation (S.No. 3, Para No. 57)Recommendation (S.No. 3, Para No. 57)Recommendation (S.No. 3, Para No. 57)Recommendation (S.No. 3, Para No. 57)
5. In Sarva Siksha Abhiyan, the Mid-Day Meal Scheme
(MDMS) was expected to reduce drop out rate by 5 percentage
points per annum, and improve retention of 1.5 million children every
year.
6. Though the Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MDMS) was stated to have
contributed, to some extent, to reduce drop out rates and increase in
school enrolment and attendance, the Committee expressed concern over
various media reports which stated that due to supply of contaminated/
sub-standard food, school children had fallen sick resulting into addition
in drop out rates and attendance. Hence the scheme required setting up
of proper distribution and monitoring mechanism at the State, District,
Block and Panchayat levels. The Committee, therefore, felt that the
Department concerned may conduct a Baseline Survey of MDMS and
based on the results thereof, take suitable steps to improve the quality
of meals supplied to school children. At the same time it was imperative
to impress upon the State Governments to conduct enquiries regarding
supply of contaminated or sub-standard food wherever it is reported,
accountability fixed and appropriate punishment awarded. The Commit-
tee desired to be apprised of the specific disciplinary action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
7. The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply stated as
under:
“State Governments have reported a few instances of food poisoning
in 2005-06. State-wise details along with action taken by them
is given in the Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex. below. The Department of School
Education & Literacy (DSEL) has continuously taken up with the

3
States to ensure regular supply of good quality mid-day meal to
children.
Various mechanisms have been established to ensure regularity and
maintenance of good quality meal. Some of them are:—
(i) Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees have been set-up at
State, District and Block levels. Periodically meetings are held
to tackle implementation issues at field level such as
uninterrupted supply of provisions, availability of manpower
and infrastructure, hygiene and safety etc.
(ii) The DSEL monitors the programme through Quarterly
Progress Reports.
(iii) 42 reputed Social Science Institutions, already monitoring SSA,
have been engaged to monitor MDM Scheme.
(iv) Guidelines of the Scheme also provide monitoring at school
level by Village Education Committee (VEC)/PTA/Mother
Teacher Association (MTA)/School Management Committee
and PRIs.
(v) The DSEL is in the process of developing Web enabled MIS
to facilitate monitoring by various management structures of
MDMS and disseminate programmatic information to general
public stakeholders etc., to ensure transparency and account-
ability.
As regards Baseline Survey, it is stated that in collaboration with
UNICEF, nutritional assessment of children of 6-14 age group has been
initiated.

4
Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.
Instances of food poisoning among children due to consumption
of Mid-Day Meal in 2005-06 and Action Taken by States:
Sl. No. State No. of children affected
in 2005-06
1. Andhra Pradesh 46
2. Karnataka 310
3. Maharashtra 77
4. Rajasthan 71
5. Tamil Nadu 77
6. West Bengal 85
2. Action taken by above State Governments are as follows:—
Andhra Pradesh : Cases were enquired and where it was proved
that incidence has occurred due to negligence of the implementing
agencies, such agencies were replaced. Appropriate warnings were
given to the school authorities to be vigilant.
Karnataka : The Headmasters and the Cooks were served
warnings.
Maharashtra : The incidents had occurred in 4 districts. Of these,
in one district viz., Jalgaon, FIR has been filed. Inquiries were made
in the remaining cases.
Rajasthan : Appropriate disciplinary action has been initiated
against Block Development Officer, Additional CEO of Zila
Parishad and School Authorities.
Tamil Nadu : The organizer, cook & assistants have been placed
under suspension.
West Bengal : An FIR has been filed in one case and in the second
case, no wilful misdeed was found after enquiry.”
[Planning Commission O.M. No.38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]

5
8. While noting with concern the supply of sub-standard/
contaminated food to the primary school children under MDMS in
several districts in the States like Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal during the
year 2005-06, the Committee had stressed upon the need to set-
up a proper distribution and monitoring mechanism at the State,
District, Block and Panchayat levels. The Committee had also
recommended that the Department may conduct a baseline survey
of MDMS to improve the quality of meals. Last but not the least,
the Committee had also impressed upon conducting inquiries and
appropriate punishment awarded to the guilty. However, they
observe from the reply that no stringent actions have been taken
in the matter either by the State Governments concerned or by the
Central Agency monitoring the Scheme. The Committee have been
informed that the Department of School Education and Literacy
(DSEL) is taking up the matter with the States to ensure regular
supply of good quality Mid-Day Meal to School children and that
Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees have been set up to tackle
implementation issues, alongwith 42 social science institutions, which
have been engaged to monitor MDMS alongwith SSA (Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan). The Committee also note the efforts of the DSEL to initiate
the process of developing web-enabled MIS to facilitate monitoring
by various Management Structures of MDMS and disseminate
programmatic information to general public stakeholders etc. to
ensure transparency and accountability. However, the Committee are
not satisfied with the pace of efforts undertaken in view of the fact
that despite the revised MDMS scheme having come into effect way
back in September, 2004, the Government has only ‘initiated’ the
nutritional assessment of primary school children so far. The
Committee further observe that no time frame has been fixed as
to when the said assessment would be completed. Hence they expect
a precise reply in the matter. Moreover, the Committee are of the
opinion that instead of crowding the monitoring mechanism of
MDMS with several Committees, it would be more appropriate if
the scheme is subjected to a ‘social audit’ by citizens in Gramsabha
and Village Panchayats.
9. In so far as the question of fixing individual responsibility
and taking follow up action for the sub-standard meals supplied to

6
children is concerned, the Committee are surprised to note the action
taken by the State Governments against those persons found to be
negligent in their duties, which is utterly inadequate by all standards.
The Committee note that there were 6 66 cases of food poisoning66 cases of food poisoning66 cases of food poisoning66 cases of food poisoning66 cases of food poisoning
due to consumption of Mid-Day Meal in 6 States during 2005-06,due to consumption of Mid-Day Meal in 6 States during 2005-06,due to consumption of Mid-Day Meal in 6 States during 2005-06,due to consumption of Mid-Day Meal in 6 States during 2005-06,due to consumption of Mid-Day Meal in 6 States during 2005-06,
for which the action taken has not gone beyond issuing warnings,for which the action taken has not gone beyond issuing warnings,for which the action taken has not gone beyond issuing warnings,for which the action taken has not gone beyond issuing warnings,for which the action taken has not gone beyond issuing warnings,
barring only 1 case where FIR has been filed. The Committee arebarring only 1 case where FIR has been filed. The Committee arebarring only 1 case where FIR has been filed. The Committee arebarring only 1 case where FIR has been filed. The Committee arebarring only 1 case where FIR has been filed. The Committee are
particularly perturbed over the lax attitude of the Karnatakaparticularly perturbed over the lax attitude of the Karnatakaparticularly perturbed over the lax attitude of the Karnatakaparticularly perturbed over the lax attitude of the Karnatakaparticularly perturbed over the lax attitude of the Karnataka
Government, which has merely served warnings to the personsGovernment, which has merely served warnings to the personsGovernment, which has merely served warnings to the personsGovernment, which has merely served warnings to the personsGovernment, which has merely served warnings to the persons
concerned despite the highest number of food-poisoning casesconcerned despite the highest number of food-poisoning casesconcerned despite the highest number of food-poisoning casesconcerned despite the highest number of food-poisoning casesconcerned despite the highest number of food-poisoning cases
reported there. In the Committee’s view, it is virtually a criminalreported there. In the Committee’s view, it is virtually a criminalreported there. In the Committee’s view, it is virtually a criminalreported there. In the Committee’s view, it is virtually a criminalreported there. In the Committee’s view, it is virtually a criminal
act to wilfully expose the already malnourished children of rural Indiaact to wilfully expose the already malnourished children of rural Indiaact to wilfully expose the already malnourished children of rural Indiaact to wilfully expose the already malnourished children of rural Indiaact to wilfully expose the already malnourished children of rural India
to the dangers of food poisoning, that calls for a stringent punishmentto the dangers of food poisoning, that calls for a stringent punishmentto the dangers of food poisoning, that calls for a stringent punishmentto the dangers of food poisoning, that calls for a stringent punishmentto the dangers of food poisoning, that calls for a stringent punishment
to be meted out to those found guilty. Therefore, they desire theto be meted out to those found guilty. Therefore, they desire theto be meted out to those found guilty. Therefore, they desire theto be meted out to those found guilty. Therefore, they desire theto be meted out to those found guilty. Therefore, they desire the
Ministry to sensitise the State Governments towards the concernsMinistry to sensitise the State Governments towards the concernsMinistry to sensitise the State Governments towards the concernsMinistry to sensitise the State Governments towards the concernsMinistry to sensitise the State Governments towards the concerns
expressed by this Committee and also urge them to improve theexpressed by this Committee and also urge them to improve theexpressed by this Committee and also urge them to improve theexpressed by this Committee and also urge them to improve theexpressed by this Committee and also urge them to improve the
quality of meals supplied under quality of meals supplied under quality of meals supplied under quality of meals supplied under quality of meals supplied under MDMS.

7
2.  Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 69 & 70)Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 69 & 70)Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 69 & 70)Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 69 & 70)Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 69 & 70)
10. The Committee noted that Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana envisages electricity access to all rural households over a period
of five years and electricity connections only to BPL households. But from
the information furnished to them, they found that at the end of fifth
year, all households would not be electrified as envisaged in the National
Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) because the current objective
aims only to provide electricity access to all rural households over a
period of 5 years and electricity connection only to BPL households. They,
therefore, desired that unless every household is electrified, the NCMP
objective may prove a mismatch.
11. The Committee further noted that the revised definition for
village electrification requires electrification of 10% of the total
households in that village to be recognized as electrified, in addition to
electrification of public places such as schools, Panchayat Offices,
Community/Health Centres etc. Hence, the claim relating to the number
of villages electrified appeared high when compared to the number of
households actually electrified. They, therefore, desired that an indepen-
dent verification may be carried out to assess the ground realities in this
regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
12. The Ministry of Planning in their action taken reply stated as
under:—
“Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) envisages
attainment of the National Common Minimum Programme
(NCMP) goal of providing access to electricity to all households in
five years. Under the scheme, projects are financed with capital
subsidy for provision of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone
(REDB), and creation of village electricity infrastructure, which shall
facilitate in giving access to electrification of households. Electricity
connection to un-electrified BPL households are also provided free
of cost as per norms of Kutir Jyoti Programme. Households above
the poverty line are required to pay for their connections at
applicable connection charges and connection shall be released on

8
their request. However, the applicable charges towards consump-
tion of electricity are payable by the households in both cases.
Supply of power for electrification of villages and households comes
under the purview of the States.
Under the scheme, projects are financed with capital subsidy
for provision of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB),
creation of village electricity infrastructure and electrification of
Below Poverty Line (BPL) households. Accordingly, the States
have reported that the works related to creation of REDB and
village electricity infrastructure have been completed in 12633
villages as on 19.6.06 and the process of providing electricity
connections to rural households (including BPL households) is
under process. Letters from the concerned Gram Panchayats/
Sarpanch to this effect are being collected. As desired by the
Committee, action for an independent verification to assess the
ground realities in this regard, has also been initiated. The State of
Uttar Pradesh has deployed M/s. RITES for the purpose and the
States of Uttaranchal, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal would be
availing the services of NTPC. The Programme Evaluation
Organisation of Planning Commission shall also be conducting an
evaluation study.”
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]
13. The Committee find that under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana, projects are financed with capital subsidy for
provision of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB) and
creation of village electricity infrastructure so as to provide access
to all Rural Households over a period of four years. They observe
that under the Yojana, the unelectrified BPL households get
electricity connection with 100% capital subsidy and APL families
are required to pay for that but both types of families have to pay
electricity consumption charges. The Committee feel that acceptance
by consumers for paying the electricity charges itself is going to be
a challenge for the States. Besides, from the reply of the Ministry,
the Committee note that the works related to creation of REDB and
village electricity infrastructure have been completed only in 12633
villages as on 19.6.2006. As per the Economic Survey 2005-06, at
present only 44% of the rural households have access to electricity.

9
The Committee recall that under Bharat Nirman, specific target set
for rural electrification was to provide electricity to all un-electrified
villages (1,25,000) and to connect 23 million BPL households by the
year 2009. By this criteria, the achievement so far does not seem
to be encouraging. Even the process of providing electricity
connections to rural households (including BPL) is also stated to be
under process and the letters from the concerned Gram Panchayats/
Sarpanch regarding claim relating to number of villages electrified
vis-a-vis the number of household actually electrified are being
collected. From the reply the Committee understand that action has
been initiated by four States for independent verification to assess
the ground realities of villages electrified and the actual number of
households electrified. The Committee, however, feel that the pace
is too slow to achieve the desired targets within the stipulated time
frame. They, therefore, desire that the Government should take
concrete steps for implementation of the Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana in letter and spirit. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the action taken by the Government in this direction.

10
3.  Labour and Employment (NSSO)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)
14. The Committee found that NSSO Sample Surveys and the
demographic census form the basis for estimation of labour force,
employment and unemployment. They also found that growth rate of
employment/labour force declined from 2.70% per annum during
the period 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.07% per year during 1993-94 to
1999-2000. As per the Survey conducted in 1999-2000, labour force
participation rates also declined sharply in comparison to 1993-94
resulting into sharp deceleration in the growth of labour force from 2.43%
during 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.31% in 1993-94 to 1999-2000. What the
Committee wanted to know from the Government was the latest result
of the sample survey conducted by the NSSO during July, 2004 — June,
2005 which the Government could not furnish by saying that the same
was not available with them. The Committee were surprised that even
after a lapse of almost one year, the results of the Survey are not available
with the Government. The Committee took a serious view in the matter
and expected the Government to come out with the result early, which
is so crucial for employment planning.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
15. The Government in their action taken reply, have stated as
follows:—
“The National Sample Survey Organisation in every five years,
surveys 1.5 lakh to 2.0 lakh households to find the employment/
unemployment status of individuals living in the households. The
survey is conducted throughout the country and in every region of
the country including difficult terrains and disturbed areas.
Compilations of results based on these surveys of individual
households takes a little time. However, NSSO has been informed
about the comments of the Standing Committee on Finance
(2005-06) of 14th Lok Sabha and asked to take necessary steps in
this regard.”
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
16. From the information furnished to them the Committee
find that NSSO Surveys 1.5 lakh to 2.0 lakh households in every
five years to find the status of employment and unemployment of

11
individuals living in the households. In their earlier report, the
Committee had expressed dismay over the fact that result of this
survey conducted in 2004-05 was still not released as it had an
important bearing on the employment Planning. The Planning
Commission was expected to get the results of the survey and apprise
the Committee of the same. They are also not convinced with
Government’s response which states that compilation of results based
on these surveys of individual households takes time owing to the
fact that the survey is conducted throughout the country and in
difficult terrains and disturbed areas. They feel that NSSO, which
has been functioning since the year 1970, is not only equipped with
a strong infrastructure but also holds enough experience to conduct
the survey work, right from the planning of survey to the release
of survey results. Therefore, the Committee desire that the results
of the survey held in 2004-05 should have been released well in
time. Further, they desire that the results must come without further
loss of time as without the latest figures, the estimation of labour
force, employment and unemployment will not be realistic and the
objective of employment planning will be difficult to achieve.

12
CHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER IICHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 24)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 24)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 24)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 24)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 24)
The Committee note that Geographical Information System (GIS) for
planning (Rural and Urban) as a tool or as a support system for location
specific planning was not being used so far adequately in the planning
process resulting in poor and haphazard/uncoordinated maintenance of
different utilities such as water-lines, power-lines, telephone lines etc.
From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that
Spatial Data Infrastructure for Multi-Layered Geographical Information
System (GIS) project for planning has been undertaken by the Ministry
with an aim to build necessary framework for evolving a self-sustaining
system for continuous development for GIS applications, in the areas of
resource and Infrastructure planning, disaster management, soil and
water conservation etc. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by
the Planning Commission in this direction, particularly creation of a
seamless GIS for the entire country, which, in view of the phenomenal
pressure on utility services in big cities, is the need of the hour.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
This is a general comment by the Committee and do not call for
any further comments/reply.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 25)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 25)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 25)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 25)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 25)
The Committee find that at present many agencies are involved in
preparation of maps e.g. Survey of India, Geographical Survey of India,
Forest Survey of India etc. However, these maps are on analog format
as well as different scales, and thus, are unable to provide information
for location-specific planning. Taking note of GIS project sponsored by
the Planning Commission relating to utility mapping for seven metros
like Delhi, Ahemadabad, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and
12

13
Mumbai, the Committee find that 48 crore has been spent on it and
around Rs. 20 crore is estimated to be spent during the current year. They
further note that the project, once completed, will help civic agencies to
pinpoint even a manhole cover or do the alignment of a sewer-line/water-
line etc. Thus, utility mapping would be possible and its maintenance
systems will improve to a great extent including other applications such
as vehicle navigation system based on Global Positioning System (GPS).
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Planning Commission and
hope that the project would be completed in time. In this connection, the
Committee would also expect that once the project is found to be useful
for its intended objectives, other metros/major cities may also be
considered for the same.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Geographical Information System (GIS) has been developed for
23 identified layers with seamless data across the country and provides
a unique platform with visual representation of data for Planning and
monitoring in various sectors. Data for this system has been developed
with support from various organizations including Survey of India (SoI),
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Registrar General of India
(RGI), Forest Survey of India (FSI), National Bureau of Soil Survey & Land
Use Planning (NBSS & LUP), All India Soil & Land Use Survey (AISLUS)
etc. This data has been ported on central GIS server at NIC hqrs. with
mirror server at Planning Commission. The entire data has been
customized in a user friendly environment and has been deployed on
the network for its utilization with G2G environment.
GIS provides a platform for utilization of data for planning in
number of sectors. Apart from hosting of this data on the web to be used
by various users, a number of specific applications have been customized
to assist the planning in various sectors. One of the applications
developed include thematic mapping for Amenities and Demography at
village level with census data 2001 from RGI. It provides district level
maps for most of the infrastructure data such as status of Power, Health,
Education etc. The application developed for Telecom sector includes
Mapping of towers for mobile services across the country. The application
provides view of coverage of services across villages in the country and
planning of new towers for uncovered areas. GIS for Emergency
Preparedness and Response System is one of the unique application
wherein mapping of hazardous chemicals is undertaken by MoEF and

14
also areas delineated through chemical modelling with worst case
scenario. Other applications include mapping data from drinking water
mission, health, animal census etc.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 41)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 41)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 41)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 41)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 41)
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY) was launched as a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the
target of connecting, through good all-weather roads, every habitations,
having population of more than 500, by the year 2007. From the
information furnished to them, they find that Government have now
revised the criteria of population for road connectivity, which was earlier
250 and above, owing to crunch of funds. The new criteria provides for
road connectivity of those habitations having population of 1000 and
above and 500 population in hilly, desert and tribal areas. The Committee
further note that about 49017 habitations have been connected (under
the PMGSY) so far. The programme (Bharat Nirman) as a whole, needs
Rs. 48,000 crore which could be managed partly from the cess money
on HSD (Rs. 16,000 crore), multilateral funding (Rs. 9,000 crore) and
remaining Rs. 23,000 crore with an increase of budgetary support/cess
of over Rs. 6000 crore or so. A separate window in NABARD has been
proposed to raise funds to meet this gap. The NABARD will give loan
to National Rural Road Development Agency (NRRDA), which in turn
will provide it to all States. The Committee note that the actual modalities
of utilizing the NABARD window is currently being worked out by the
Ministry of Rural Development in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance. They expect the process to be completed early so that the
programme could be taken up for implementation without delay at least
on this account.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
There is no change in the targets of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana to provide connectivity through good all-weather roads to all the
habitations having a population of 500 and above (250 and above in Hill
States, tribal and desert areas). In order to adopt a more focused and time
bound approach under Bharat Nirman, it has been proposed to provide
connectivity to all 1000 + habitations (500 + in hilly and tribal areas)
by 2009. The remaining eligible habitations would be taken up thereafter.
The procedures and modalities of availing funds from NABARD have
been agreed to, in-principle, by the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Rural

15
Development has accordingly initiated the process to obtain approval of
the Cabinet for these procedures and modalities, so that the programme
can be taken up for implementation without delay.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)
The Committee note that few districts are left in the Southern and
Western States under PMGSY. However, they are constrained to observe
that large number of Districts are left in some other States despite being
identified for providing connectivity. They note that the pace of the
receiving proposals from some of these States is abysmally low.
Therefore, they hope that, with coming into picture of NABARD funding
the programme, the pace may gain some momentum henceforth. They
also desire that Government should make sincere efforts urgently to
assess the progress of PMGSY in all the States and take necessary
corrective measures to put the scheme on the right track.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The inter States and inter districts disparities in rural road
connectivity is historical. However, the target under Bharat Nirman is to
connect all the habitations having population of 1000 and above
(500 and above in hilly and tribal areas) by 2009 which will remove the
present disparity to a great extent. All out efforts are being made to
enhance the capacity of the States. Wherever required, the States are being
allowed to outsource certain activities to augment their capacity. More
than 5000 engineers of different States have already been trained to orient
them towards PMGSY standards. Training is also planned for
Contractor’s engineers and workmen.
The progress in the implementation of the programme is regularly
monitored through monthly progress reports received from the States and
field visits by the Officers of the Ministry and the National Rural Roads
Development Agency, which is an arm of the Ministry to provide
technical support for the programme. Regional Review Meetings and
Workshops involving all the States are also held in different places to
closely monitor the progress, identify bottlenecks and suggest solutions
for removing the bottlenecks for better implementation of the programme.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C
dated 30th August, 2006]

16
16
CHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IIICHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S
REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 26)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 26)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 26)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 26)Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 26)
What the Committee apprehend in this regard is that the Ministry
may face problems in collecting the data/information from the agencies
concerned for the purpose of utility mapping since their information is
likely to be old/not up to date. The Committee also feel that since many
agencies/stakeholders will be involved in the process, maintaining
coordination between those may also become problematic. Therefore, the
Committee desire that the Ministry may explore the possibility of
including a representative each from the public utility service providers
of the city concerned in the mapping project. They further feel that once
the project is completed, instructions may be issued to the concerned
utility agencies to take clearance from the Government prior to any major
maintenance work. The Committee also desires that a mechanism should
be put in place for creation of a transaction specific data capture for
automatic updation thereof.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Necessary arrangements have been made to ensure that
proper coordination between the agencies/stakeholders in the project
relating to “Computer Aided Digital Mapping Project for six cities –
Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Kolkata”
has been established. The State Government will create a State level
Committee (SLC) in each of the six cities where the project is being
implemented for necessary coordination as well as implementation of the
project.
The SLC will ensure the participation of all the agencies providing
physical infrastructure like water, sewage, telephone network,
power supply systems etc. and also identify an office space for

17
establishing “Control Centre” convenient to them to locate central
server and other peripherals necessary for Metropolitan Area Network
(MAN).
Each utility agency will have access to the digital base map data
installed on the central server located at Control Centre through dedicated
leased lines connecting central server at Control centre to the Server at
Remote Centre. Agency will collect their utility network and related data
and superimpose it on the common digital base map visible on their
remote server. Utility network of all the utility agencies can be viewed
together or in combination to plan and execute their activities
appropriately.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 55)
The Committee note that Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) has made
some progress in 2005-06 in regard to starting up and providing new
schools additional class rooms/teachers. As a result, 93% of children
between the age-group of 6-14 years are presently stated to be in school
and the number of children out of school has come down to 0.98 crore
in 2004-05. Keeping in view this reported progress the budget outlay of
the Abhiyan has been increased from Rs. 7,156 crore to Rs. 10,041 crore
in 2006-07.
Reply of the Government
The budget outlay of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) has been
increased to Rs. 11,000 crore in 2006-07 including that for the North
Eastern Region (NER) from Rs. 7800 crore in 2005-06.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 56)
However, at the same time the Committee are constrained to note
that the objective of SSA, which was to enroll all children in schools/
EGS/AIE centres by 2003, and that all children would complete five years

18
of schooling by 2007, could not be achieved, the reason being delayed
start of SSA, as the States took time for preparation of district perspective
plans under SSA. From the information furnished, they also find that
the target to reduce the dropout rates by 5% points every year is not being
met consistently as during this year 2003-04, the reduction rate was
merely 3.53%. The Committee take note of the reviews with concern which
indicated that about 50% of the total out-of-school children in the country
are in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal. The Committee
are of the firm view that unless special efforts are made to increase
enrolment and participation of children in these States, the situation is
going to deteriorate further. As around 73 districts have already been
identified by the Department for special enrolment drives, the Committee
expect that action might have been initiated in these districts. However,
they desire that the Government must continue in their efforts to counter
teacher absenteeism and sensitize the rural population through
appropriate folk publicity measures, about the importance of education
for their children so that the children do not drop out of schools mid-
day.
Reply of the Government
1. (i) The goals of SSA for enrolling all children in school/EGS/
bridge courses by 2003 was revised to 2005 by the Governing
Council of the National Mission of SSA in its meeting on
23.02.2005.
(ii) The dr opout rates at primary levels have been declining
steadily from 39.03% in 2001-02 to 31.36% in 2003-04. The
drop out rate for girls during the same period has shown a
more encouraging reduction of 11.44% points.
2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 Redu ction between
2001-02 and 2003-04
Total 39.03 34.89 31.36 7. 67% points
Boys 38.36 35.85 33.66 4.7 points
Girls 39.88 33.72 28.44 11.44 points

19
2. An independent national level survey by SRI-IMRB in July-August
2005 revealed that 1.34 crore children in the age-group of 6-14 years are
out of school/69% of the out of school children are in the 5 States of
Bihar (23.6%), Uttar Pradesh (22.2%), West Bengal (9%) Madhya Pradesh
(8%) and Rajasthan (5.9%).
Therefore for the year 2006-07, targeted attention was paid to these
States by allocating:
— 50% of total SSA funds allocated in 2006-07.
— 55% of total schools; 58% of additional classrooms &
67% of teachers.
3. Also 48 districts were identified as having the largest number of
out of school children and were also targeted for special attention by
allocating to these districts 17% of SSA funds.
4. The stress in SSA is to improve the quality of teaching of children.
To this effect, the Minister of Human Resources Development had written
to the State Chief Ministers and Lieutenant Governors on 7th April, 2006
for;
— Independent testing of students and teachers performance
— Ensure teachers presence in school hours
— Remedial teaching for weaker students
— Decentralized academic support to teachers.
5. Extensive use of Doordarshan & AIR and the print media is being
done to address parents/community teachers with the concept of school
ownership by local communities, teachers to do joyful teaching and
parents to send children to school, particularly the girl child.
Dissemination of SSA funds and targets of school infrastructure etc. are
also being done through newspapers.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

20
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 63)
The Committee are disturbed over the fact that though the
Government has been promising since the year 2002 to provide telephone
connectivity to all villages in the country, a lot still remains to be done.
The Government has now expressed confidence to provide connectivity
to all uncovered villages so  far by the year 2007 through 66,822 VPTs,
for which adequate fund provision from Universal Service Obligation
Fund (USOF) is reportedly available. However, going by the past record,
the Committee are not very sure if this extended target can be met. Besides,
as the Government has committed to complete the task in another one-
and-a half year, the Committee feel that the increasing popularity of
mobile phones, even in the semi-urban and rural areas, may adversely
affect the actual utility of landlines in the long run. Therefore, the
Committee feel that keeping this factor in mind, the Government should
not only ensure that the VPTs are provided in all villages at the earliest
but should also keep scope open for providing cellular mobile telephones
in select rural areas. In this connection the Committee note that in order
to extend financial support to infrastructure for cellular telephony in rural
areas, the Government is contemplating to bring a Bill to amend the
Indian Telegraph Act. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Agreements have been signed with M/s BSNL in November, 2004
to provide VPTs in the remaining uncovered eligible 66,822 villages,
25,431 VPTs have already been provided by M/s. BSNL till April, 2006.
A close watch is being kept on the implementation and every
attempt will be made to ensure that the task is completed before
November, 2007.
A proposal is under active consideration of the Government to
support infrastructure for providing mobile services in the rural and
remote areas of the country. To enable such support, a bill to amend
Indian Telegraph Act has already been introduced in the Budget Session
of the Parliament and the same has been referred to the Standing
Committee.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

21
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 71)
The Committee are unhappy to note that around 80% unelectrified
villages are mostly located in the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, the reasons being that
the State utilities pertaining to these States do not have the requisite
manpower and technical expertise to implement the rural electrification
programme within the stipulated time frame as envisaged under
RGGVY. The Committee learn that for implementation of the RGGVY,
some States like Assam, J&K, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Tripura
have entered into agreement with the CPSUs under the Ministry of
Power. In this backdrop, the Committee feel the States which do not
have requisite manpower or technical expertise may be persuaded to
enter into an agreement with CPSUs for the implementation of the
project. In addition, a special component may be created under
RGGVY in order to give a boost to rural electrification in the backward
States in the form of assistance to appoint/depute required technical
experts.
Reply of the Government
Under the scheme, the services of Central Public Sector
Undertakings (CPSUs) have been offered to the States for assisting
them in the execution of Rural Electrification Projects as per their
willingness and requirement. Accordingly, the States of Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, J & K, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal are availing the
services of CPSUs of power sector like POWER GRID, NHPC, NTPC
and DVC, for implementation of rural electrification projects under
RGGVY.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 86)
The Committee are further disturbed to note that number of
registrants of job seekers in employment exchanges have not come down
despite Government’s claim that job placement taking place outside the
purview of employment exchanges is substantial. From the information

22
furnished, the Committee find that Government is promoting labour
intensive sectors for creation of employment potential and 10th Plan has
also taken initiative in this regard. Despite all these, employment in
organised sector – both in public and private – has declined, which the
Committee feel, is a very discouraging scenario keeping in view the ever-
increasing number of job seekers. It may be pertinent to mention that
one of the prime factors contributing towards rise in crimes and terrorist
activities is lack of direction as well as appropriate employment
opportunities for the country’s youth. The Committee, therefore, desire
that Government should come out with suitable measures to provide
employment to youth. The Committee would also like the Government
to be more cautious in restructuring the Government Departments,
as a result of which employment has further declined in public
organised sector. Keeping in view the present scenario of high growth
rate of unemployment, the Committee recommended that the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme, which reportedly
has been implemented only in some 200 Districts, be extended to
other districts also for facilitating jobs to unemployed youth. The
Committee also feel that the suggestions made in the Mid-Term Appraisal
of the 10th Five Year Plan document to amend existing Labour Laws,
be examined expeditiously to promote the growth of organized
employment. Further, in order to give a boost to self-employment,
the Committee urge the Government to encourage credit-linked
entrepreneurship too.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission has initiated the process of formulation
of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012). In this direction, one
Steering Committee for Labour and Employment has already been set
up to look into the issues of employment generation, labour, regulations
etc. among others. The issues of employment in organized sector and
employment for youth will also be considered by the Working Group
on Labour Force and Employment Projection. There are also other
Working Groups set up for the Eleventh Plan like Working Group on
Skill Development and Vocational Training, Working Group on Labour
Laws and other Labour Regulations and Working Group on Social
Security.

23
Steering Committee for Labour and Employment, Working Group
on Labour Force and Employment Projection and Working Group
on Labour Laws and other Labour Regulations in particular will be
looking into the issue of promotion of regular wage employment
and suggest measures for arresting the decline in organized sector
employment and increasing regular wage employment outside public
organized sector.
The leading Departments of the Central Government, State
Governments, Chambers of Commerce and Trade Unions in the country
are also taking active role in this exercise of the 11th Plan.
As regards the National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme,
the scheme will be extended to all rural areas in the perspective.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

24
24
CHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IVCHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 57)
Though the Mid-Day Meal Scheme is stated to have contributed,
to some extent, to reduce drop out rates and increase in school enrolment
and attendance, the Committee expressed concern over various media
reports which state that due to supply of contaminated/sub-standard
food school children fall sick resulting into addition in drop out rates
and attendance. Hence the scheme requires setting up of proper
distribution and monitoring mechanism at the State, District, Block and
Panchayat levels. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Department
concerned may conduct a Baseline Survey of MDMS and based on the
results thereof, take suitable steps to improve the quality of meals
supplied to school children. At the same time it is imperative to impress
upon the State Governments to conduct enquiries regarding supply of
contaminated or sub-standard food wherever it is reported, accountability
fixed and appropriate punishment awarded. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the specific disciplinary action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
State Governments have reported a few instances of food poisoning
in 2005-06. State-wise details along with action taken by them
is given in the Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex. below. The Department of School
Education & Literacy (DSEL) has continuously taken up with the States
to ensure regular supply of good quality mid-day meal to children.
Various mechanisms have been established to ensure regularity and
maintenance of good quality meal. Some of them are:—
(i) Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees have been set-up at
State, District and Block levels. Periodically meetings are held
to tackle implementation issues at field level such as
uninterrupted supply of provisions, availability of manpower
and infrastructure, hygiene and safety etc.

25
(ii) The DSEL monitors the programme through Quarterly
Progress Reports.
(iii) 42 reputed Social Science Institutions, already monitoring SSA,
have been engaged to monitor MDM Scheme.
(iv) Guidelines of the Scheme also provide monitoring at school
level by Village Education Committee (VEC)/PTA/Mother
Teacher Association (MTA)/School Management Committee
and PRIs.
(v) The DSEL is in the process of developing Web enabled MIS
to facilitate monitoring by various management structures of
MDMS and disseminate programmatic information to general
public stakeholders etc., to ensure transparency and account-
ability.
As regards Baseline Survey, it is stated that in collaboration with
UNICEF, nutritional assessment of children of 6-14 age group has been
initiated.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

26
Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.Annex.
Instances of food poisoning among children due to consumption
of Mid-Day Meal in 2005-06 and Action Taken by States:
Sl. No. State No. of children affected
in 2005-06
1. Andhra Pradesh 46
2. Karnataka 310
3. Maharashtra 77
4. Rajasthan 71
5. Tamil Nadu 77
6. West Bengal 85
2. Action taken by above State Governments are as follows:—
Andhra Pradesh :  Cases were enquired and where it was proved
that incidence has incurred due to negligence of the implementing
agencies, such agencies were replaced. Appropriate warnings were
given to the school authorities to be vigilant.
Karnataka :  The Headmasters and the Cooks were served
warnings.
Maharashtra :  The incidents had incurred in 4 districts. Of these,
in one district viz., Jalgaon, FIR has been filed. Inquiries were made
in the remaining cases.
Rajasthan :  Appropriate disciplinary action has been initiated
against Block Development Officer, Additional CEO of Zila
Parishad and School Authorities.
Tamil Nadu : The organizer, cook and assistants have been placed
under suspension.
West Bengal : An FIR has been filed in one case and in the second
case, no wilful misdeed was found after enquiry.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

27
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 69)
The Committee note that Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana envisages electricity access to all rural households over a period
of five years and electricity connections only to BPL households. But from
the information furnished to them, they find that at the end of fifth year,
all households would not be electrified as envisaged in the National
Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) because the current objective
aims only to provide electricity access to all rural households over a
period of 5 years and electricity connection only to BPL households. They,
therefore, desire that unless every household is electrified, the NCMP
objective may prove a mismatch.
Reply of the Government
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) envisages
attainment of the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) goal
of providing access to electricity to all households in five years. Under
the scheme, projects are financed with capital subsidy for provision of
Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB), and creation of village
electricity infrastructure, which shall facilitate in giving access to
electrification of households. Electricity connection to un-electrified BPL
households are also provided free of cost as per norms of Kutir Jyoti
Programme. Households above the poverty line are required to pay for
their connections at applicable connection charges and connection shall
be released on their request. However, the applicable charges towards
consumption of electricity are payable by the households in both the
cases. Supply of power for electrification of villages and households
comes under the purview of the States.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 70)
The Committee further note that the revised definition for village
electrification requires electrification of 10% of the total households in
that village to be recognized as electrified, in addition to electrification
of public places such as schools, Panchayat Offices, Community/Health
Centres etc. Hence, the claim relating to the number of villages electrified
appeared high when compared to the number of households actually
electrified. They, therefore, desired that an independent verification may
be carried out to assess the ground realities in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Under the scheme, projects are financed with capital subsidy for
provision of Rural Electricity Distribution Backbone (REDB), creation of
village electricity infrastructure and electrification of Below Poverty Line

28
(BPL) households. Accordingly, the States have reported that the works
related to creation of REDB and village electricity infrastructure have been
completed in 12633 villages as on 19.6.2006 and the process of providing
electricity connections to rural households (including BPL households)
is under process. Letters from the concerned Gram Panchayats/Sarpanch
to this effect are being collected. As desired by the Committee, action
for an independent verification to assess the ground realities in this
regard, has also been initiated. The State of Uttar Pradesh has
deployed M/s. RITES for the purpose and the States of Uttaranchal,
Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal would be availing the services of
NTPC. The Programme Evaluation Organisation unit of Planning
Commission shall also be conducting an evaluation study.
[Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 85)
The Committee find that NSSO Sample Surveys and the demographic
census form the basis for estimation of labour force, employment and
unemployment. They find that growth rate of employment/labour force
declined from 2.70% per annum during the period 1983 to 1993-94 to only
1.07% per year during 1993-94 to 1999-2000. As per the Survey conducted
in 1999-2000, labour force participation rates also declined sharply in
comparison to 1993-94 resulting into sharp deceleration in the growth of
labour force from 2.43% during 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.31% in 1993-
94 to 1999-2000. What the Committee wanted to know from the
Government was the latest result of the sample survey conducted by the
NSSO during July, 2004 - June, 2005 which the Government could not
furnish by saying that the same was not available with them. The
Committee are surprised that even after a lapse of almost one year, the
results of the Survey are not available with the Government. The Committee
take a serious view in the matter and expected the Government to come
out with the result early, which is so crucial for employment planning.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The National Sample Survey Organisation in every five years,
surveys 1.5 lakh to 2.0 lakh households to find the employment/
unemployment status of individuals living in the households. The survey
is conducted throughout the country and in every region of the country
including difficult terrains and disturbed areas. Compilations of results
based on these surveys of individual households takes a little time.
However, NSSO has been informed about the comments of the Standing
Committee on Finance (2005-06) of 14th Lok Sabha and asked to take
necessary steps in this regard.
[Planning Commission, O.M. No. 38/5/2006–OM&C,
dated 30th August, 2006]

29
29
CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
 N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI
11 December , 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

30
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday the 7th December, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
14. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
15. Shri Rupchand Pal
16. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
17. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
18. Shri K.S. Rao
19. Shri Lakshman Seth
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
30

31
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. The Committee, then took up for consideration the draft
reports on action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 38th Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Planning.
5. ** ** ** ** **
6. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft reports
on (i) action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 38th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-
07) of Ministry of Planning.
7. ** ** ** ** **
8. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Reports in the light of suggestions received from the Members and also
make consequential verbal changes and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 11 December. 2006.

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-EIGHTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANING
(i) Total Number of Recommendations
(ii) Recommendations/observations
which have been accepted by the
Government.
(Vide Recommendations No. 1 (Para
Nos. 24 & 25), 2 (Para Nos. 41 & 42)
(iii) Recommendations/observations
which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the
Governments replies.
(Vide Recommendations Nos. 1 (Para
No. 26), 3 (Para Nos. 55 & 56), 4
(Para No. 63), 5 (Para No. 71) and 6
(Para No. 86)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in
respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted
by the Committee.
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3 (Para
Nos. 57), 5 (Para Nos. 69 & 70) and
6 (Para No. 85)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in
respect of which final reply of the
Government is still awaited  (Nil)
Total % of total
14
4 28.57%
6 42.86%
4 28.57%
Nil Nil
32