3 
         
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
                                                        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2004/Sravana, 1926(Saka)

 
THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
                                  (2004-05) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20  August, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2004/Sravana, 1926(Saka)

CONTENTS 
 
 
           
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
REPORT………………………………………………………………..    1 
 
   
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
   11 AND 19 AUGUST,  2004 ……………………………………….  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
                               M
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.R. Antulay 
3. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
6. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
9. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
10. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
11. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
12. Shri Rupchand Pal 
13. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
14. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
15. Shri K.S. Rao 
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
17. Shri Lakshman Seth 
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
19. Shri Ajit Singh 
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
21. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri P.D.T. Achary - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
     4.    Shri R.C. Kakkar  - Under Secretary  
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present this Third Report on Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Planning. 
2.   The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Planning were laid on the Table of 
the House on 11 July, 2004. Under Rule 331E  of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha, the Standing Commi ttee on Finance are required to consider 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/D epartments under their jurisdiction and make 
Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
3.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of  the Ministry of 
Planning at their sitting held on 11 August, 2004 in connection with examination of the 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005).  
 4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 
19 August, 2004. 
5.   The Committee wish to ex press their t hanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Planning for the co-operation extended by them  in furnishing written replies and for 
placing their considered views and perceptions before the Committee. 
6.  For facility of reference, the obs ervations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         MAJ. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                              Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  
  

REPORT 
Introductory 
 
1.   The Planning Commission was constituted in March, 1950 by a Resolution of 
the Government of India and acts as the Secretariat of  the National Development 
Council.  The Planning Commission consults the Central Ministri es and the State 
Governments while formulating Five Year Plans and Annual Plans and also oversees 
their implementation.  The Commission also functions as an advisory Planning body at 
the apex level. 
 2.   The Planning Commission functions th rough several subjects matter Divisions 
and a few Specialist Divisions.  These Divisions fall under two broad categories.  
(i) Specialist Divisions which ar e concerned with aspects of entire 
economy e.g. Perspective Planning, Financial Resources, 
Development Policy Division, etc., and 
(ii) Subject Divisions e.g. Agricu lture, Education, Health, Housing 
Divisions, etc., which are conc erned with specified fields of 
development in the related areas. 
3.   The overall Demands for Grants per taining to Ministry of Planning is as 
follows:- 
Demand No. 72  - Ministry of Planning                          8269.88 crores 
 
4. In the present Report, the Committee have examined following issues:- 
(i) GDP – Indicator of Growth Performance of the Economy 
(ii) Fiscal Performance in the Tenth Plan 
(iii) National Commission on Population 
(iv) Modernisation of Office Systems  
(v) Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR) - Grants-in-Aid 
(vi) Payment for Professional and Special Services 
 
 
  

 
1. GDP – Indicator of Growth Performance  of the Economy 
 
5. The Indian economy has completed two years of the Tent h Five Year Plan 
(2002-07), which is not only ambi tious in its target fixing,  but also optimistic about 
exploiting the development potential of t he economy to its fullest with all the 
eagerness to place India amongst one of the fastest growing economy in the world.  
Enhancement of human well being in terms of all socio-economic indicators has been 
central to the objectives of the Tenth Plan.  Fulfillment of these objectives rests on 
achievement of the NDC  mandated target growth rate of 8%  on average per annum. 
Transformation of the Indian ec onomy from a historical grow th path of about 5.5% to 
an accelerated growth trajectory of 8% would technically depend on the achievement 
of the crucial macro economic parameters, such as savings rate and investment rate 
estimated at 26.84%  and 28.41 % of GDP,  respectively.  The Tenth Plan puts 
emphasis on enhancement of capital efficiency as the guiding principle of all policy 
intervention for making the growth target feasible.  
6. The economy has suffered serious set back in terms of growth, estimated 
at 4.0% in real term in the first year ( 2002-03) of the Tenth Plan.   However, growth 
performance of the economy in the second year of the Tent h Plan (2003-04) as 
released by the Central Statistical Organisa tion in its Advance Estimates of National 
Income, reveals that the economic growth w ould accelerate to more than 8 per cent.  
Since this accelerated growth would be geared by significantly good performance in 
agriculture sector, it is possible to main tain the growth momentum in the medium 
term through demand generating impact of agriculture growth.  
   7.            The overall perfo rmance of the economy duri ng 2002-03 suffered further 
deceleration in the economic growth compared to the previous year.  As per the latest 
estimates on National income, brought out by the CSO, the Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) grew at a rate of around 4.0% during 2002-03 as co mpared to 5.8 percent in 
2001-02.  This slow growth was on account of poor monsoon that resulted in negative 
growth rate for the agriculture sector (-5.2%) and a consequent dec line in the overall 
growth rate.  
  8.           As per the Advance Estima tes, the overall growth in real Gross Domestic 
Product was expected to be 8.1 percent in 2003-04.  The assumed growth rates of 
  

9% percent in agriculture and allied  sector, 6.5 percent in industry and 8.4 percent in 
the service sector.  
               
9.    Tenth Five Year Plan envisages the rate of growth of economy as 8% per 
annum during the period 2002 to 2006-07  as enunciated in its objectives.  The 
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech inform ed that ‘maintaining a growth rate of 7-
8 percent per year for a sustained period’  is one of the economic objectives of CMP. 
 
10.   When asked about the ac tual economic growth rate during 2003-04  and  the 
projected economic growth rate as es timated by the Planning Commission for the 
current year, i.e. 2004-05 and also the st eps proposed by the Planning Commission 
to achieve accelerated economic growth, the Committee have been informed as  
under: 
“As per the information available fr om the National Accounts Statistics 
(NAS) brought out by the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), the rate 
of growth of the economy for t he year 2003-04 was 8.3 per cent 
expressed in terms of Gross Domestic Product at Market Prices.  
Planning Commission does not fix growth targets on annual basis.  
 
          In order to achieve steady acceleration growth performance, the 
Tenth Plan has suggested  
  
• Larger public investments in infrastructure and social sectors; 
• Improvement in allocative efficiency of resources;  
• Enacting policy reforms with a view to creating an investor friendly 
environment;  
      improving governance and enhancing the efficiency of delivery 
systems.” 
 
11.               The Committee  desired to know the details of  economic  and investment 
growth, the Secretary, Ministry of Planning , during oral evidence  stated: 
 “As far as investment is concerned,  last year 8.3 percent rate of 
growth that was achieved is something which is self evident.  Investment 
did not take place proportionately.  Normally, we expect an ICOR of 3.5  
to 4 percent which would mean that fo r the growth rate of 8 percent, we 
should have had at least an investment level of about 28 percent or 28.5 
percent.” 
 
12. When the attention of t he representative of the Mi nistry was drawn to the 
fact that according to the Government, fi gure  it was 22.7 percent, the Secretary  
stated as under: 
  

 
   “Our estimate is slightly hi gher around 24%.  What ever be the number, 
how it has happened is primarily becaus e there was a capacity surplus 
which has got created duri ng the nineties.  That  surplus capacity got 
utilised last year.  The interest factor has also become a very major factor 
which improved the profitab ility.  This is partly as  an explanation of what 
you have pointed out.  I would like to definitely mention, Sir, that let us not 
forget that even though the growth ra te last year was 8.3 percent, the 
growth rate in the first year of Tenth Plan was 4.6 percent.  Therefore, the 
resultant growth rate that we get for the first two years is only 6.4 percent.  
So, with 6.4 percent growth rate in firs t two years, the target of achieving 
8 percent growth rate is going to be al most, I won’t say impossible, but it 
appear to be improbable because there  is a pull back factor that we have 
already lost two years and our average rate of growth is 6.4 percent.  
This is the one point which we are look ing at.  More realistic figure would 
be the range between 7 to  8 percent and not 8 percent and above.  
Therefore, there will be probably a review of this.” 
 
13.    The Committee desired to know about the relationship between growth rate of 
GDP and  investment rate, the Ministry in  their supplementary reply have submitted 
as under: 
 
“There is a view in economics that the rate of growth of an economy 
is driven almost entirely by the investment rate, other things 
remaining the same. In other word s, higher GDP growth cannot be 
obtained without an increase in the inve stment rate. This view is by 
and large correct in the medium to  long-run. In the short run, 
however, there can be deviations from this relationship. There can be 
many factors that can change t he relationship between output and 
investment such as the level of capacity utilisation, the lag between 
investment and capacity created, st ructure of the economy, etc. 
Therefore, the relationship between the investment and the growth of 
output (GDP) should not be judged on the basis of short-term 
changes in the level of investm ent and the corresponding growth 
rates of the economy. Recent theoretical literature also suggests that 
the relationship between investment ra te and growth rate of capacity 
is not constant.  
 
         14.      The Ministry has further informed: 
 
 
“In explaining the high growth rate recorded in 2003-04 without a 
corresponding increase in the inve stment rate, it needs to be 
recognised that there existed subs tantial excess capacity in the 
Indian economy, particularly in the manufacturing sector, at the end 
of the Ninth Five Year Plan, i.e.  in 2001-02.  According to Planning 
Commission estimates, there wa s about 21% excess capacity in 
manufacturing. It appears that in the last two years, and particularly 
in the year 2003-04, a substantial part of this under-utilised capacity 
  

has been brought into production, thus resulting in a higher rate of 
growth without a significant increas e in the investment rate. In 
addition, in the year 2003-04, the agr iculture sector registered an 
increase of 9.1 per cent over the previous year, which also led to an 
increase in the growth rate.  If we take into account the first two years 
of the Tenth Five Year Plan, the growth rate works out to 6.4 per cent 
which is in line with the behaviour of  the growth rate over the past 
decade or so and is consistent with the observed investment rates.” 
 
  
 
  

15.   The Committee find that the overa ll performance of the economy  has 
seriously suffered during the first y ear (2002-03) of the Tenth Plan and the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) grew at a rate of around 4.0 percent as compared to 5.8 
percent in 2001-02 as against the projected rate of 8 percent as envisaged in the 
Tenth Plan.  The Committee are given to  understand that the main reason for 
slow grow th during the first y ear of the Tenth Plan w as due to poor monsoon 
that resulted in negative grow th rate for the agriculture sector resulting in  
decline in the overall growth rate. However, growth performance of the 
economy in the second y ear of the Tenth Plan (2003-04) as released by  Central 
Statistical Organisation (CSO) is 8. 3 percent. The Committee express their 
apprehension that since during the first y ear of the Tenth Plan there has been a 
slippage in average grow th rate, it might not be possible to ach ieve the target of 
8 percent during the remaining three y ears unless the growth rate is accelerated 
to more than 8 percent.   
     16.          T he Committee would like to be apprised of  the actual grow th rate 
(sector-wise) achieved during the first two y ears of the Tenth Plan and the 
corrective measures taken/proposed to be  taken to accelerate the grow th rate 
during the remaining three y ears of the Pl an.   They  are of the view  that unless 
policy measures and institutional changes as envisaged in the 10 th Plan are 
implemented expeditiously   the targeted growth rate of 8 percent can not be 
achieved.  They  are given to understand that  in order to achieve this ambitious 
target, the domestic savings must be at the level of about 26% but we are lagging 
behind in this regard. They, therefore, recommend that the Planning Commission 
should come out w ith a policy  which may suggest the w ays to boost domestic 
savings.  If the target in respect of savings is achieved there is no reason w hy 
the investment rate w ill not pick up w hich in turn w ill help in achieving the 
growth rate target.  They  also w ant that Planning Commission may  carry  out 
periodical monitoring and keep a close look at the situation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Planning Commission should take initiatives to 
encourage public investments in rural in frastructure and social sectors and give 
directions to Ministries/Departments to make effective and efficient use of the 
available resources in each sector of th e economy and also take action tow ards 
improving governance and enhancing the e fficiency of the delivery  sy stem in 
order to achieve steady acceleration in growth performance.  
  

2.    Fiscal Performance in the Tenth Plan 
         17.    A high level of fiscal deficit continues to be an area of concern for the policy 
planners. The fiscal deterioration has been most ly contributed by declining tax to GDP 
ratio and significant increases in t he revenue expenditure of the government. 
Government finances do not indicate any im provement in the year 2001-02. However, 
the provisional accounts of Central Govern ment finances reveal improvement in the 
fiscal deficit estimated at 5. 8 percent of GDP in 2002-03 com pared to the actual figure 
of 6.1% in the previous year. 
 
      18.     Ever since economic re forms have been initiated, achievements of a 
sustainable fiscal position has been a constant  endeavor.  The first two years of the 
Tenth Five Year Plan indicate improvement  in the fiscal posit ion of the Central 
Government. The combined fiscal deficit of  Centre and States increased from 6.8 
percent of GDP in 1996-97 to 10.8 percent of  GDP by the end of the Ninth Plan.  The 
combined revenue deficit of t he Centre and States also in creased from 3.6 percent of 
GDP to 7.0 percent of GDP during the same period.  The fiscal deterioration has been 
mostly contributed by declining tax to GD P ratio and significant increases in the 
revenue expenditure of the government.  Go vernment finances do not indicate any 
improvement in the y ear 2001-02.  The provisional a ccounts of Central Government 
finances reveals improvement in the fiscal def icit estimates at 5. 3 percent of GDP in 
2002-03 compared to the actual fi gure of 6.2 percent in the previous year.  There has 
been further improvement in the fiscal position of the Centre in the year 2003-04, the 
fiscal deficit of Centre is estimated to be around 4.6 percent of GDP. 
19.        On the revenue receipt side, the tax revenue of Centre and Sates improved 
from 13.8 percent of GDP in 2001-02, to 14.7 percent in 2002- 03  and further to 15.1 
percent during 2003-04. The average tax rev enue collection of Cent re and the States 
together, during the Ninth Plan, was 14.0 percent and for the Te nth Plan, it is targeted 
to achieve 16.1%. 
20.        On the expenditure side, the plan expendi ture of the Cent re and the States 
together (inclusive of inter governmental pl an transfer) increased from 8.0% of GDP in 
2001-02 to 8.8% in 2002-03 and 8.7 percent  in 2003-04.  The average plan 
expenditure of the Centre and the States dur ing the Ninth Plan was 7.8 percent and for 
the Tenth Plan, it is tar geted to achieve 9.0 percent.  The non plan expenditure of 
Centre and States increased from 24.5 percent of GDP in 2001-02 to 25.4% in 2002-03 
  

and 26.1% in 2003-04. The average non plan expendi ture of Centre and States during 
the Ninth Plan was around 23.8% and during t he Tenth Plan it is envisaged to reduce 
the ratio to 23.1 percent.       
21. Asked about the fiscal def icit during 2003-04, the Mi nistry have stated as 
under: 
 “ The fiscal deficit of the Centre  has declined from 5.9 percent of 
GDP in 2002-03 (Actuals) to 5.6 per cent in 2003-04 (BE).  The fiscal 
deficit further declined to 4.8 percent  of GDP in 2003-04 (RE) and further 
down to 4.4 percent of GDP in 2004-05 (BE).” 
 
     22.           Asked about the e fforts made to bring down the high level of fiscal 
deficit, the Ministry in their written reply has stated as under: 
“ Measures suggested by the Planni ng Commission to bring down the 
fiscal deficit to str engthen the process of fiscal consolidation are 
indicated in the Tenth Plan Docu ment. Planning Commission has been 
impressing upon  States the need to generate higher levels of own 
resources, inter alia by improv ing the performance of State level 
enterprises, increasing tax and non-ta x revenue and  curtailing non-Plan 
expenditure to enable greater flow of finances for strengthening the 
process of fiscal consolidation .  States have been urged to maintain 
fiscal prudence during Deputy Chai rman- Chief Minister level 
discussions and also during  visits of the Commission to  States. “  
 
23. As regards the instructions  issued to the State Governments for the efficient 
fiscal management and  improving their own resources, the Ministry in their reply 
have stated as under: 
“Finances of State Governments have been deteriorating since 1997 
mainly due to upward revision of salari es of State Government employees.  
Relatively stagnant revenues of State Governments and the fiscal burden 
of loss making State Level Public En terprises have forced them to depend 
more and more on borrowed funds. 
 
  Nevertheless, financial management of States being primarily the 
responsibility of State governments, it is for State Governments themselves 
to initiate remedial action. However, to  alleviate the mismatch in their cash 
flows, Government of India releases  Plan assistance, shares in Central 
taxes and small savings loans in advance depending on the needs and 
requests of State Government. In addition to Ways and Means support to 
States by the Reserve Bank of India,  Central Government also provides 
Ways and Means advances to States. 
 
 Pursuant to the recommendati ons of the Eleventh Finance 
Commission, a Medium Term Fiscal Reform Plan (MTFRP) has been drawn 
up by the Government of  India. Under the schem e, States have been 
encouraged to draw up a monitorable fi scal reforms programme aimed at 
  

improving their financial position in t he medium term. Incentive funds will be 
made available to States periodi cally depending on progress achieved in 
meeting fiscal reform targets. In addition, a debt swap mechanism has been 
proposed for reducing the interest burden of States.” 
 
Position with regard to Debt Swap Scheme 
  
    24.           To take advantage of the soft interest rate regime, a debt swap is in 
operation since  2002-03.  Under the scheme, mutually agreed between the 
States and the Centre, States are allowed to retire loans taken from the Central 
Government bearing a coupon rate in excess of 13 percent.  The retirement of 
high cost loans will be funded through addi tional market borrowings and a 
specified percentage of small saving collections.   
 
25.   During his  Budget speech on 8.7.2004,  the Finance Minister  has informed 
that the revenue deficit is estimated at Rs 76171 crore equi valent to 2.5 percent of 
GDP, which is one percentage point below  the corresponding estimate of 3.5 
percent of GDP in 2003-04 according to the provisional actuals.  The fiscal deficit 
is estimated at Rs 137,407 which is 4.4 percent of the estimated GDP.   
  

 
26.   The Committee note w ith serious concern that a high level  of fiscal deficit 
continues to be an area of concern for the policy planners which is mostly due 
to decline in tax to GDP ratio a nd significant increase in the revenue 
expenditure of the Government both at Ce ntre and States levels.  They note that 
fiscal position of States is somew hat alarming and unless drastic measures are 
taken to arrest the mismatch betw een the cash flow s, the position w ould 
become worse.  Many State Governments resort to massive borrowings to meet 
their expenditure which push them in a debt trap.  They are given to understand 
that in order to reduce burden of States with regard to interest pay ment, the 
Central Government has introduced a De bt Swap scheme for the States w hich 
enables the State Governments to retire  their high interest bearing loans and 
swap w ith low  interest bearing loans.  They  note w ith satisfaction that this 
scheme has given much relief to the St ate Governments but at the same time 
are of the view that it is not sufficient and more has be done.  
27.   The Committee view  the situati on very  seriously  and desire that the 
Planning Commission should give directions to the  State Governments to keep 
the non plan revenue expenditure and th eir borrow ings under tight control to 
enable greater flow  of finances fo r strengthening the process of fiscal 
consolidation. States should also be pe rsuaded to maintain strict fiscal 
discipline by improving their ow n resources through appropriate fiscal reforms 
enlisted in the Medium Term Fiscal Reforms (MTFR).  The Committee would also 
like to know the monitorable fiscal reforms drawn by the State Governments  for 
improving their financial position in the medium term. 
  

Demand No. 72. 
Ministry of Planning 
Major Head : 3451 
Minor Head : 08 
 
 
3.  National Commission on Population (NCP) 
 
 
 
 
                                                                             (Rupees in lakhs) 
Year BE RE % change 
RE/BE 
Actual 
expenditure 
   
2001-02 136.00 90.00 -33.81 77.53 
2002-03 213.00 200.00 -6.10 152.27 
2003-04 200.00 170.00 -15.00 124.41 
 
2004-05 400.00  
 
 
28.    The Committee have been informed that the  NCP is a separate body. 
However, its budget requirement is included in  the Demand for Grant s of Ministry of 
Planning. Government of India has set up the NCP in pursuance of the objectives 
contained in the National Population Poli cy 2000. The Prime Minister as Chairman 
heads the Commission while the Deputy Chai rman of Planning Commission is Vice 
Chairman. All State Chief Ministers and t he Central Ministers of the Associated 
Ministries, leading demographers, health  professionals as well as known 
personalities who have distingui shed themselves in their chosen field such as the 
media, industry, social work, women of  distinction and political leaders are all 
associated with this project. 
  
 29.       This Commission was cons tituted as a Plan Scheme with the following 
objectives: - 
 
  

i) To review, monitor and give dire ction for the impl ementation of the 
National Population Policy with a view to meeting the goals set out 
in the Policy. 
ii) To promote synergy bet ween demographic, educational, 
environmental and developmental pr ogrammes so as to hasten 
population stabilization. 
iii) To promote inter-sectora l coordination in planning and 
implementation across government  agencies of the Central and 
State Governments, to involve the civil society and the private sector 
and to explore the possibilities of  international cooperation in 
support of the goals set out in the Policy. 
iv) To facilitate the development of  a vigorous people’s movement in 
support of this national effort. 
 
 
      30.          As regards t he under utilisation of funds  the Committee have been 
informed as under: 
“The under-utilization during 2001- 02 and 2002-03  was owing to 
non-appointment of staff for NCP as  the sanctioning of posts was 
under process with the Ministry  of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure). As the NCP with a lim ited staff was occupied with the 
work relating to Advisory/Worki ng Groups for examining various 
issues having a bearing on population stabilization, no foreign visits 
could be organized for want of s pecific recommendations of the 
Working/Advisory Groups. The non-receipt of their 
recommendations also resulted in a shortfall under Domestic Travel 
Expenses and other object heads such  as Publications. The non-
availability of required number of officers and staff has been the 
main reason for carrying out  t he heavy agenda of work as per the 
terms of reference as stated abov e which consequently resulted in 
under-utilization of funds during 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 
 
 The under utilization of funds  during 2003-04 was owing to 
postponement of the main conf erence of the NCP, foreign and 
domestic travels owing to other important work, non-release of 
instalments for research studies owing to slow progress by the 
Institutions and also owing to the continuing process for finalisation 
of some working group reports 
 
 
31.   When the Committee desired to k now about the initiatives  taken by 
the Planning Commission for monitoring and implementation of the National 
  

Population Policy especially in the eight States (UP, Bihar, MP, Rajasthan, Orissa, 
Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, and Chhattishgar h) that are lagging behind the other 
States in implementation of the policy, the Ministry in  their written reply have 
submitted as under: 
The Empowered Action Group (EAG) was constituted under the 
Department of Family Welfare to address the issues relating to high 
population growth in eight states  namely UP, Bihar, MP, Rajasthan, 
Orissa, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand and C hhattisgarh which contribute 45 
percent of the total population of India. The EAG has been set up to 
facilitate the preparati on of area specific programmes to address the 
existing gaps in facilities and services. During the 10 th Plan an amount 
to Rs. 250 crores has been allocat ed for the EAG schemes. The EAG 
mechanism is to work as an one window clearance system for 
approving schemes meant to addr ess the demographic problems in 
these States. 
 
 In view of the crucial role of the EAG States in achieving the NPP 
objectives & goals, Dy Chairman, Planning Commission & Vice 
Chairman National Commission on Populat ion took a meeting of Chief 
Secretaries and Family Welfare Se cretaries of EAG States on 8 th April 
2004 to review the progress toward s achieving NPP goals. It became 
clear that if the NPP target of reaching replacement fertility of TFR of  
2.1 is to be achieved by 2010 the le vel of family planning performance 
in the EAG States has to increase four folds. The performance in these 
States was lagging behind very much.  With a view to improve the 
situation the following decisions were taken at the meeting: 
 
• Within 15 days each EAG States would prepare a time 
bound Action Plan to reduce t he level of unmet needs 
for family welfare servic es keeping the goals of the 
National/State population policies in view and send the 
same to Planning Commission/National Commission on 
Population and the DoFW, GOI. 
• Family Planning for limiti ng the family size and 
promoting the small family  norm among the eligible 
couples would be emphasized as the core activity 
under the Family welfare programme, along with the 
concerns for improving the mother and child health. 
• The service providers and functionaries of the 
programme would be held accountable for delivering 
the services and meeting the targets arrived at through 
inter-active and flexible community Needs Assessment 
(CNA) for reducing levels of unmet needs. 
• Review of the implementat ion of Family Welfare 
Programs in the EAG  States with special reference to 
the progress achieved in br inging down the level of 
unmet needs would be underta ken atleast once in a 
  

year under the aegis of the Planning 
Commission/National Commission on Population, 
• The EAG States would make detailed reference to the 
Department of Family Welfare in context of its proposal 
for augmentation of capacitie s at State and district 
levels. 
• The EAG States would send monthly reports in the 
prescribed format to enable timely compilation and 
communication to the PMO on the identified thrust 
areas 
• The G.O for revised compensation package would be 
issued at the earliest with copies to the DoFW 
• The States would undertake necessary action to 
activate Public Private Pa rtnership for the Family 
Welfare programme. 
• The importance of Populati on Stabilization Programme 
would be highlighted in the meeting of the National 
Development Council. 
   
32.    The Committee asked about provisions made by the Planning 
Commission to meet the expenditure for t he projects relating to control and 
stabilization of population, the Ministry have stated as under: 
The programmes/activities relat ed to control and stabilization of 
population are to be implemented by  the Department of Family 
Welfare. During the 10 th Plan, Planning Commission has approved 
an outlay of Rs. 27125.00 crores fo r the Department of Family 
Welfare for undertaking such activi ties. This provision includes 
special allocation of Rs. 250.00 cr ores for the Empowered Action 
Group setup for effective implement ation of population stabilization 
programmes in high fertility states.  
 
 In addition to the above, Planni ng Commission has also provided 
funds amounting to Rs. 17 crores in 2000-2001 & Rs. 22.5 crores in 
2001-02, which has been released to the identified high fertility 
districts through National Commissi on on Population for population 
stabilization activities through im plementation of District Action 
Plans.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 33.      The Committee note that the National Commission on 
Population (NCP), w as set up on 11 May, 2000 under the Chairmanship of 
Prime Minister and Deputy  Chai rman, Planning Commission as Vice-
Chairman alongw ith 125 members and pe rmanent invitees primarily  to 
review, monitor and give directions fo r the implementation of the policies 
and programmes relating to population stabilisation set out in  the National 
Population Policy .  They  consider that the National Commission has a 
major role to play in respect of stabilisation of population in the country.  
34.   They  note w ith serious con cern that eight Sates namely , UP, 
Bihar, MP, Rajasthan, Orissa, Utta ranchal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh 
contribute 45% of the population in th e country and thus are reckoned as 
high fertility  states, the Governmen t has set up a Empow ering Action 
Group (EAG) to deal w ith the population problem in these States.  They  are 
given to understand that EAG mechan ism is to w ork as single w indow 
clearance sy stem for approving sch emes to address the demographic 
problems in these States.  They also note that National Population Policy  
2000 has set out an ambitious target of  reducing fertility rate and attaining 
the level of 2.1 percent by  2010.  Thi s target can be achieved only  if the 
special concerted efforts are put in place by these States.  
35.  They  also desire that Stat es performance w ith regard to 
Population Stabilisation Programme ( PSP) may be included as one of the 
criteria to draw  central aid by  them and such assistance may  be denied to 
non performing States.  In their view , this w ill inspire the States to 
participate in the population stabilisation programme.  
 36.   From the figures made available to them, the Committee are 
given to understand that the funds a llocated for the National Commission 
on Population remained under utilised. The non availability  of required 
number of officers and staff has been  cited as the main reason for the 
under utilisation of funds duri ng 2001-02 and 2002-03.  The  under 
utilisation of funds during 2003-04 was owing to postponement of the main 
conference of National Commission on Population, foreign and domestic 
travels owing to other important w ork  and non release of instalments for 
research studies etc.  The Commi ttee recommend that the budgetary  
  

allocations as far as possible should be  made realistically  and adequate 
staff must be put in place so that NCP becomes fully  functional in true 
sense.  The Committee also  desire that more efforts should be taken to 
review demographic scenario at nati onal and state level making population 
stabilisation a peoples’ programme.   While human resources need to be 
developed fully , the Standing Committee underscore the need to control 
population in our country. 
  

 4.   Modernisation of Office Systems  
 
 
37.   The Committee have been informed that  the  objectives of this Plan  
scheme is to remove the deficiencies in infrastructure and energise the  working 
environment by renovating/al teration of office rooms,  furniture, and equipments, 
etc. Ideally by the end of  the Ninth Plan. This scheme  should have been 
completed. However, because of various ex ternal exigencies, it was anticipated 
that the project would requi re further continuation with a view to keeping pace 
with changing technologies.   A provision of Rs 10 crore has been projected for 
achieving the objectives of this sc heme in the new FY under the sub head 
Renovation and Alteration.     
38.   The attention of t he representatives of the Mi nistry was drawn to the 
fact that there is an increase in t he allocation under Modernisation of Office 
System i.e from 2.2crore to  Rs 60 crore.  The Secret ary during evidence, stated  
the Ministry  has provided  for spatia l Data Infrastructu re, GIS systems  air 
conditioning, computers, fixtures and furnitures. Modernisation is going to be a lot 
of work.  Modernisation of the sections is  still cast in the ol d mould.  We are 
working on that.  There is modernisati on of the interiors also, including 
conference room facilities with plasma screen facilities.   
39.   The Committee wanted to know the details of this scheme and the 
provision made for IT, the Ministry in their written reply has stated as under: 
The Plan Scheme "Modernisation of Offi ce Systems" is divided into 
the following two parts:   
(i) Renovation and Alteration; and 
(ii) Information Technology 
RENOVATION AND ALTERATION 
The budget provision of Rs.10.00 cr ore earmarked for "Renovation and 
Alteration" will be utilized for the activities under the following object heads: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Office Expenses 
 
40.  Funds under this object head are utilized on renovation of offices of 
Deputy Chairman/Ministers/Members/Advi sers, rooms/divisions/Sections/Units/ 
Cells, toilets, Coffee Board/Tea Board/C anteen, corridors and such other items.  
The renovation of Regional Evaluation Offices and Project Evaluation Offices is 
also undertaken under this object head.  Tile  flooring of individual rooms is also 
covered. The funds are al so utilized for renovation/r eplacement of ETAC/PTAC 
Plants, A.C. Units etc. In addition all electrical works relating to renovation is also 
covered under this object head. As Yo jana Bhavan is an old building some 
internal renovation works have become necessary.  
 
Machinery and Equipment 
41. Funds under this object head are utilized for purchase of machinery 
items like Photostat Machines, Fax Machines, etc. 
 
Other charges 
 
42. Funds under this object head are utilized on miscellaneous items like 
providing iron grills for safety on floor s and other major/electrical works not 
directly covered under renovation. 
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
43.  A budget provision of Rs.50.00 crore has been kept for "Information 
Technology" and will be utilized for "I.T In frastructure in Planning Commission" 
and two projects namely, (i) Spatial Data  Infrastructure fo r Multilayer GIS for 
Planning and (ii) Urban Utility Mapping Project.  The funds for these items will be 
utilized under the following object heads:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

1.Office Expenses 
 
44. Funds under this object head are utilized for procurem ent of software, etc. 
for Planning Commission and Regional Evaluat ion Offices and Project Evaluation 
Offices. In addition, funds will also be utilized for procurement of data on 
topographic maps from SOI, satellite imagerie s from NRSA, etc., GIS Application 
Development (integration of  data, GIS data processi ng, thematic mapping and 
analysis for planning), map compilation (p rocurement of map data NRSA/SOI, 
etc.) and Project Management (Workshop at States, Travel, contingencies, etc.).   
 
2. Machinery and Equipment 
 
     45.             Budget Provision under this object head is utilized for furthering the 
use of Information Technology and for pur chase of computer systems, plasma 
screens, systems with TFT monitors, printers (all types), scanners, laptops for the 
offices of senior officers and Sections  and also for upgradation of existing old 
computers and for upgrading IT Infrastruc ture for Regional Evaluation Offices and 
Project Evaluation Offices.  Besides, f unds will also be used for purchase of 
HW/SW (High end server, client computers, scanner, plotter, colour laser printer, 
GPS, video wall, projector, GIS image processing SW, Internet, GIS products etc. 
and HW/SW Control Centre (High end server , clients, GIS, software, OS, etc.) 
and HW/SW for Remote Centre s (Medium size server, clients, OS GIS Software, 
2 MBPS lease line for each center). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46.   The Committee note that  the   “Modernisation of Office System” is divided 
into  tw o parts viz. (I) Renovation a nd alteration (ii) Information Technology .  
They are of the view that these parts create lot of confusion as both the parts as 
stated do  not co- relate w ith each othe r at the time of implementation of the 
programme.  They  find that the Governm ent has explained their intent for 
raising  these demands but they  feel th at better classificati on could have been 
made by the Government.  At the same ti me they also w ant the Government to 
ensure that expenditure on IT is fully  utilised and does not remain unspent.  
They feel that IT spendings may  be cl osely monitored by  the Government as 
this is an area w hich can provide essential impetus to the technology  
upgradation programme.  
  

 
                                     5.    Demand No. 72 
Ministry of Planning 
Major Head : 3475 
Minor Head : 04 
Detailed Head : 04.03.31 
Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR) 
Grants-in-aid 
         
                                                                                (Plan) 
Rs. (lakh) Year 
BE RE Actual 
2001-02 1500 500 432.09 
2002-03 750 499               172.31 
2003-04 350      140                    105.00 
2004-05 700   
 
47. Grants-in-Aid under the plan section of Institute of Applied Man power 
Research (IAMR) is for the purpose of taking up studies on topics of current  
interest to Planning Commission and infr astructural development at Narela 
Campus.  
48.    IAMR was established in 1962 under  the Societies Registration Act of 1860 
and has been functioning with Government gr ants mainly released from Planning 
Commission.  The mandate of IAMR included inter alia, the following: 
a) Evolving methods and techniques for man power assessment 
 
b) Advancing knowledge on all aspects of human resources development 
 
c) Stimulating interest in the Manpower Research , collaborating with other 
organisations in research on Manpower and Employment 
 
d) Disseminating the knowledge acquired 
 
The Committee have been informed that the following schemes   were 
implemented under the Grants in Aid to IAMR 
a) Construction of office-cum-Resi dential complex at Narela was under 
implementation/completion during 2001-02 and 2002-03. 
  

b) Development of infrastruc ture at new campus was under 
consideration during 2002-03 and approved in 2003-04. 
c) Proposal under study was s anctioned in 2000-01 and additional 
funding was considered necessary 
The Committee have been informed that  provision for these schemes were 
made in subsequent year which appears a hike in allocation of Plan 
(Revenue) Budget in 2002-03 and 2003-04. 
 
49.   The Committee desired to  know the reason for hike in the Budget Estimates 
during 2004-05 vis-à-vis actuals of 2003-04, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
 
“An amount of Rs 700 lakh is allo cated in BE 2004-05 considering the 
need for infrastructure development at the Narela Campus occupied by 
IAMR in the year 2002-03.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
50.  The Committee regret to observe that  there had alw ays been substantial 
underutilisation of budgetary provision under the head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ meant for 
Institute of Applied Man Pow er Resear ch (IAMR).  The Committee are also 
unable to understand w hy there w as a dela y in completion of construction of 
office-cum-Residential Complex at Na rela since  2001-02 and w hy the scheme 
for development of infrastructure at new  campus could not be approved w ell in 
time in order to avoid the under utilisation of funds.  Huge allocations have been 
made at BE stage, revised at RE stage and surrendered at the end of this y ear 
since 2001.  The Committee are of the vi ew that no serious efforts are being 
made by  the Planning Commission to project  realistic demands.  The 
Committee desire that Government should make endeavour to project realistic 
budgetary allocations and every  effort s hould be made to ensure that amount 
allocated for a particular purpose is spent thereon and does not remain 
unspent.  They want that IAMR may be directed accordingly.  
  
  

                                                       .Demand No. 72 
Ministry of Planning 
Major Head: 3475 
Minor Head: 00.800 
Detailed Head: 06.00.28 
 
6.   Payment for professional and Special Services 
            
                         (Plan) 
                                                                                                       (Rs in Lakh) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actuals 
 
2001-2002 76,00,000 30,00,000 6,58,000 
2002-2003 40,00,000 40,00,000 32,35,000 
2003-2004 40,00,000 40,00,000 31,96,000 
2004-2005 2,00,00,000 - - 
Page No.9 
 
 
51.    The head, “Payment for Professional  and Special Services”   is meant for 
utilizing the services of Experts incl uding the retired Government Officials on 
full time or part-time basis for undertaking specific studies of current interest 
and/or complex nature whic h are of current interest to the Commission and 
which cannot otherwise be carried out by  the Planning Commission with the 
help of its regular staff.  Not only the individuals but a few Institutes are also 
identified and assigned the job of carrying out some specific studies.   In view 
of the nature of worki ng of Planning Commission and its Socio-economic  role, 
the need for the  Planning Commission to engage such type of personnel 
designated as “Consultants” was fe lt way back in 1965 and its has been 
continuing  since then.   
52. The expenses incurred towards t he fee/remuneration, TA/DA etc. on 
these consultants are met from this  head. The guidelines issued by the 
Department of Personnel and Training are invariably followed with regard  to 
determining  the quantum of monthly fees, tenure etc. A special provision has 
been made by the Government for the Planning Commission to appoint 25 
Consultants (maximum limit) at any given point of time.  Persons of high repute 
who want to work for free for the Commission and wish to contribute for the 
development of the country in an honor ary capacity, without drawing any 
remuneration are also appointed.    The expenditure on their tr avel,  per diem 
etc. is booked under this scheme. In t he case of selected institutions, a 
consolidated amount is fixed in advance (not exceeding Rs.2.00 lakh in each 
  

case) depending upon the task involved, which includes expenses on all 
components such as salaries, travel, stationery, secretarial assistance etc.    
 
     53.   Until the end of Financial year 2001-2002, all payments released by the 
Planning Commission in connection with t he Planning Commission project, viz. 
“Agro Climatic Regional Planning Unit (ARPU )” set up  at Sardar  Patel Institute 
of Economic and Social Research (SPI ESR), Ahmedabad, as its main Centre 
of activity  and with fift een   other zonal centres located at various State 
Agricultural Universities were also being booked from the same  head of 
account.  This Project has since been   discontinued from the Tenth Plan i.e. 
w.e.f. 1.4.2002.  
 
54.   Asked to furnish the expenditu re incurred during the years 2002-2003 and 
2003-2004, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted as under: 
 
“Actual expenditure during 2001-2002 and 2003-2004 was 
Rs.28.00 lakh and Rs.39.00 lakh re spectively.  However, after 
taking into account the Receipts  of unutilized amount of ARPU 
under  the scheme duri ng 2001-2002 and 2003-2004,  the 
Actuals were Rs. 6.58 lakhs and Rs.31.96 lakhs respectively.” 
 
55.   During the oral evidence when the Committee desired to know why there are 
two  separate heads  for Payment for  Pr ofessional and Professional Services,  the 
representatives of the  Ministry   stated as under: 
“The big increase under this H ead is because of the State 
Development Report, which is a pr oject that has been taken up for 
preparing special reports on States .  Bunching has been there this 
year.  One head is a sm all head, which relates to the hiring of 
consultants within Planning Commissi on and the other is the higher 
level.  One of these heads is fo r such activities within the UNDP 
assistance.  It has been kept separately.” 
  
56.   Asked to furnish the reasons fo r keeping these two heads separately, the 
representatives of the Ministry during evidence stated,  
 
“In one case, under the UNDP assi stance, we pay for hiring 
consultants and holding workshops.  In  the other head, we give grant-
in-aid to the State Governments fo r reimbursing the money for holding 
workshops.  These are just two differ ent activities.  Money comes from 
the UNDP which is rout ed through the Planning Commission.  We just 
reimburse whatever they spend.” 
 
  

 
57.    The Committee also desired to know  the reasons  for under utilization of 
budgetary allocation during the year 2001- 02 and also the reasons for sharp 
increase in allocation of funds for the y ear 2004-05, vis-à-vis actuals of 2003-04 the 
Ministry have submitted as under: 
 
“The project titled “Agro Climatic Regional Planning Unit” which was 
started during 1988 to provide tec hnical and scientific support to 
Agricultural and Allied sectors was decided to be discontinued from the 
Tenth Plan i.e. w.e.f. 01.04.2002.  The project was being implemented  
in coordination with t he State Governments and the selected State 
Agricultural  Universities, for whic h the State Governments were  also 
required to bear matching contribut ions enabling any further release 
from the Planning Commission.  Ho wever, the concerned  agencies 
were not able to fully utilize the am ounts earlier released to them in the 
previous years and hence, there was a short fall in their demand for 
release  of additional funds, despite the fact that a suitable provision 
was made by the Planning Commissi on at the start of 2001-2002. 
Hence, there was under utilization of  budgetary allocations during  the 
year 2001-2002.   
 
 The new  Planning Commission  has now been in place after 
formation of new Government at the Centre.  The Planning Commission 
is scheduled to have  mid-term appraisa l  of the Tenth Five Year Plan 
during 2004-2005 and for this purpose a nu mber of studies are likely to 
be assigned to outside experts/institute s.  Hence, a  higher provision 
has been estimated in the Budget allocation  for the year 2004-2005. “  
 
 
 
 
  

 
           58.     The Committee observe that the Planning Commission is operating 
a Plan Scheme, namely , Expertise for Planning Process – Pay ment for 
Professional and Special Services (PPSS).  Under this Scheme, the services of 
experts including the retired Government officials are engaged by the Planning 
Commission on full time or part time b asis for undertaking specific studies of 
complex nature which are of current interest to the Commission.   
59.    From the figures made ava ilable to them, the Committee are 
constrained to find that there is a w ide gap between actual utilisation of funds 
meant for “Expertise for Planning Pro cess” particularly during 2001-02 under 
plan.   The Committee are not inclined to  accept the view  point of the Ministry  
that it w as difficult to assess the ty pe or number of studies requiring the 
services of experts, w hich w ere going to  be undertaken during a particular 
year. They  are of the view  that th e Planning Commission should have learnt 
from the past experience and should have made realistic projections.    
       60. As regards, the steep rise in the budgetary allocation for the year 
2004-05, the Committee are given to unders tand that higher provisions have 
been made to meet a number of studi es w hich are likely  to be assigned to 
outside experts/institutes for preparati on of mid-term appraisal of the Tenth 
Plan, compilation of State Developm ent Reports (SDRs) for all the 35 
States/UTs during 2004-05.   In view  of the very fact that the amount allocated 
has remained underutilised in the past several years, the Committee are of the 
opinion that there should be timely  utili sation of funds so as  to complete 
preparations of Mid term appraisal and State SDRs in time.    
61.   The Committee, therefore,  recommend that budgetary  exercise 
should be undertaken keeping in view  the actual requirement so that the gap 
between Budget Estimates, Revised Esti mates and actuals get minimised and 
they desire that two separate heads may be given to differentiate the tw o ,  one 
for “Payment for Professionals” and other for “Special Services”. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         MAJ. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                        Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance  
  

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THE THIRD REPORT (2004-05) 
 
 
Sl.No. Para No. Ministry/Department 
Concerned 
Conclusions/Recommendations 
1 2 3 4 
1 15,16 Ministry of Planning         The Committee find that the ove
performance of the economy has seriously suff e
during the first year (2002-03) of the Tenth Plan 
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at a 
of around 4.0 percent as compared to 5.8 percen
2001-02 as against the proj ected rate of 8 per c
as envisaged in the T enth Plan.  The Comm i
are given to understand that the main reaso n
slow growth during the first year of the Tenth P
was due to poor monsoon t hat resulted in neg a
growth rate for the agriculture sector resultin g
decline in the overall growth rate.However, gr o
performance of the economy in the second ye a
the Tenth Plan (2003-04)  as released by Ce n
Statistical Organisation (CSO) is 8.3 percent. 
Committee express their apprehension that s
during the first year of  the Tenth Plan there 
been a slippage in average growth rate, it migh t
be possible to achieve the target of 8 percent du
the remaining three years unless the growth ra t
accelerated to more than 8 percent.   
         The Committee would like to be apprised 
of  the actual growth rate (sector-wise) 
achieved during the first two years of the Tenth 
Plan and the corrective measures 
taken/proposed to be taken to accelerate the 
growth rate during the remaining three years of 
the Plan.   They are of  the view that unless 
policy measures and inst itutional changes as 
envisaged in the 10 th Plan are implemented 
expeditiously  the targeted growth rate of 8 
percent can not be achieved.  They are given 
to understand that in or der to achieve this 
  

  
ambitious target, the domestic savings must be 
at the level of about 26% but we are lagging 
behind in this regard.  They, therefore, 
recommend that the Planning Commission 
should come out with a policy which may 
suggest the ways to boost domestic savings.  
If the target in respect of savings is achieved 
there is no reason why t he investment rate will 
not pick up which in turn will help in achieving 
the growth rate target.  They also want that 
Planning Commission may carry out periodical 
monitoring and keep a close look at the 
situation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Planning Commission should 
take initiatives to encourage public 
investments in rural infrastructure and social 
sectors and give directions to 
Ministries/Departments to make effective and 
efficient use of the available resources in each 
sector of the economy and also take action 
towards improving governance and enhancing 
the efficiency of the deliv ery system in order to 
achieve steady acceleration in growth 
performance
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Planning Commission should take initiatives to 
encourage public investments in rural 
infrastructure and social sectors and give 
directions to Ministries/Departments to make  
2 26,27 Ministry of Planning        The Committee note with serious concern 
that a high level of fiscal deficit continues to be 
an area of concern for the policy planners 
which is mostly due to decline in tax to GDP 
ratio and significant increase in the revenue 
expenditure of the Govern ment both at Centre 
and States levels.  T hey note that fiscal 
position of States is somewhat alarming and 
unless drastic measures are taken to arrest the 
mismatch between the cash flows, the position 
would become worse.  Many State 
Governments resort to massive borrowings to 
meet their expenditure which push them in a 
debt trap.  They are given to understand that in 
order to reduce burden of States with regard to 
interest payment, the Central Government has 
introduced a Debt Swap scheme for the States 
which enables the State Governments to retire 
their high interest bearing loans and swap with 
low interest bearing loans.  They note with 
satisfaction that this scheme has given much 

  
relief to the State Go vernments but at the 
same time are of the view that it is not 
sufficient and more has be done.  
           The Committee view the situation very 
seriously and desire that the Planning 
Commission should give directions to the  
State Governments to keep the non plan 
revenue expenditure and their borrowings 
under tight control to enable greater flow of 
finances for strengthening the process of fiscal 
consolidation. States should also be 
persuaded to maintain strict fiscal discipline by 
improving their own resources through 
appropriate fiscal reforms enlisted in the 
Medium Term Fiscal Reforms (MTFR).  The 
Committee would also like to know the 
monitorable fiscal reforms drawn by the State 
Governments  for improving their financial 
position in the medium term. 
3 33,34,35 
&36 
Ministry of Planning The Committee note that the National 
Commission on Population (NCP), was set up 
on 11 May, 2000 under t he Chairmanship of 
Prime Minister and Deputy Chairman, 
Planning Commission as Vice-Chairman 
alongwith 125 members and permanent 
invitees primarily to review, monitor and give 
directions for the im plementation of the 
policies and programmes relating to 
population stabilisation set out in  the National 
Population Policy.  They  consider that the 
National Commission has a major role to play 
in respect of stabilisation of population in the 
country.  
  They note with serious concern that 
eight Sates namely, UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Orissa, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand 
and Chattisgarh contribute 45% of the 
population in the c ountry and thus are 
reckoned as high fertility states, the 
Government has set up a Empowering Action 
Group (EAG) to deal with the population 
problem in these States .  They are given to 
understand that EAG mec hanism is to work 
as single window clearance system for 
approving schemes to address the 
demographic problems in these States.  They 
also note that National Population Policy 2000 
has set out an ambitious target of reducing 
fertility rate and attaining the level of 2.1 
percent by 2010.  This target can be achieved 
only if the s pecial concerted efforts are put in 

place by these States.  
  They also desire that States performance with 
regard to Population Stabilisation Programme 
(PSP) may be included as one of the criteria to 
draw central aid by them and such assistance 
may be denied to non performing States.  In 
their view, this will inspire the States to 
participate in the population stabilisation 
programme.  
    From the figures made available to them, 
the Committee are giv en to understand that 
the funds allocated for the National 
Commission on Population remained under 
utilised. The non avail ability of required 
number of officers and staff has been cited as 
the main reason for the under utilisation of 
funds during 2001-02 and 2002-03.  The  
under utilisation of funds during 2003-04 was 
owing to postponement of the main conference 
of National Commission on Population, foreign 
and domestic travels owi ng to other important 
work  and non release of instalments for 
research studies etc.  The Committee 
recommend that the budgetary allocations as 
far as possible should be made realistically 
and adequate staff must be put in place so that 
NCP becomes fully functional in true sense.  
The Committee also  desire that more efforts 
should be taken to review demographic 
scenario at national and state level making 
population stabilisation a peoples’ programme.  
While human resources need to be developed 
fully, the Standing Committee underscore the 
need to control population in our country. 
4 46 Ministry of Planning The Committee note that the  
“Modernisation of Office System” is divided 
into  two parts viz. (I) Renovation and 
alteration (ii) Informati on Technology.  They 
are of the view that t hese parts create lot of 
confusion as both the pa rts as stated do  not 
co- relate with each ot her at the time of 
implementation of the programme.  They find 
that the Government has explained their 
intent for raising  these demands but they feel 
that better classification could have been 
made by the Government.  At the same time 
they also want the Gove rnment to ensure that 
expenditure on IT is fully utilised and does not 
remain unspent.  They feel that IT spendings 
may be closely monitored by the Government 
  

  
as this is an area whic h can provide essential 
impetus to the technology upgradation 
programme. 
5 50 Ministry of Planning  The Committee regret to observe that 
there had always been substantial 
underutilisation of budget ary provision under 
the head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ m eant for Institute of 
Applied Man Power Research (IAMR).  The 
Committee are also unable to understand why 
there was a delay in completion of 
construction of office-cum-Residential 
Complex at Narela since  2001-02 and why 
the scheme for development of infrastructure 
at new campus could not  be approved well in 
time in order to avoid the under utilisation of 
funds.  Huge allocations have been made at 
BE stage, revised at RE stage and 
surrendered at the end of  this year since 
2001.  The Committee are of the view that no 
serious efforts are being made by the 
Planning Commission to project  realistic 
demands.  The Committee desire that 
Government should make endeavour to 
project realistic budgetary allocations and 
every effort should be made to ensure that 
amount allocated for a particular purpose is 
spent thereon and does not remain unspent.  
They want that IAMR may be directed 
accordingly. 
6 58,59,60 
& 61 
Ministry of Planning     The Committee observe that the Planning 
Commission is operating a Plan Scheme, 
namely, Expertise for Planning Process – 
Payment for Professional and Special Services 
(PPSS).  Under this Schem e, the services of 
experts including the retired Government 
officials are engaged by the Planning 
Commission on full time or part time basis for 
undertaking specific studies of complex nature 
which are of current interest to the 
Commission.   
 From the figures made available to 
them, the Committee are constrained to find 
that there is a wi de gap between actual 
utilisation of funds meant  for “Expertise for 
Planning Process” particularly during 2001-02 
under plan.   The Committee are not inclined to 
accept the view point of the Ministry that it was 
difficult to assess the type or number of studies 
requiring the services of  experts, which were 
going to be undertaken during a particular 
year. The y are of the view that the Plannin g 

Commission should have learnt from the past 
experience and should have made realistic 
projections.    
     As regards, the steep rise in the budgetary 
allocation for the year 2004-05, the Committee 
are given to understand th at higher provisions 
have been made to meet a number of studies 
which are likely to be assigned to outside 
experts/institutes for preparation of mid-term 
appraisal of the Tenth Plan, compilation of 
State Development Reports (SDRs) for all the 
35 States/UTs during 2004- 05.   In view of the 
very fact that the amount allocated has 
remained underutilised in the past several 
years, the Committee are of the opinion that 
there should be timely utilisation of funds so as  
to complete preparations of Mid term appraisal 
and State SDRs in time.    
  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that budgetary exercise should be undertaken 
keeping in view the actual requirement so that 
the gap between Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and actuals get minimised and they 
desire that two separ ate heads may be given 
to differentiate the two ,  one for “Payment for 
Professionals” and other for “Special 
Services”. 
 
  

 
Minutes of the Second sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11 August, 2004 from 1200 to 1345 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
8. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
12. Shri K. S. Rao 
13. Shri Ajit Singh 
14. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
15. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Murli Deora 
17. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
19. Shri Amar Singh 
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
21. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Planning Commission 
 
1. Sh. Rajeeva Ratna Shah, Secretary, Planning Commission 
2. Sh. A.K. Mishra, Principal Adviser 
3. Smt. Renuka Viswanathan, Adviser (SP-S/PAMD/SER/FR) 
  

4. Dr. Pronab Sen, Adviser (PP) 
5. Dr. (Smt.) Rohini Nayyar, Adviser (RD/DP) 
6. Ms. Sushma Choudhary, Adviser (SP-W/H&FW/NCP) 
7. Smt. Suman Swarup, Adviser (SP-NE/Education) 
8. Dr. Kamal Taori, Adviser (VAC/VSE) 
9. Sh. Shailendra Sharma, Adviser (LEM) 
10. Sh. Gautam Basu, Addl. Secretary & FA 
11. Dr. S.P. Pal, Adviser (PEO) 
12. Sh. G.B. Panda, Adviser (SJ&WE) 
13. Sh. V.K. Bhatia, Adviser (C&I) 
14. Sh. S.K. Roy, Adviser (Agri.) 
15. Dr. R. Mandal, Adviser (E&F) 
16. Sh. B.N. Puri, Adviser (Transport) 
17. Sh. R.C. Jhamtani, Adviser (P&E) 
18. Sh. Surya P. Sethi, Adviser (P&E) 
19. Sh. L.P. Sonkar, Adviser (Coal & Minerals) 
20. Sh. A. Sekhar, Adviser (WR) 
21. Dr. O.P. Sharma, Adviser (IE) 
22. Sh. S.S. Batra, Adviser (HUD,MLP,DRF) 
23. Dr. Rajan S. Katoch, JS(SP&Admn./Adviser,S&T) 
24. Km. Gurjot Kaur, Adviser (PC/Tourism) 
25. Ms. L.N. Tochhawng, Director (Finance) 
26. Sh. J.C. Sharma, Director (PC-s) 
27. Sh. C.S. Mohapatra, Director (PC-M) 
28. Sh. G.P.Grover, Dy. Secretary (Admn.) 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he representatives of  the Ministry of 
Planning to the sitting of the Committee and invi ted their attention to the provisions 
contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of  representatives of the Ministry of 
Planning on Demands for Grants (2004-05) and other related matters. 
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry of 
Planning to furnish notes on certain points rais ed by the Members to which replies were 
not readily available with them during the discussion. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
             The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
  

Minutes of the Fourth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 August, 2004 from 1500 to 1630 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3.   Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri K. S. Rao 
6. Shri Lakshman Seth 
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Murli Deora 
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. XX  XX  XX  XX 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. Thereafter, they took up for consi deration the draft report on the Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of  Planning and adopted the same with changes 
as suggested by some of the Members as shown in Annexure I. 
6. XX  XX  XX  XX 
7. XX  XX  XX  XX  
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to  finalise the Reports in the light 
of modifications as also to make verbal  and other consequential changes arising out of 
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  