22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BILL, 2004 
 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
August, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka) 
 1

 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BILL, 2004 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  4th   August, 2005 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on     4th August, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
August, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 2

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE            
 
 
INTRODUCTION            
 
 
REPORT                
 
 
 
  
     MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 10TH MARCH,  
4TH JULY, 13TH JULY AND 1ST AUGUST, 2005 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BILL, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
Secretariat 
1.     Shri John Joseph   Secretary      
2.     Dr (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu    Additional Secretary 
3.     Shri R.K. Jain    Deputy Secretary 
4.     Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar  Under Secretary  
 
 4

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I,   Chairman of the  Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised to 
submit the Report  on their behalf pres ent this Twenty Sec ond Report on the 
Government Securities Bill, 2004. 
 2. The Government Securities Bill , 2004,  introduced in Lok Sabha on 21 st 
December, 2004, was referred to the Committee on 23 rd December, 2004 for 
examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 3.  The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained 
in the aforesaid Bill from Ministry of Fi nance, Department of Ec onomic Affairs, who 
also briefed them at their sitting held on 10th March, 2005. 
4. Written views/memoranda were received from: (i) Indian Banks’ Association 
(IBA), (ii) PNB Gilts Limit ed a nd (iii) F ixed Income Money Market and Derivativ e 
Association of India (FIMMDA).  
5.    The Committee at their sitting held on 4 th July, 2005  heard the views of 
the representatives of  (i) Indian Banks ’ Association (IBA), (ii) P NB Gilts Limited,   (iii)  
Fixed Income Money Market and Derivativ e Association of India (FIMMDA) and (iv) 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Economic Affairs on 13th July, 2005.  
7. The Dr aft Report was circ ulated to Members on 29 th J uly, 2005.   The 
Committee considered and adopted the dra ft report at their sitting held on 1 st August, 
2005.  
 5

 
 8.  The Committee wish to expr ess their t hanks to t he officers of the Ministry of  
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, representatives  of the  (i) I ndian Banks ’ 
Association (IBA), (ii) PNB Gilts Limited,   (iii) Fixed Income Money Market and Derivative 
Association of India (FIMMDA) and (iv) Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  for their co-operation 
in placing before them their considered views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill 
and for furnishing written notes and informa tion that the Committee had desired in 
connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 9.  For facility of reference, re commendations/observations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;                (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI) 
3rd    August, 2005                                                     Chairman, 
12 Sravana,1927(Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance 
 6

Report 
Management of Government securities  inv olves iss ue and ser vicing of 
Government securities.  Servicing of Go vernment securities includes pay ment of 
interest and principal to the holders of Government securities and settlement of 
claims on the death of the holder or holders.   
2. The Indian Securities Act, 1920 governed the securities issued by 
both the Central and t he then Provincial Governments until April 1946.  Since May 
1946, the legal framework for dealing with Government Securities came to be 
regulated, in stages, by the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944) and the Rules framed 
thereunder.  The servicing of  the Govern ment Securities is required to be 
undertaken within the framework of the Public Debt Act and Rules. 
3. Though the express ion 'public debt ' seems to cover all the debt s 
of Government including Public  Provident  Fund, Senior Citizens  Savings Scheme,  
Indira Vikas Patra, Kisan Vi kas Patra, etc, Section 2(2 ) of the Public Debt Act, 1944 
defines the expression, 'Government secu rity' as a security created and iss ued by 
the Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having one of the forms 
specified therein namely, stock, promissory note, bearer bond or such other form as 
may be prescribed by rules.  Public Pr ovident Fund, Senior  Citizens Savin gs 
Scheme, Indira Vikas Patra, Kisan Vikas Patra, etc. are not covered within the scope 
of the expr ession 'Government security' as defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944.   
Thus, the Public Debt Act, 1944  relates only to marketable debt.   
4. The issue of Government Securities and their servicing is 
attended to by the Reserve Bank  on a ‘decentralised’ basis, through the Public Debt 
Offices.  T he branches of State Bank of  India/Associate banks and the district 
treasuries/sub-treasuries are also involved in the servicing of public debt. 
5. As the provisions of t he Public Debt Act had not undergone any  
substantial change in spite of  the tremendous increase in the volume of t he public 
debt and other changes in the external env ironment, some of the provisions  of the 
Act have been found to be proving to be onerous.  A number of rigidities and 
deficiencies came to notice in the Pub lic Debt Act,  1944 and  the Rules  framed 
thereunder over the years.  Also, some of the Rules had ceased to be relevant in the 
changing context.  Consequently, the Reserve Bank of India, the agency ba nks and 
 7

the treasuries were also handicapped in im proving customer servic es, especially in 
the wake of very substantial increase in the volume of public debt.  
6.  Some of the areas where rigiditi es noticed in the legal framework for 
dealing wit h Government Securi ties that are propos ed to be r emoved by way of 
enacting the Government Securities Bill and  thereby improve customer service and 
enable a better management of Government securities are as under : 
 
(a) Accepting orders of c ourts and other aut horities in additio n to probate, 
letters of administration and succ ession certificate for recognizing the title 
of the heirs of the deceased holders of Government securities.     {cl  7(2)} 
(b) Empowering RBI to settle the cl aims of the heirs of deceased holders of  
Government securities up to one lakh rupees and empowering the 
Government of India to increase the said limit to one crore rupees through 
delegated legis lation, which is expe cted t o save the customers of the 
expenditure and loss  of time involv ed in routine court proceedings. {cl 
7(3)} 
(c) Facilitating nomination in respect of  all Government securities including 
existing Government securities, even by joint holders. (cl  9). 
(d) Both the mother and father may act as  guardians of minors irrespective of  
the personal law thereby making it eas ier for either parent to invest in 
Government securities on behalf of minors.  {cl  10} 
(e) Enabling c reation of  pledge, hy pothecation and lien on Government 
securities and thereby providing the requi red liquidity to the inv estors. {cl 
28} 
 
7.  The Reserve Bank of India had,  with a view to simplifying and 
rationalizing the rules and procedures re lating to Management of Government 
Securities, constituted a Committee on Ma rch 12, 1985 under the chairmanship of  
Shri T. N. Iyer.   The committee, which co nsisted of representatives of the R eserve 
Bank of India, the Ministry  of Finance, the Ministry of  Law and Justice and the State 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Mahar ashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal undertook a thorough and comprehensive review of the entire gamut of 
Government securities management and made certain recommendations. As the 
 8

recommendations required extensive amendment s to the Public  Debt Act, 1944,  it  
was considered desirable to enact a new legisl ation viz. Government Securities Bill,  
2004 in its place.    
8.   The Government Securities Bill, 2004 which was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on 21 Decem ber, 2004 and referred to the Standing Committee on Financ e 
for examination and report on 23.12.2004, seeks to repl ace the Public Debt Act, 
1944 and to repeal the Indian Securities Act, 1920. 
9.   The salient features of the proposed Bill are to:  
(a) provide for opening and maintaining of  subsidiary general ledger account, 
constituent’s subsidiar y general ledger  acc ount and bond ledger account  
with the Reserve Bank of India subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be specified and in such form and on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed;  
(b) provide for the Reserve Bank of  India to prescribe the form for tr ansferring 
Government securities; 
(c) provide for holding of Government promissory notes by Trusts; 
(d) provide for summary procedure for recognizing title for Government  
Securities up to rupees one lakh with enabling power to t he Central 
government to enhance the said limit up to rupees one crore and enhancing 
of the monetary limit in other related circumstances also; 
(e) provide for micro film s, facsimile copi es of documents, magnetic tapes and 
computer print outs to be admissible as evidence; 
(f) provide for suspension of the holders of  subsidiary general ledger account 
from tradin g with the  facilit y of t hat accoun t in the ev ent of misuse of the  
said facility; 
(g) enable creation of pledge, hy pothecation or lien in respect of Government 
securities; 
(h) empower the Reserve Bank of India to call for information, cause inspection 
and issue directions; and 
(i) empower the Reserv e Bank of India to  make regulations with the previous  
approval of the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
 
 9

 10.   The Committee received writt en views/suggestions on  the various  
provisions of the Bill f rom (a) Indian B anks’ Association (IBA), (b) Fixe d Income Money 
Market and Derivativ e Associat ion of I ndia (FIMMDA), and (c) PNB Gilts Ltd. The 
Committee also had personal hear ings of the views of the representatives of the se 
organizations and the Reserve Bank of India.  
11.  The Committee took oral ev idence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance ( Department of Economic Affairs) and the Reserve Bank of India to further 
enlighten themselves on various aspects of the proposed legislation. 
 12. Upon examining the various pr ovisions of the Government Securities Bill, the 
Committee are generally in agreement with the broad objectives envisaged. They agree  that 
the enactment of this legislation will give a greater scope for creation of a  liquid Government 
securities market and al so bri ng forth co nsiderable  improvement  in the securities 
transactions.  
  13.   In their  deliberations with r epresentatives of various organizations such as 
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), PNB Gilts Ltd., Fixed Income Money Market and Derivative 
Association of India (FIMMDA) as well as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  and th e Ministry 
of Finance, certain provisions came to the notice of  the Committee, which they felt, could be 
recast to serve the purposes of the Bill in a better way.  Such  provisions and the 
recommendations and obs ervations of the Committee thereon, which ar e aimed at enabli ng 
a better management and s ervicing of Government Securities are dealt with in detail in the 
subsequent paragraphs.   
 
Clause 7 (Recognition of title to the Government security of a deceased sole holder or 
joint holders): 
 
Clause 7 states as under:  
        
14.  “ (1) Subject to the provisions of s ub-sections (2) and (3), if on the death of  
a sole holder or death of a ll the joint holders of a Govern ment security there is no 
nomination in force, the executor s or administrators of the deceased sole holder or all 
the deceased joint holders, as the case may be, or the holder of a succession 
certificate issued under Part X of the I ndian Succession Act, 1925 shall be the only 
person who may be recognis ed by the Bank and having any title to the Government  
security. 
 10

 (2)  Nothing contained in this s ection shall bar the recogniti on by the Bank of 
any person as hav ing a title to a Government  security on the basis of a decree, order 
or direction passed by  a compet ent court de claring the person as having tit le to the 
Government security or appointing a receiver to take possession of a security or on 
the basis of a certificate issued or order passed by any other authority who might have 
been empowered under a statute to confer  on any such person a title to the 
Government security or on the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in any other law for the 
time being in force, where the outstanding value of Gove rnment security held  by a 
deceased sole holder or deceased joint holders, as the case may be, does not exceed 
an amount of rupees one lakh or such high er amount not exceeding rupees one crore 
as may be fixed by the Central Government by  notification in the Official Gazette from  
time to time, the Bank may recognise a person as having title t o such Government 
security of the deceas ed sole holder or deceased joint holders in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.” 
15. The following suggest ion has been re ceived from PNB Gilts Ltd., with 
respect to this Clause: 
“Section 7 (2) permits RBI to recognise any  person as  having the title to a 
Government security of a certificate issued under statute to confer on any 
such pers on a title t o the Government security.  There may not be Act 
specially empowering any authority to confer on any person a title to the 
Government security.  Keeping this  in view, the section requires  
modification. 
 One more provision is necessar y to give discharge to the bank by 
payment to the person who is rec ognised by the bank as havin g any title to 
Government security.” 
 
 16. In response to this suggestion, the Ministry in their written submission 
stated as below: 
“There may not be any Act specifically empowering any authority to confer 
on any person a title to Government security.  However, the authorities 
having jurisdiction over the entire esta te and the properties of the deceased 
do at times  pass orders or issue certific ates in respec t of the entire estate 
which may cover Government Securities  also.  T he reference is to the 
certificate or orders of statutory authorities recognising a person or persons 
as the heir  or heirs of a deceas ed w ho m ay also be holding Government 
securities.  However, to make the intention more clear, for the words, ‘confer 
on any such person a title to the Government Security’ the words ‘recognise 
a person as the heir of a dec eased’ may be substituted.  Clause 18 of the 
 11

Bill gives adequate protection to the Bank .  As such, no further provision is  
considered necessary.” 
 12

17. The Committee observe that  Clause 7 seeks  to prov ide for the recogni tion of 
title to the Government Security on the death of the sole-holder or a joint-holder of the 
Security.  Sub-claus e (2) thereof  entit les RBI to r ecognise any person as  having the 
title to a Government security on the basis of a certificate iss ued or order passed by 
an authority, ‘who might have been empowered under a statute to confer on any such 
person a title to the Government security’.  T hey have been informed that there may  
not be any Act separately empowering any authority to confer on any person a title to 
the Government security.  The Committee take note of the response furnished by the 
Government wherein it  has  been inter alia  informed that  the in tended referenc e in 
clause 7(2) was  to the statut ory authorities entitled to recognize a person or  persons 
as the heir or  heirs  of  a deceased and whos e orders or  cert ificates may,  at  times,  
apart from covering the entire estate of the deceased, include Government Securities 
also.  Wi th a view to ma ke t he intended reference to  the author ities concerned 
unambiguous,  the Committee feel that  th e part of  c lause 7(2), which reads  as, 
‘authority who might hav e been  empowered under a statut e to confer  on any  suc h 
person a t itle to the Government Sec urity’ needs to be rephrase d as ‘ authority who 
might have been empowered unde r the statute to recogni se a person as a heir of  the 
deceased’. Hence, they want that this sub-clause (2) should be amended accordingly.  
 
 13

  
Clause 12 (Summary  determinatio n by  the Bank  of  title to  Government security in  
case of dispute) 
 
18.    Clause 12 reads as Under:   
 
“(1) If the Bank is of opinion that a doubt exists as to the title to a 
Government security, it may proceed t o determine, in ac cordance with suc h 
regulations as may be made, the person w ho shall for the purposes of the Bank be 
deemed to be the person entitled thereto. 
(2) For the purpose of making any order which it is empowered to make under 
this Act, the Bank  may request a District Magist rate to record or to have recor ded the 
whole or any part of such evidence as any  person whose evidence the Bank requires  
may produce and the District Magistrate so requested may either himself record, or 
may direct any Magistrate of the first class subordinate to him or any Magistrate of the 
second class subordinate to him and empowered in this behalf  by general or special 
order of  the State Government to reco rd the evidence, and shall forward a copy  
thereof to the Bank. 
(3) For the purpose of making a vesting order under this Act, the Bank may  
direct one of its officers to record t he evidence of any person whose ev idence the 
Bank requires or may receive evidence upon affidavit. 
(4) A Magistrate or an officer of the B ank acting in p ursuance of this secti on 
may administer an oath to any witness examined by him.”  
19. While giving their suggestions on va rious provisions  of the Bill,  the 
representative of the Indian  Banks’ Association (IBA) during the cours e of oral 
evidence stated as follows in respect of aforesaid clause: 
“The first suggestion that we are making is in relat ion to sub-
Clause (2) of Clause 12. This cl ause is making a prov ision about 
deciding a title to the Government  security by the Res erve Bank 
of India. In connection with this power, the Reserve Bank of India 
is given the power to ask a Distric t Magistrate to record evidence. 
In this Clause  there is  a refer ence to the Magistrate of the First  
Class and Magistrate of the S econd Class subordinate to the 
District Magistrate. The Magistr ates of Fir st Class  and Second 
Class are actually Judicial Magistra tes. The District Magistrate is 
an Executive Magistrate. Magistrates subordinate to him are Sub-
divisional Magistrates. They ar e known by different names in 
different States. The Criminal Procedure Code contains the 
 14

hierarchy of Judicial Magist rates as well a s Executive 
Magistrates. The reference to First Class  and Second Class in 
this Clause needs to be actually corrected.” 
 
20.  Questioned, whether the hierarch y, as shown in the  Clause was not  
correct,  the representative of IBA further stated: 
“That is right. Instead of Magistrate  of First Class  and Magistrate 
of Second  Class, it will have t o be ‘Sub-divisional Magistrate 
subordinate to the District Magist rate’. Or, instead of giving 
specific designations , it woul d be better to say ‘any other 
Magistrate subordinate to the District Magistrate’.” 
 
21. The Ministry, in their written reply on the aforesaid viewpoint as 
suggested by IBA stated as below: 
“The reference in sub-clause (2) of clause 12 is to the Magistrates 
subordinate to the District M agistrate, namely, Exec utive 
Magistrates subordinate to him.  The reference is not to cover 
Judicial Magistrates.  Determi nation of title to Government 
securities in case of dispute, being a matter of civil nature, would 
be determined by civil courts.  Magistrates, Metropolitan or  
otherwise, set up for trying criminal c ases may not be the 
appropriate authorities to determi ne the title to Government 
securities in the case of dispute.” 
 
  22.     When asked during oral ev idence, as to why this  Claus e does no t 
clearly make a reference to Executive Magistrates,  the representative of the Ministry 
stated: 
“Sir, because the word used is ‘subordinat e to him’, we felt that it  
is clear that it cannot be a J udicial Magistrate who will be 
subordinate to him.” 
 
23.   In response to a further query, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
 
“It is submitted that the words,  ‘subordinate to him’ make it 
abundantly clear that the reference is not to judicial magistrates as 
they are not subordinate to the District Magistrates.  However, if it is 
considered desirable,  for the words,  ‘Magistrate of the First Clas s 
subordinate to him or any Magist rate of the Second Class ’ the 
words “Executive Magistrate” may be substituted in sub-Clause (2) 
of Clause 12. 
 15

  
 24. Clause 12 lays  down the proce dure for summary dete rmination of title 
to Government Security by the Reserve Bank  of India in  case of dispute.  Claus e 
12(2) enti tles the B ank to de termine the title to  a Government  Security in c ase of 
dispute on the basis of  evidence recorded by a District Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class or of the se cond class subordinate to hi m.  The Committee  take note 
of the contention of the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) that terming the Magistrates 
subordinate t o the District  Magistrate as  Magistrates of  the first  class  or  of  the 
second c lass in Clause 12(2) may  not  be  in cons onance with the hierarchy of 
Executive Magistrates who are subordinate to the D istrict Magistrate.  The District 
Magistrate being an E xecutive Magistrate, the Co mmittee feel that it  would be more 
appropriate to term the Magistrates  subordinate to the District Magistrate, who may  
be entit led to record ev idence in terms  of Clause 12(2)  as  Exec utive Magistrates  
instead of M agistrates of the first c lass or  the s econd cl ass. The Committee, 
therefore,  recommend that Clause 12(2) be amended accordingly.  
   
 16

 
Clause 15 (Power of Bank to require bonds) 
 
25. Clause 15  reads as follows: 
 
“(1) Before making any order which it its empowered to make under this  
Act, the Bank may require the person in w hose favour the order is to be made to 
execute a bond with one or more sureties in  such form as may be prescrib ed or to 
furnish security not exceeding twice the va lue of the subject-matter of the order, to 
be held at the dispos al of the Bank, to pay  to the Bank or any person to whom the 
Bank may assign the bond or security in fu rtherance of sub-section (2) the amount 
thereof. 
  (2) A Court before which a c laim in respect of the subject-matter of any such 
order is established may order the bond or security to be assigned to the suc cessful 
claimant who shall thereupon be  entitled to enforce the bond or realise the security 
to the extent of such claim.” 
 
26.     In this regard, a suggestion received from the Fixed Income Money 
Market and Derivative Association of India (FIMMDA) has been that the power of Bank 
to require bonds, as provided by Clause 15 should be chan ged as po wer of Bank to 
require indemnity.  The following reason was attributed in support of this change: 
“The amendment is suggested to differentiate the meaning between 
“surety” and the meaning of  “Bond” used in this Bill. Therefore the 
word “Bond” appearing in this  Clause may be r eplaced wit h 
“Indemnity”. 
 
27. When the Ministry were asked to respond to this suggestion, they replied 
as under: 
“The reference is to indemnity  bond.  It is felt t hat the context  
clarifies the same.  F urther, the form of bond is  to be prescribed 
by regulat ions.  However, there may be no objection to 
substituting ‘bond’ wit h ‘indemni ty bond’ to make the difference 
amply clear.” 
 
 17

 
28. The Committee observe that Claus e 15 inter alia aims t o empower the 
Reserve B ank to requi re th e person in whose fav our the ord er of vest ing a 
Government Security is to be  made to execute a bond wi th one or more sur eties.  
They are of  the opinion that  the r eference to ‘bond’,  as  provid ed in the Cl ause i s 
ambiguous as it does not specifically provide for the type of bond viz. indemnity bond 
or surety bond. They take note of  the suggestion received from Fixed Inc ome Money 
Market and Derivative Associ ation of  India (FIMMDA) in this regard th at the Clause 
should specifically provide for empowering the bank to require a person to execute an 
indemnity bond.  They  are not  convinced with  the  reply  of the Government  in this 
regard that the reference is  to indemnity  bond and the context cl arifies the same.  
They feel that if the intention of the Government is so, there is no reason why it cannot 
be specifically provided for.  They, therefore, want that the term ‘bond’ as occurring i n 
Clause 15(2) should be substituted with ‘indemnity bond’.  
 18

Clauses 21 and 23 (Disc harge in r espect of  interest on Government  securit ies and  
Period of limitation of Government ’s liab ility in  resp ect of 
interest) 
 
29. Clause 21 which seek s to provide for discharge of the Reserve  bank in 
respect of interest  on Government Securities after the maturity thereof states: 
“Save as otherwise expressly  pr ovided in the terms of a 
Government security, no person  shall be entitled to claim interest 
on such security in respect of any period which has elapsed after 
the earliest date on which dema nd could have been made for the 
payment of the amount due on such security.” 
 
30. Clause 23 which limits the period of liability of the Government in respect 
of interest payable on the Government security provides: 
“Where no shorter period of limit ation is fixed by any law for the 
time being in force, the liability of the Government in respect of 
any interest payment due on a Government security shall 
terminate on the expiry of six y ears from the date on which the 
amount due by way of interest became payable.” 
 
  
31. In response to a query on the total unclaimed amount in respect of  
Government securities, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
“As on June 30, 2005 there are 6, 23,790 Government securities  
in respect of Central and State Government loans which have 
matured and remain unpaid.  Thei r aggregate value is Rs. 354.56 
crore.” 
 
 32. Further, the representative of the Ministry of Fi nance stated as  follows 
before the Committee while tendering oral evidence: 
“The amount that is borrowed by the Government through issue of 
securities, after it is m atured  is paid back. If it is not paid at that 
point of tim e, then that amount remains outstanding in the books  
for next 20 years. He can claim that for the next 20 years. After 20 
years also if he comes to claim and it is written off, still the  
Government’s liability is there to pay that and it is paid.” 
 
 19

33. On the issue of non- payment of interest beyond the maturity date and 
utilisation of money by the Government,  the representative of the Ministry of Finance 
stated as follows before the Committee: 
“The repayment of loan is  normal because the Government of  
India is incurring a regular fiscal deficit and it is financed through 
fresh borrowing. But the point made by you that the money  
remains with the Government is  absolutely  correct. B ut if you 
look at actually the s ubscribers to the Government securities  
and what is the amount which is  not claimed, subsequently that 
amount is t here, if we are talk ing of the Government securities  
per se. 
The other relief bonds  and those kinds of instruments l ike 
saving bonds, there the issue is  different and there the point that 
there should be a provision for post-maturity interest is well taken. 
In the case of the nor mal Government securities which are traded 
in the market where the 99 per cent  of the investment is by the 
financial institutions including  banks, t here the possib ility of 
providing for post-maturity interest  would be very difficult. On th e 
issue of what does  the Governm ent do t o make the inv estors 
aware about this, the date of the maturity in the case of  a physical 
document is mentioned on top of t hat. The instrument itself is  
known by the name of the year in which it to mature. Suppos e, if 
10.25 percent Government Security , 2021 is a sec urity, then it is  
known in t he market and that is how  it is traded. So, it is known 
that it is going to mature in 2021.  So, the instrument is known by  
the very name of its maturity. The Government of India issues the 
Press Release almost about two months before the actual date of 
maturity which is put on the website. The Reserve Bank does the 
same exercise and the Public Debt Offices  of the Reserve Bank  
put out a notice in this regard t hat the date of the maturity is  
known.”  
 
34.     When asked whether a holder  of Government security could be 
informed of the maturity date before-hand, t he Secretary, Economic Affairs, Ministry  
of Finance stated as below: 
“ We can put in place a system whereby say two months or three 
months before, he can be info rmed…it will not be possib le to 
individually inform each person that  this security is going to 
mature because apart from the la rge numbers, the security could 
have changed hands  in that period of  10 to 12 years. Not as a 
part of the Bill, but what one can c onceive of as an administrativ e 
instruction that let us say two m onths before all such securities  
are going to mature, an advertisement generally informing 
everybody, all holders of such securities that the securi ty is going 
to mature in the next two mont hs, can be brought out by way of  
informing everybody so that we can take care of that aspect.” 
 20

 
35. With regard to a query on spec ifying in Clause 23, a six year  
period limitation for claiming the  interest, the representative of the Mi nistry of 
Finance stated as follows before the Committee: 
“If somebody has not claimed interest during the maturity as it 
was due to him, he can make that claim for six y ears after from  
the date on which his interest was due. If somebody has bought a 
security and his  first year’s inte rest was to be paid on 1.1. 2005,  
then he can make his claim up to 2011. After that he cannot make 
his claim.” 
 
36. On being asked as to why the in terest was payable only for six years  
while the principal could be paid even after 20 years, he said: 
“Sir, some kind of time limitation is to be there…Sir, I would like to 
submit one thing here. I face one problem in that I handle the 
budgetary provision for the interest  payment in Gov ernment of 
India as well as repayment of debt. What happens is that we have 
to make an estimate of how muc h of  interest is going to be paid 
during the current year whic h the Government brings before 
Parliament. It is a charged exp enditure. But, nonetheless, it is  
there. What happens is, if there is no limitat ion then estimating 
that expenditure in respect of interest payment and all, it becomes 
very difficult. Every year we ac tually come before the PAC t o 
explain as to why we have had either savings or excess in respect 
of this expenditure. Some kind of limitation actually helps.” 
 
 37. Further in reply to a query on fixi ng too short a period of six y ears for 
payment of interest, which appeared to be inappropriate as  the RBI is sought to be 
empowered to recognise titles as also sett ling claims which can be challenged in the 
Court, the Ministry in their written submission  replied as under: 
“In case of a challenge of the B ank’s decisions and the Court of 
Law decides that principal and in terest has to be paid for a 
specific number of years then the Bank has to make the payment.  
However under normal circumstances, allowing for post maturity 
interest for an indefinite period w ould weaken the very concept of 
maturity which is ess ential to m arket discovery of interest rate.  
The settlement of claims could become difficult if there is no strict 
maturity period.  The debt portfolio of the Government would 
become unwieldy and management of pub lic debt  would be 
adversely affected and budgetar y discipline in respect of  
Repayment of Debt A ppropriation would become difficult.  Briefly 
stated a general provision allowing for post-maturity interest on 
marketable securities (as distinct from non-marketable debt) is not 
desirable and also not readily implementable.” 
 21

 
38. When asked whether a dedic ated account could be created for 
depositing the unclaimed amounts, the Secretary, Economic Affairs, stated as follows: 
“We will consider this point.”  
 22

39.    The C ommittee note that w hile Cl ause 21 di scharges the Reserve 
Bank of India of the responsibility of paying interest beyond the maturity thereof, Clause 
23 s eeks to limit the liabilit y of t he Governme nt in res pect of interest  payable on a 
Government Security to a si x year  period in situations where a s horter p eriod of  
limitation is  not  fixed by  law.  The Committee fu rther observe that presently  the 
unclaimed amount in respect of Government Securities totals to Rs. 354.56 crore. 
40.  In the course of thei r i nteraction w ith the repres entatives of the 
Reserve Bank  of India and th e M inistry of Financ e, t he Committee learnt  that the 
principal component of amounts involved in Government Securities was kept alive in the 
record books  for  a per iod of  20 years.  However, t he in terest c omponent on s uch 
amounts ceases to be payable beyond the six year period limitation. The Committee are  
of the opinion that keeping the principal component in respect of Government Securities 
alive for 20 years but limiting the liability on interest payment to a maximum period of six 
years may pr ove t o be too st ringent, particularly  t o th ose who may  not  c laim t he 
amounts on the due dates owing to bonafide reasons. The Committee, while taking note 
of the fact that  allowing pay ment of  post matu rity interest  wou ld we aken t he ver y 
concept of matur ity also feel  that  legitimate spac e needs  to be gi ven to ensure that 
persons who may  not c laim the amounts inv olved by t he due dates owing t o genuine 
reasons are not deprived of  their  dues.  The Committee,  theref ore, desir e that the 
government explore the poss ibility of creating a dedicated  fund wherein  the unclaimed 
amounts of G overnment Securities could be kept, and ac cruals under which could be 
utilized for enabling post maturity interest payments in bonafide cases.  The Committee 
expect the Government  to give ser ious consideration to this  issue and bring forth s uch 
changes  in Clause 23 for enabling post maturity interest payments in legitimate cases. 
41.   In response to the Committee’s contention that the onus of informing the 
individuals or  Government  Security  holders before-hand of the ma turity dates  of the 
securities should also rest  with the Government, the Se cretary, Ec onomic Affairs, 
acquiesced before the Committee  that a system  could be put  in place, whereby an 
advertisement coul d be i ssued before-hand i nforming the holders of Government 
Securities of the matur ity dates.  The Com mittee desire that though  not by way of law,  
necessary administrat ive in structions need to be issued for mandatorily  releas ing 
advertisements in the pr int and electronic  medi a info rming the gene ral public  or  the 
Government Secur ity holders  of the maturity da tes at least two months  in a dvance.  
 23

Such a measure,  the Committ ee feel w ould hel p in ensur ing t hat people are not 
unnecessarily deprived of their legitimate dues.  
  
 24

 
 
Clause 25   (Micro films, facsimile copies of documents, magnetic tapes and computer 
print outs as documents of evidence) 
 
42. The Explanation of this Clause states: 
Explanation – For the purposes of this section,- 
(a)     ”computer” means any device that revives, stores and processes data, 
applying s tipulated processes to the information and supplying 
results of these processes; 
(b)   ”computer print out” shall incl ude ledgers, day-books, account books  
and other records maintained in the ordinary course of business of 
the Bank; and  
(c)     any reference to information being derived from other information shall 
be a reference its  being derived there from by calculation, 
comparison of any other process.  
  
43. The suggestion received from the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
in this regard is stated below: 
“Clause 25 of the Bill is making el aborate provisions in regard to 
electronic records and computer print-outs as documents of 
evidence etc. Explanation (a) to (c) below Sub Clause 5 of Clause 
25 defines the expressions ‘Comput er’, ‘Computer Print-out’ and  
‘information derived’. 
In this connection your kind attent ion is invited to the provisions 
contained in Section 2 (1) (I) of  the Information Technology Act, 
2000 whic h defines the express ion ‘c omputer’ which is different 
from the definition contained in the explanation referred to above.  
Further Section 2 (1) (t) of the Information Technology Act defines 
the expression ‘Electronic Record’ which is more elaborate, rather 
than the definition of ‘c omputer print-out’ as c ontained in this Bill.  
In our view the provisions cont ained in Clause 25 need to be in 
conformity with the provision s contained in the Information 
Technology Act, 2000.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25

44. The provisions of Section 2 (1) (i ) and (t) of the IT Act, 2000 are shown 
below: 
Section 2 (1) (I): ‘computer’ means any  electronic magnetic, optical or other 
high-speed data processing device or system which performs logical, arithmetic and 
memory functions by manipulations of el ectronic, magnetic or optical impulses, and 
includes all input, output, processing, storag e, computer software, or communication 
facilities which are connected o r related to the computer in a co mputer system or 
computer network. 
 
Section 2 (1) (t): ‘electronic record’ means data, record or data generated, 
image or sound stored, received or sent in  an electronic form or micro film or 
computer generated micro fiche.  
 
45. Further during the course of oral evidence, the representative of the IBA 
stated as follows before the Committee: 
“This Clause makes the provision in regard to computer, 
computer printouts accepted as  evidence in the proc eedings. At 
the end of the claus e, in the ‘Explanation’, t here is a definition of 
computer, computer printout  and information derived from  
computer, etc. All these provisio ns actually need to be brought in 
conformity with the Informati on Technology Act, 2000. The 
definition of computer given here is different from the definition  
already contained in the Informa tion Technology Act, which is  
much wider and elaborate as compar ed to this definition. In 
regard to acceptance of computer  printout as an ev idence, the 
Information Technology Act makes detailed provisions about that. 
Even the Evidence Ac t, Indian Penal Code and all other relevant  
provisions have been amended by  the Information Technology  
Act for giving evidentiary value to computer printouts, etc. This  
clause, in fact, needs to be re conciled with the Information 
Technology Act, which has bec ome a general law relating to e-
commerce and authenticity to computer records.”   
 
46. In their written reply, the Ministry furnished as follows with regard to 
definitions of the expressions ‘computer’, ‘computer print-out’ etc: 
“The definition of  the expression ' computer' under the 
Government Securities Bill, 2004 serves the purpose. However 
the definition under Section 2(1)(i ) of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000, being more comprehensive, may be adopted. The 
expression 'computer pr int out' as defined in  expl anation (b) to 
 26

Clause 25 is suitable to the adm inistration of the Government 
Securities Bill.  No change is considered necessary.” 
 
47. When asked during the course of oral evidence whether Clause 25 could 
be modified to bring the definitions in harmony with those of IT Act, 2000, the 
representative of the Ministry of Finance stated as follows : 
“Sir we will modify.” 
 27

 
48. The Committee find that the defi nitions of ‘computer’, ‘computer print-outs’ 
and ‘information derived’ as given in Clause 25 of th e Bill are not in  conformity with the 
definitions of these terms, as  provided under the Information Technology  (IT) Act, 2000.  
The Committee understand that  the definitio ns contai ned i n the IT  Act, 2000 are more 
comprehensive and if subst ituted with, in the pro posed legis lation,  the Government  
securities market would be reflected better.  They observe that the Government was wary 
to accede to this suggestion on the premise  t hat the d efinitions in the Bi ll served the 
purpose but l ater on agreed to  amend the defi nitions to ma ke them in c onsonance with 
the provisions of the IT Act, 2000.  They feel that the making the provisions of the Bill in 
conformity with those of  the IT Act, 2000 will not  only make it more comprehensive but 
also obviate the chances of litigation on account  of two different meanings of the same 
terms in the two enactments.  Hence, they want the def initions of ‘computer’,  ‘computer 
print-outs’ and ‘information derived’ should be amended accordingly.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI) 
3rd    August, 2005                                                                 Chairman, 
12  Sravana,1927(Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance 
 28

Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 10th  March, 2005 from 1530 to 1615 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Bhartruhari Mehtab  
3.  Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
1. Shri K.S. Rao 
2. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain  
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
4. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
5. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
1. Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
2. Shri V.S. Chauhan, Deputy Secretary (Budget) 
 
Reserve Bank of India 
1. Shri B.B. Sangma, General Manager (DGBA), Mumbai 
2. Shri G.S. Hegde, Joint Legal Adviser  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed the representatives of Ministry of  
Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs) and the Reserve Bank of India to the 
sitting of the Committee and invi ted their attention to  the provisions contained in the 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.   
 29

3.   Then the  representatives  of t he Mi nistry of Financ e (Department of 
Economic Affairs) and Reserve Bank of I ndia briefed the Committee on the various  
provisions contained in the Government Securities Bill, 2004. The Members asked 
clarificatory questions which were replied to by the r epresentatives. The Chairman, 
then, directed the representativ es of the Ministry that th e information with regard to 
queries of  the Members which were not  readily available with them might be 
furnished to the Committee later on. 
4.    A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
       The witnesses then withdrew 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 30

Minutes of the Thirty-Fifth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 4th  July, 2005 from 1030 to 1230 hrs and 1500 to 1630 hours.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
32. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
33. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
34. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
35. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
36. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
37. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
38. Shri Rupchand Pal 
39. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
40. Shri K.S. Rao 
41. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
42. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
43. Shri R.P. Goenka 
44. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
45. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
46. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
47. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Indian Banks’ Association 
Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Advisor-Legal 
Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India 
1. Shri Sudhir Joshi, Chairman and Managing Director  
2. Shri C.F.S. Azariah, Chief Executive officer 
PNB Gilts Limited 
Shri I.D. Singh, Managing Director 
 31

 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welc omed the wit nesses from Indian Banks’ 
Association, Fixed Inc ome Money Market and Derivatives Association of India and PNB 
Gilts Limited to the sitting of  the Committee and invited their attention to the provision s 
contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3.  Then the Committee heard the views of the witnesses on the various provisions  
of the Government Securities Bill, 2004. Me mbers asked clarificatory questions which were 
replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman, then directed t hem that the information with 
regard to queries of the Member s which was not readily available might be furnished to the 
Committee later on. 
4.  The evidence was concluded 
5.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
                The witnesses then withdrew 
Part – II 
(1500 to 1630 hours) 
WITNESSES 
Reserve Bank of India 
1. Shri B. Mahapatra, Chief General Manager-in-Charge, Internal Debt Management Deptt. 
2. Shri B.B. Sangma, General Manager, Department of Government and Bank Accounts 
3. Shri G.S. Hegde, Joint Legal Advisor, Legal Department 
 
2.   At the outset, the C hairman welcomed the witness es from the Reserve Bank of  
India to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in 
the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3.  Then the Committee heard t heir views on the various provisions contained in the 
Government Securities Bill, 2004. Member s asked clarificatory questions which were 
replied to by the witnesses. The Chairman, then directed t hem that the information with 
regard to queries of the Member s which was not readily available might be furnished to the 
Committee later on. 
4.  The evidence was concluded 
5.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 32

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY- SEVENTH  SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 13 July, 2005 from 1030 to 1300 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
         
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
               
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
1.   Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri K.S. Rao 
6. Shri Lakshman Seth 
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
8. Shri Ajit Singh 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri R.P. Goenka 
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
13. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
 
Part I 
(1030 to 1200 hours)  
 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
     
     XX   XX   XX   XX 
 33

Part II 
(1215 to 1300 hours) 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affair) 
 
 
1. Shri A.K.  Jha, Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
2. Smt. L.M. Vas, Joint Secretary (Budget) 
3. Shri V.S. Chauhan, Deputy Secretary (Budget) 
 
 
Reserve Bank of India  
 
 
1.   Shri B.B. Sangma, General Manager (DGBA), RBI, Mumbai 
2. Shri G.S. Hegde, Joint Legal Adviser, RBI 
 
 
2.  At the outset the Chairman welc omed the representatives  of the 
Ministry of Finance ( Department of Econom ic Affairs) and the Reserve Bank of  
India to the sitting of  the Com mittee and in vited their attention to the pr ovisions 
contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.  
3.   The Committee then took oral ev idence of the above representatives 
on the provisions of the Government Securities Bill, 2004.   
4.  Thereafter the members raised quer ies which wer e replied to by the 
witnesses. The Chairman directed the witnesse s to send written replies to some of 
the queries on whic h replies were not r eadily available with  them during the 
evidence.  
5.  The evidence was concluded. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned 
 34

MINUTES OF THE FORTIETH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 1st August, 2005 from 1500 to 1615 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
6. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
8. Shri Rupchand Pal 
9. Shri K.S. Rao 
10. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
2. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary (Banking & Insurance) 
3. Shri Lalit Kumar, Deputy Secretary (Insurance)  
 
         2.  XX  XX  XX  XX 
XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
          3.            XX  XX  XX  XX 
  XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX 
  XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
 35

5. XX  XX  XX  XX 
  XX   XX   XX   XX 
           
6.               XX             XX                   XX                  XX 
  XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
7. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the   
Government Securities Bill, 200 4 without  any mod ification/amendment.The Committee 
authorised the Chairman to present the Report in both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 36

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 101 of 2004 
21 December, 2004 
THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BILL, 2004 
-------------------- 
Arrangement of Sections 
-------------------- 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, application and commencement 
2. Definitions 
3. Forms of Government securities 
4. Subsidiary general ledger account 
5. Transfer of Government securities 
6. Holding of Government securities by holders of public offices 
7. Recognition of title to t he Govern ment security of a deceased joint holder or 
joint holders 
8. Right of survivors of joint holders or several payees 
9 Nomination by holders of the Government securities 
10. Government securities belonging to a minor or an insane person 
11. Issue of duplicate securities and of new securities on conversion, consolidation, 
sub-division, renewal, stripping or reconstitution 
12. Summary determination by the Ban k of t itle to Government security in case of 
dispute 
13. Law applicable in regard to Government securities 
14. Postponement of payments and re gistration of transfers pending the making of 
a vesting order 
15. Power of Bank to require bonds 
 37

16. Publication of notices in Official Gazette 
17. Procedure and scope of vesting order 
18. Legal effect of orders made by the Bank 
19. Stay of proceedings on order of Court 
20. Cancellation by the Bank of vesting proceedings 
21. Discharge in respect of interest on Government securities 
22. Discharge in respect of bearer bonds 
23. Period of limitation of Government's liability in respect of interest 
24. Inspection of documents 
25. Micro films, facsimile copies of documents, magnetic tapes and c omputer print outs as 
documents and as evidence 
26. The Bank and its officers to be deemed public officers 
27. Misuse of subsidiary general ledger account facility 
28. Pledge, hypothecation or lien 
29. Powers to call for information, inspection and issue of directions 
30. Contravention and penalties 
31. Certain laws not to apply to Government securities 
32. Power to make regulations 
33. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir 
34. Power to remove difficulties 
35. Repeal and saving 
 38

Bill No. 101 of 2004 
THE GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BILL, 2004 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law  rela ting to Government securities and its  
management by the Reserve Bank of India and for matters con nected therewith or 
incidental thereto 
WHEREAS it is expedient  to consoli date and amend the law relating to  Government 
securities and its management by the Reserve Bank of India; 
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to 
any of t he matters aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and  25 0 of the  
Constitution; 
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1 ) of article 252 of the Con stitution, 
resolutions have been passed by the Houses of the Legislat ures of all the States, except  
the Legislature of the Sta te of Jammu  and Kashmir, to the effect that the matters 
aforesaid should be regulated in those States by Parliament by law; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- 
Short title,  
Application and
commencement (1) This Act may be called the Government Securities Act, 2004. 
(2) This Act applies to Governm ent secur ities cre ated and issued whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act by the Central Government or a State Government. 
(3) It applies in the first instance to whole of the States, except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, and to all the Union territories and it shall also apply to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir which adopts this Act by  resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1)  
of article 252 of the Constitution. 
(4) It shall come into force in all the Stat es, except the State of J ammu and Kashmir, 
and in the Union territo ries on such date as the Central Go vernment may, b y 
notification in the Officia l Gazett e, ap point and in the State of Ja mmu and Kash mir 
which adopts this Act under clause (1) of article  252 of the Constitution, on the date of 
such adoption; and any  reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in 
relation to any  State or Union territor y, means the date on which this Act, co mes into 
force in such State or Union territory. 
 39

2. Definitions.  
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--  
(a) "agent" means, a scheduled bank within the meaning of clause (e) of section 2 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934(2 of 1934), or any other person specified as such; 
(b) "Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constitut ed under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934(2 of 1934); 
(c) "bond ledger account" means an account w ith t he bank or an agent in which the  
Government securities are held, in a dematerialised form at the credit of the holder; 
(d) "constituents' subsidiary general ledger  account" means a subsidiary general ledger 
account opened and maintained with the Bank by  an age nt on behal f of the 
constitutents of such agent; 
(e) "Government", in relation to any  Government security, means the Central or State  
Government issuing the security; 
(f) "Government security" means a security created and issued by  the Government for 
the purpose of raising a public loan or for any  other purpose as may tie notified by the 
Government in the Official Gazette and  having one of the forms mentioned in section 
3; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Act; 
(h) "promissory note" includes a treasury bill; 
(i) "specified" means specified by the Bank in the Official Gazette. 
3. Forms of Government securities. 
A Government security may, subject to such ter ms and conditions as may be specified, 
be in such forms as may be prescribed or in one of the following forms, namely:-- 
(i) a Govern ment pro missory n ote pay able to or t o the order of a certain  
persons; 
or 
 40

(ii) a bearer, bond payable to bearer; or 
(iii) a stock; or 
(iv) a bond held in a bond ledger account. 
Explanation.--For the purpose of this section, "stock" means a Government security,-- 
(i) registered in the books of the Bank for which a stock certificate is issued; or 
(ii) held at the credit of the holder in the subsidiary  general ledger account 
including the constituents subsidiary general ledger account maintained in the 
books of the Bank, and transferable by registration in the books of the Bank. 
4. Subsidiary general ledger account. 
(1) A subsidiary  general ledger account incl uding a constituents'  subsidiary  general 
ledger account and a bond ledger account m ay be opened and m aintained by t he bank 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified and in such form and on 
payment of such fee as may be prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding an ything contained in the Benami Transactions (Prohibitio n) Act, 
1988(45 of 1988), or any  ot her law for the tim e being in fo rce, the Gov ernment 
securities may be held on behalf of a constituent in a constituents' subsidiary  general 
ledger account under sub-section (1) and the holder of such account shall be deemed to 
be the holder of the securities held in that account: 
Provided that the constituted as a benefi cial owner of the Government security shall be 
entitled to claim from the holder all the benefits and be subjected to all the liabilities in 
respect of the Government securities held in  the constituents' subsidiary general ledger 
account. 
(3) The holde r of a constituents'  subsidiary general ledger account shall maintain such 
records and adopt such pr ocedure for safegua rding the interests o f the constituents as 
may be specified. 
5. Transfer of Government securities. 
(1) No transfer of a Government security  shall be valid if it does n ot purport to convey 
the full title to the security. 
 41

(2) The transfer of the Government sec urities shall be made in such form  and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Any  document relating to a Governme nt se curity or any  endorse ment on a  
promissory note issued by the Government may, on the dem and of a person who for  
any reason is unable to write, shall be ex ecuted on his behalf in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) Nothing i n this section shall affect any order made by the Ba nk under this Act, or 
any order made by a Court upon the Bank.  
6. Holding of Government securities by holders of public offices. 
(1) In the case of any public office to which the Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare this sub-section to apply, a Government security may be held 
in the name of the office. 
(2) When a Government security is so held, it shall be deemed to be transferred without 
any or furt her endorsement or transfer d eed fro m each holder of the office to the  
succeeding holder of the office on and from  the date on which the latter takes charge of 
the office. 
(3) When the  holder of the office transf ers to a party not bein g his successor in office  
where a Government security so held, the transfer shall be made by the signature of the 
holder of the office and the name of the office in the manner laid down in section 5. 
(4) Where the holder of the office is tem porarily absent for m ore than a fortnight fro m 
his office for any reason, he may authorise in writing such other person, who wo uld be 
incharge of this office during the period of such absence, to ef fect transf er of the  
Government securities. 
(5) This section applies as well to an office of which there are two or more joint holders 
as to an office of which there is a single holder. 
7. Recognition of title to the Government security of a deceased joint holder o r joint 
holders. 
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), if on the death of a sole holder 
or death of a ll the joint holders of a Government security there is no nom ination in 
force, the ex ecutors or ad ministrators of the deceased sole holder or all the  deceased 
joint holders, as the case may be, or the hol der of a succession certificate issued under 
Part X of the Indian Succ ession Act, 1925(39 of 1925) shall be t he only person who 
may be recognised by the Bank as having any title to the Government security. 
 42

(2) Nothin g contained in this section shall bar the recognition by the Bank of an y 
person as having a title to a Government security  on the basis of a decree, order or 
direction passed by a com petent court declaring the person as having title to the  
Government security or appointing a receiver to take possession of a security  or on the 
basis of a certificate issued or order passed by any other authority who might have been 
empowered under a statu te to confer on an y such person a title to the Government 
security or on the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in an y other law for the tim e 
being in force, where the outstanding value of Government security held by a deceased 
sole holder or deceased joint holders, as the case may be, does not exceed an amount of 
rupees one lakh or such hi gher amount not exceeding rupees one crore as may be fixed 
by the Central Government b y notification in the Official Gazett e from time to tim e, 
the Bank m ay recognise a person as having t itle to such Government security  of the  
deceased sol e holder or deceas ed joint holde rs in such manner and subject  to such  
conditions as may be prescribed. 
8. Right of survivors of joint holders or several payees.  
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872(9 of 
1872) and subject to the provisions of sections 7 and 10,-- 
(a) when a Governm ent security  is held  by two or more persons jointl y, and  
either or any of them dies, the title to the Government security shall vest in the 
survivor or survivors of those persons; and 
(b) when a Government security  is pa yable to two or more persons severally 
and either or any of them dies, the Government security shall be payable to the 
survivor or survivors of those persons or to the representative of the deceas ed 
or to any one of them:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect any claim which any 
representative of a dec eased joint holder or dece ased holders of a Government 
security or a surviving joint holder or ho lders of a G overnment security, as the 
case may be, m ay have against the survi vor or survivors or representatives 
under or in respect of any Government security to which this section applies. 
Explanation.--For the purposes of this s ection, a body incorporated or deemed 
to be incorp orated under the Co mpanies Act, 195 6(1 of 19 56), or the Co-
operative Societies Act, 1912(2 of 1912), or an y other enactment for the tim e 
being in force relating to the incorporation of associations of individuals, shall 
be deemed to die when it is dissolved.  
 
 43

9. Nomination by holders of the Government securities. 
(1) Notwithstanding an ything contained  in sections 7 and 8 or an y other law for the 
time being in force, except the provisions of sub-section (2),-- 
(a) where a Government security other than  in the f orm of pro missory note or 
bearer bond is held by  a p erson in his nam e or jointly  with an y other name or 
names, as th e ca se may be, the sole holder or all the joint holders of the  
Government security together may nominate one or more persons in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, who in the event of the death of the 
sole holder or the death o f all the join t holders, as the case may be, would 
become entit led to the Governm ent secu rity and to pay ment thereon to the  
exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in  
the prescribed manner; 
(b) where a nom ination in respect of a Government security has been made in 
favour of tw o or m ore nom inees and either or an y of t hem is dead, the 
surviving nominee or nominees, as the case may be, shall be entitled to the 
Government security and payment thereon;  
(c) where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the sole holder or all the 
joint holders of a Government security , as the case may be, to appoint i n the 
prescribed manner any  pe rson in whom the Gover nment securi ty would be  
deemed to ha ve vested in the event of death of such holder or joi nt holders of 
the Government security during the minority of the nominee; 
(d) the recognition of right and clai m of the nominee or nominees to the 
Government security held by a sole holder or joint holders, as the case may be, 
and an y pa yment made by  t he Government or the Bank to the nom inee o r 
nominees shall constitute a full discharge and shall absolve the Governm ent or 
the Bank of its liability in respect of the said Government security. 
(2) Any nomination or appointment made under sub-section (1) shall become voi d if 
the nominee predeceases, or where there are two or more nominees, if all the nominees 
predecease t he holder or joint holders of the Government security  making the  
nomination.  
(3) Where th e amount due for the tim e being on a Governm ent security is pa yable to 
two or more nom inees and either or any of  them  dies, the title to the Government 
security shall vest in the survivor or survivors of those nominees and the amount for the 
time being due thereon shall be paid accordingly. 
(4) A transfe r of a Government securit y m ade in ac cordance wit h sub-section (2) of 
section 5 shall automatically cancel the nomination previously made: 
 44

Provided that where a Government security is in the possession of a person either as a 
pledge or by way of security for any purpose, such possession sha ll not have the effec t 
of cancelling the nomination, but the ri ght of the no minee shall be subject to the right 
of the person so possessing it. 
(5) The Gove rnment may, on the recommendation of  the Bank, b y notification in the 
Official Gazette extend the  facility of nomination to any Government security  as may 
be specified therein.  
(6) Nothin g contained in  sub-section (1) shall affect the right  or claim  which an y 
person may have against  the person wh ose right and title to a Go vernment security is 
recognised by the Government or the Bank or  to whom the payment of the amount d ue 
on the Government securit y is made by  the Government or the Bank under sub-section 
(1). 
(7) No notice of any  claim of any  person, other than the person or persons in whose 
name a Government security is held or the nominees thererof, shall be receivable by the 
Bank or Govern ment, nor shall the Ban k or Government be bound b y any such notice 
even though expressly given to it: 
Provided that where any decree, order , certificat e o r other authority  from  a court of 
competent jurisdiction relating to such G overnment security  is produced bef ore the 
Bank or t he Government, the Bank or the G overnment shall take due note of such 
decree, order, certificate or other authority.  
10. Government securities belonging to a minor or an insane person. 
(1) Where any  Government security  is held on behalf of a minor the pa yment of the 
same for the time being due on a Govern ment secu rity either by way  of outstanding 
principal or interest thereon m ay be m ade to t he father or m other of such  minor and 
where neither parent is alive or where the living parents are or onl y li ving parent is 
incapable of action, a person entitled under th e law for the time being in force to have 
care of the property of the minor. 
(2) When a Government security  belongs to  a m inor or a person who is ins ane and 
incapable of managing his affairs and the outst anding pri ncipal value of the 
Government security does not in the aggregate excee d rupees one lakh or such higher 
amount not exceeding rupees one cr ore as the Central Govern ment may, by  a  
notification i n the Official Gazette fro m ti me to time, fix, the Bank may  m ake such 
order as it thinks fit for the vesting of such Government se curity in such person as it 
considers represents the minor or insane person. 
11. Issue of duplicate securitie s and of new securities on conversion,  
consolidation, sub-division, renewal, stripping or reconstitution.  
 45

 (1) If the person entitled to a Government security applies to the Bank alleging that the 
Government security  has been lost, stolen or destroy ed, or has been de faced or  
mutilated, the Bank may, on proof to its satis faction of the loss, theft, destruction, 
defacement o r mutilation of the Government security, and subject to such con ditions 
and on pa yment of such fees as may be prescribed, order the issue of a duplicate  
Government security to the applicant.  
(2) If the per son entitled to a Govern ment secu rity applies to the Bank to have the 
Government security converted into a Govern ment security of a nother form, or into a 
Government security issued in connection with  another loan or to have it consolidated 
with other like Govern ment securities, or to ha ve it sub-divided, or to have it re newed, 
stripped or reconstituted, t he Bank m ay, subject to such conditions and on pa yment of 
such fees as may be prescribed, cancel the Government security and order the issue of a 
new Government security or Government securities.  
Explanation.--A Govern ment security  may be  stripped separatel y for interest and 
principal or r econstituted on the applic ation of the holder subject to such terms and  
conditions as may be specified. 
(3) The pers on to whom a duplicate  Govern ment security  or a new Government 
security is issued under this section shall be deemed for the purposes of section 18 to 
have been recognised b y the Bank as the hol der of the Government security; and a 
duplicate Government sec urity or new  Govern ment security so issued to any person 
shall be deemed to constitute a new contract  between the Government and such person 
and all persons deriving title thereafter through him:  
Provided that the issue of new security under this section shall not affect the interest of 
third parties in whose favour a charge o r other interest was lawfully  created and was 
subsisting at the time of issue of the new security. 
12. Summary determina tion by the Bank of title  to Govern ment security in 
case of dispute.  
(1) If the Bank is of opinion that a doubt  exists as to the title to a Government security, 
it may proceed to determine, in accordance w ith such regulations as may be made, the 
person who shall for the purposes of the Ba nk be deem ed to be the person entitled  
thereto.  
(2) For the purpose of making any order which it is empowered to make under this Act, 
the Bank may request a D istrict Magistrate to record or to have recorded the whole or 
any part of such evidence as any  person whose evidence the Bank requires may 
produce and the District Magistrate so requ ested may  either himself re cord, or m ay 
direct any  M agistrate of the first class s ubordinate to him  or an y Magistrate of the 
second class subordinate t o him  and em powered in this behalf by general or  special 
order of the State Government to record the evidence, and shall for ward a copy thereof 
to the Bank. 
 46

(3) For the purpose of making a vesting order under this Act, the Bank may direct one 
of its officers to record the evidence of any person whose evidence the Bank requires or 
may receive evidence upon affidavit.  
(4) A Magistrate or an officer of the Bank acting in pursuance of this secti on m ay 
administer an oath to any witness examined by him. 
13. Law applicable in regard to Government securities.  
Notwithstanding that as a matter of con venience, the Government may have arranged 
for payments on a Govern ment security to be  made elsewhere than in India, the rights 
of all person s in rel ation to Government securities shall be deter mined in connection 
with all such  questions as  are dealt with by this Act  by the law and in the Courts of 
India. 
14. Postpon ement of p ayments and registrat ion of tran sfers pending  the 
making of a vesting order. 
Where the Bank contem plates making an order u nder this Act to  vest a Gove rnment 
security in any  person, the Bank may  suspend payment of interest on or the maturity 
value of the Government security or postpone the making of any order under section 7, 
section 10, section 11 o r section 12  or the regi stration of a ny transfer of the  
Government security, as the case may be, until the vesting order has been made. 
15. Power of Bank to require bonds.  
(1) Before making an y order which it i s empowered to m ake under this Act, the Bank 
may require the person in whose favour the order is to be made to execute a bond with 
one or m ore sureties in such form  as may be prescribed or to furnish security not  
exceeding twice the value of the subject- matter of the order, to be held at the disposal  
of the Bank, to pay to the Bank or any person to whom the Bank may  assign the bond 
or security in furtherance of sub-section (2) the amount thereof. 
(2) A Court before which a cl aim in r espect of the s ubject-matter of any  such order is 
established may order the bond or security  t o be assigned to the successful  clai mant 
who shall thereupon be entitled to enforce the bond or realise the security to the extent 
of such claim. 
16. Publication of notices in Official Gazette. 
Any notice required to be given b y the Bank under this Act may be served by post, but 
every such notice shall al so be published by  the Bank in the Official Ga zette or the  
Official G azette of a State, according as th e notice relates to a G overnment se curity, 
 47

issued by the Central Government or a State Government, and on such publication shall 
be deemed to have been delivered to all persons for whom it is intended. 
17. Procedure and scope of vesting order. 
 (1) The Bank shall, while making a vesti ng order u nder section 7, section 10,  section 
11 or section 12, follow such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(2) An order made by  the Bank under this  Act may either confer full title to a 
Government security or a title only  to the accrued and accrui ng interest on the  
Government security pending a further order vesting full title. 
18. Legal effect of orders made by the Bank.  
No recognition by the Bank of a person as the holder of a Government security, and no  
order made by the Bank under this Act shall be  called in question b y any Court so far 
as such recognition or ord er affects the relations of the Govern ment or the Ban k with 
the person recognised by  the Bank as the holde r of a Government security or with any 
person claiming an i nterest in such security ; and any such recognition by the B ank of 
any person or any order by the Bank vesting a Government security in any person shall 
operate to confer on that person a title to  the secur ity subject only  to his pe rsonal 
liability to the rightful owner of the secu rity for money had and received on his  
account. 
19. Stay of proceedings on order of Court.  
Where the Bank contem plates making with reference to any  Government security any 
order which it is em powered to make under this Act, and before the order is made the 
Bank receives from a Court in India an order to stay the making of such order, the Bank 
shall either--  
(a) hold the security together with any interest unpaid or accruing thereon until 
further orders of the Court are received; or 
(b) apply to the Court to have the security  transferred to the Official Trustee s 
appointed for the State in which such Court is situate d, pending the disposal of 
the proceedings before the Court. 
20. Cancellation by the Bank of vesting proceedings. 
Where the Bank contem plates making an order u nder this Act v esting a Gov ernment 
security in any person, the Bank may, at any time before the order is made, cancel any 
proceedings already  taken for that purpose and ma y, on such c ancellation, proceed 
anew to the making of such order. 
 48

21. Discharge in respect of interest on Government securities. 
Save as otherwise expressly provided in the terms of a Government security, no person 
shall be entitled to clai m interest on su ch security in respect of any period which has 
elapsed after the earliest date on which demand could have been made for the payment 
of the amount due on such security. 
22. Discharge in respect of bearer bonds.  
The Government shall b e discharged  from all liabilit y on a bearer bond or on an y 
interest coupon of such a bond on payment to the h older of such  bond or cou pon on 
presentation on or after the date when i t becomes due of the a mount expressed therein, 
unless before such pa yment, an order of a Court in India has been served on the  
Government restraining it from making payment. 
23. Period of limitation of Government's liability in respect of interest. 
Where no sh orter period of limitation is fixed b y any law for th e time being in force,  
the liability of the Government in respect of any interest payment due on a Government 
security shall terminate on the expir y of six years from the date on which t he amount 
due by way of interest became payable.  
24. Inspection of documents.  
No person s hall be entitled to inspect, or to receive inform ation derived from  any  
Government security in the possession or custody of the Government or from any book 
register or other docum ent kept or m aintained by or on behalf of  the Government in 
relation to Government securities or an y Govern ment s ecurity, save in such  
circumstances and manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
25. Mi cro films , f acsimile copies of  docu ments, magnetic tap es and co mputer print outs as 
documents and as evidence.  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,--  
(a) a micro film of a document or th e reproduction  of the image or im ages 
embodied in such micro film (whether enlarged or not); or 
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or 
(c) a statement contained in a docume nt and included in a printed materi al 
produced by a co mputer, magnetic tap e or any  other for m of mechanical or  
electronic dat a retri eval mechanism (he reinafter r eferred to a computer print  
 49

out), if the conditi ons m entioned in su b-section (2) and the oth er provisions  
contained in this section are sati sfied in relation to the statement and the  
computer in question, shall be dee med to be also a document for the purposes 
of this Act an d the regulations made thereunder and shall be admissible in any 
proceedings thereunder, without further proof or production of the original, as 
evidence of a ny contents of the original or of any  fact stated ther ein of which 
direct evidence would be admissible.  
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section ( 1) in respect of a computer print out shall 
be the following, namely-- 
(a) the computer print  o ut containi ng the state ment was produced by  the  
computer during the perio d over which the co mputer was used  regularly  to  
store or process infor mation for the pur poses of any activities regularly carried 
on o ver that period b y t he person hav ing lawful c ontrol over t he use of t he 
computer; 
(b) during the said period,  there was regular ly supplied to the com puter in the  
ordinary course of the said activities, in formation of the kind cont ained in the 
statement or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived;  
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, th e computer was operating 
properly or, i f not, then any  respect in which it was not operating properly or 
was out of operation during that part of that period was not such as to affect the 
production of the document or the accuracy of the contents; and 
(d) the infor mation contained in the statement reproduced or is derived fro m 
information supplied to the co mputer in the ordi nary co urse of the said 
activities. 
(3) Where over any  period, the function of storing or processing inform ation for the 
purposes of any  activities regularly  carried on over that period as mentioned in clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by computers, whether-- 
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or  
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or  
(c) by different com binations of com puters operating in succession over that 
period; or  
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period, in  
whatever order, of one or m ore co mputers and one or m ore co mbinations of 
computers, all the co mputers used for t hat purpose during that period shall be  
 50

treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single com puter; and 
references in this section to a computer shall be construed accordingly. 
(4) In any  proceeding under this Act and th e regulations made thereunder where it i s 
desired to give a stat ement in evidence by  virtue of this section, a certificate doing an y 
of the following things, that is to say,-- 
(a) identify ing the document contai ning the statement and describing the  
manner in which it was produced; 
(b) givi ng su ch particulars of an y device involved in the pr oduction of t hat 
document as may be appropriate for the purpose of sh owing that the document 
was produced by a computer;  
(c) dealing with any  of the matters to  which the con ditions mentioned in su b-
section (2) relate, and purportin g to  be  signed by a person  occup ying a 
responsible official position in the Bank  in relation to t he oper ation of  the 
relevant device or the management o f the relevan t activities ( whichever is  
appropriate) shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the 
purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the 
best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it. 
(5) For the purposes of this section,-- 
(a) inform ation shall be taken to be s upplied to a co mputer if it is supplied 
thereto in any  appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (wit h 
or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment; 
(b) whether in the course of activities carri ed on by any official, information is 
supplied with a view  to its being stored or process ed for the purposes of those  
activities by a co mputer operated ot herwise than  in the cour se of those 
activities, that inform ation, if dul y supplied to that co mputer, shall be taken to 
be supplied to it in the course of those activities; 
(c) a document shall be taken to have b een produced by a computer whether it 
was produced b y it directly  or (with or without human intervention) b y means 
of any appropriate equipment. 
Explanation.--for the purposes of this section,--  
(a) "com puter" m eans any device tha t receives, st ores and process es data,  
applying stipulated processes to the in formation and suppl ying results of these 
processes; 
 51

(b) "computer print out " shall include  ledgers, day -books, account books and 
other records maintained in the ordinary course of business of the Bank; and 
(c) any reference to information being derived from other inform ation shall be 
a reference its being derived therefro m by calculation, comparison of any other 
process. 
26. The Bank and its officers to be deemed public officers. 
For the purposes of secti on 124 of the Indi an Evidence Act, 1 872(1 of 1872), the 
provisions of Part IV of t he Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908(5 of 1908) relating to suits 
by or against  public officers in their official capacity, and the pro visions of rul e 27 of 
Order V, and rule 52 of Order XXI of the said Code, the Bank an d any officer of the 
Bank acting in his capacity as such shall be deemed to be a public officer. 
27. Misuse of subsidiary general ledger account facility. 
Where a subsidiary  general ledger account is opened b y t he Bank in  favour  of an y 
holder of a Government security in terms of section 4 and,-- 
(a) it co mes to the notice of the Bank t hat the said account is being operated 
contrary to the terms and conditions subject to which the account was opened; 
or  
(b) the subsidiary  general ledger acco unt transfer form  has bounced due to 
insufficiency of Government security or funds; or 
(c) the Bank is of opini on that the acc ount is bein g operated contrar y to t he 
banking practice or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the holders of 
Government securities in general; or 
(d) the subsidiary  general ledger accou nt is being misused in any manner, the 
Bank may, by order in writing, after giving an opportunity of being heard debar 
the bolder of  such account from  tradin g with the s ubsidiary ge neral ledger 
account facility temporarily or permanently as it deems fit. 
28. Pledge, hypothecation or lien.  
(1) Subject to such terms and conditions  as may be prescribed, the holder of a 
Government security may create a ple dge or hy pothecation or lien in respect  of such  
security. 
 52

(2) On recei pt of notice of pledge or hy pothecation or lien from  the holder of the  
Government security, the Bank or any agent maintaining the account in respect of such 
security shall make necessary entry in its record and such entry shall be evidence of the 
pledge, hypothecation or lien thereof, as the case may be.  
29. Powers to call for information, inspection and issue of directions. 
(1) The Bank may at any time, for the purposes of this Act, call for such information as 
it deems necessary in relation to a Govern ment security from any agent, or holder of 
subsidiary general ledger acc ount including co nstituents' subsidiary general ledger 
account and cause an inspection or security to be made by one or more of its officers or 
other persons, of any  agent or holder of a subsidiary general ledger account including  
constituents' subsidiary general ledger account. 
(2) The Bank may , if it considers neces sary so to do, issue such directions as it thinks  
fit, in relation to a Government security,-- 
(i) to the holders of t he subsidia ry general ledger accounts includin g 
constituents' subsidiary general ledger account; 
(ii) to the agents maintaining bond ledger account; and  
(iii) to any other person dealing with the Government securities, for carry ing 
out the purposes of this Act. 
30. Contravention and penalties.  
(1) If an y person, for the p urpose of obt aining for himself or for any  other person any 
title to a Government security, makes to an y authority in any  application made under 
this Act or i n the co urse of an y in quiry un dertaken in  pursuan ce of this A ct any 
statement which is false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be 
true, he shall be punishab le with im prisonment for a term  which  may  extend  to six  
months, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) No Court shall take co gnizance of an y offence under sub-sect ion (1) except on the  
complaint of the Bank. 
(3) Without prejudice to any  ot her action wh ich th e Bank may deem  fit to take, the 
Bank, after giving a reasonable opport unity of being heard, may  impose on any person 
who contravenes any  provision of t his Act, or contravenes any regulation, notification 
or direction issued under this Act, or vi olates the terms and conditions for ope ning and 
maintenance of a subsidiar y general ledger  account, i ncluding Constituents' subsidiary 
general ledger account, a penalt y, not  ex ceeding five lakh rupees and where such 
contravention is a contin uing one, further penalty which m ay extend to five t housand 
rupees for every day after first day during which the contravention continues. 
 53

31. Certain laws not to apply to Government securities. 
(1) The Publ ic Debt Act,  1944( 18 of 1944) shall c ease to apply to the Gove rnment 
securities to which this Act applies an d to all matters for which provisions have been 
made by this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding such cessation anything done or any action taken in the exercise of 
any power conferred by or under that Act sha ll be deemed to have been done or taken 
in the exercise of the powe rs conferred by or under this Act a s if this Act was in force 
at all material times. 
(3) Nothing contained in the Depositories Act, 1996(22 of 1996) or the regu lations 
made thereun der shall apply  to Government  se curities covered by  this Act unless a n 
agreement is executed to the contrar y by an y depos itory under t he Depositories Act, 
1996 with the Government or the Bank, as the case may be.  
 
32. Power to make regulations.  
 (1) The Bank may, wit h the previous approval of the Central Govern ment, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations to carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of  the for egoing power suc h 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-- 
(a) the form in which and the terms and con ditions subject t o which the  
Government securities may be issued under section 3; 
(b) the form in which and the fee to be charged for opening and maintenance of 
subsidiary ge neral ledger account includi ng constit uents' subsidiary  general 
ledger account and bond l edger account by the Bank under sub-section (1) of 
section 4; 
(c) the for m and manner i n which Govern ment securities shall be  transferred  
under sub-se ction (2) of section 5 and the m anner in which any  docum ent 
relating to any  Government security or any endorsement on a prom issory note 
may be executed on behalf of a person who is unable to write under sub-section 
(3) of that section. 
(d) the documents to be produced for  recognition of title to the  Government 
security of  a deceased sole holder or  all deceased joint holders under sub-
section (2) of  section 7 an d the m anner in which an d the condit ions subject to  
 54

which the Bank may recognise title to a Government security under sub-section 
(3) of that section; 
(e) the form  and the m anner in which  a nom ination may  be m ade, varied or 
cancelled and the manner in which an y person may be appointed in whom the 
Government security would be dee med to have vested in the event of death of  
holder or joint holders of Govern ment security  during the m inority of a 
nominee under section 9; 
(f) the condit ions governing the issue of duplicate Governm ent securities and 
the fees to be paid therefor under section 11; 
(g) the manner in which the Bank may determine title to a Government security 
under section 12; 
(h) the form of bond under sub-section (1) of section 15; 
(i) the procedure for making vesting o rder referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 17; 
(j) the circumstances and the m anner in  which and the conditions subject to 
which inspection of Go vernment secu rities, boo ks, registers and other  
documents may be allowed or inform ation therefrom may b e given und er 
section 24; 
(k) the ter ms and conditions subject to  which pledge or hypot hecation or lien 
be created under sub-section (1) of section 28. 
(3) Every regulation made by the Bank under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  
period of thirty da ys which may  be com prised in one session or in two or m ore 
successive sessions, and if, before the e xpiry of the session i mmediately following the 
session or the succes sive ses sions a foresaid, both Houses a gree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regu lation should not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.  
33. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir. 
Any reference in this  Act to a law which is  not in force in the State of Ja mmu and 
Kashmir shall, wherever, necessary, be constructed as including a refer ence t o the 
corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
 55

34. Power to remove difficulties. 
(1) If any  difficulty  arises in giving effect to  the p rovisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the  
difficulty:  
Provided that no such ord er shall be made after the expiry of a period of two  
years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament. 
35. Repeal and saving. 
(1) The Indian Securities Act, 1920(10 of 1920) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or an y action taken in the exercise o f 
any power conferred by or under the Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken in 
the exercise of the powers conferred b y or under this Act as if this Act was in force on 
the day on which such thing was done or action was taken. 
 56

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The law relating to Government Securities and th eir management by the Reserve Bank of India 
is laid down  in the P ublic Debt Act, 19 44 (18 of 1944). Over t he years, a number of rigi dities 
and deficiencies have been noticed in the Public Debt Act, 1944 and t he rules framed 
thereunder and som e of t he provisions had ceased t o be relevant in the present context. T he 
Reserve Bank of India, the agency banks and the treasuries were also handicapped in improving 
customer services, especially in the w ake of very substantial increase in the volum e of public  
debt.  
2. The Reserve Bank of India constituted a Committee consisting of representatives of the  
Reserve Bank of India, the Ministry  of Finance, the Ministry of Law and Justic e and the State 
Governments of Madh ya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal 
for a thorough and co mprehensive review of the entire gamut of Government securities 
management with a view to sim plifying and rationalizing th e rules and procedures. The 
Committee made certain recommendations requiring amendment to the Public Debt Act, 1944. 
3. In view of the various amendments that might be required to be carried out in the Public  
Debt Act, 1944, it was considered desirable to enact a new legislation in its place and to r epeal 
the Indian Securities Act, 1920 (10 of 1920). 
4. The salient features of the proposed Bill are to--  
(a) provide for openi ng and m aintaining of su bsidiary gen eral ledger account 
constituent's subsidiary general ledger  acc ount and bond ledger account with the 
Reserve Bank of  India subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified:  
and in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed; 
(b) provide for the Reserve Bank of India to prescribe the form  for transf erring; 
Government securities; 
(c) provide for holding of Government promissory notes by Trusts; 
(d) provide for summary procedure for  recognizing title for Gove rnment Securities up  
to rupees one lakh with en abling power to the Central  Government to enhance the said 
limit up to rupees one cr ore and enhancing of the  monetary limit in other related  
circumstances also;  
(e) provide for m icro films, facsi mile copies of docum ents, magnetic tap es and  
computer print outs to be admissible as evidence;  
(f) provide for suspension of the holders of  subsi diary general ledger acco unt from 
trading with the facility of that account in the event of misuse of the said facility; 
 57

(g) enable creation of pledge, hypot hecation or lien in respect of Government 
securities; 
(h) empower the Reserve Bank of India to call for inform ation, cause inspecti on and 
issue directions; and  
(i) empower the Reserve Bank of India to m ake regulations with the previous approval 
of the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
5. The Bill includes pr ovisions to remove  exi sting rigidit ies and deficiencie s in the  
Public Debt Act, 1944 and to streamline some of the e xisting provisions for better 
management of the Government securities. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
P. CHIDAMBARAM.  
NEW DELHI;  
The 2nd December, 2004. 
 58

 
NOTES ON CLAUSES 
Clause 1 of t he Bill, provi des for the nam e of the Act, its application and the commencement 
thereof.  
Clause 2 seeks to define the various expressions us ed in the Bill. Clause 3 seeks to provide  for 
different forms of Government Securities. 
Clause 4 seeks to provi de for the opening and maintenance of subsid iary general ledger 
account, constituent' s subsidiary  gener al le dger account and bond ledger account by  the 
Reserve Bank. 
Clause 5 se eks to provide for the Transfer of  Government securities and the form  to be 
prescribed by the Reserve Bank.  
Clause 6 seeks to provide for the holding of Government securities by holders of public offices, 
transfer of succeeding holders of such offices and transfer to a party not being a successor to his 
office.  
Clause 7 seeks to provide for the recognition of title  to the Government security on the death of 
the sole-holder or a joint holder of the security  on the basis of the order passed inter alia, by  
courts and other authorities.  
Clause 8 seeks to provide for vesting of the title  to Governm ent security in the survivors of 
joint holders in the case  of death of any of  the joint holder and for pa yment when the 
Government security is payable to two or more persons severally.  
Clause 9 seeks to provide for the nomination in respect of Government securities. 
Clause 10 se eks to provide for pa yment in respect of Government security  held on behalf of 
minor to the father or mother of such minor or where neither parent is alive or w here the living 
parents are or only living parent is incapable of acting, to a person entitled under the law for the 
time being in force to have care of the  property  of the m inor. It also seeks t o em power the  
Reserve Bank to m ake an order for ve sting of such Government security  in s uch person as it 
considers represents the minor or insane person,  when a Govern ment security  belongs to a 
minor or a person who is insane and incapable  of m anaging his affairs and when th e 
outstanding principal value of the Government security does not in the aggregate exceed rupees 
one lakh or s uch hi gher a mount, not exceeding rupees one crore as the Central Govern ment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time, fix.  
Clause 11 seeks to provide for issue of duplicate securities and of new securities on conversion, 
consolidation, sub-division, renewal, stripping or reconstitution of Government security.  
 59

Clause 12 seeks to la y down the procedure for summary determination by the Reserve Bank of  
title to Government security in case of dispute.  
Clause 13 seeks to lay down the law applicable in regard to Government securities. 
Clause 14 seeks to provide for suspension or postponement of, or pa yment and registration of 
transfer, pending the making of a vesting order.  
Clause 15 seeks to em power the Reserve Bank to require the person in whose favour the order 
is to be made to execute a bond with one or more sureties in such form as may be prescribed or 
to furnish security.  
Clause 16 seeks to provide for the publication of notice, in Official Gazett e or Official Ga zette 
of a State. 
Clause 17 se eks to provide for the procedure for making the vesting order to be prescribed by 
the Reserve Bank and the scope of such order. 
Clause 18 seeks to lay down that legal recognition by the Reserve Bank of any person as holder 
of Government security or any order made by the Reserve Bank vesting a Government security 
in any person shall operate to confer on that person a title to the security  subject only  to the 
personal liability  to the rightful owne r of th e secu rity for m oney had and received on h is 
account.  
Clause 19 seeks to lay down the steps to be taken by the Reserve Bank on receipt of an order of 
stay from a court.  
Clause 20 se eks to provide for cancell ation of vesting proceedings by  the Reserve Bank a nd 
proceeding a new.  
Clause 21 s eeks to provide for discharge of th e Reserve Ban k in respect  of interest on 
Government securities after the maturity thereof.  
Clause 22 seeks to provide for discharge in respect of bearer bonds on payment to the holder on 
presentation.  
Clause 23 seeks to la y down the period of lim itation for the liability  of the Government in 
respect of interest payable on the Government security.  
Clause 24 seeks to lay  down that no person sha ll be entitled for inspection of documents in 
relation to Government securities except to the extent prescribed by the Reserve Bank.  
 60

Clause 25 seeks to la y down that m icro films, facsimile copies of docum ents, magnetic tapes 
and computer print outs are documents and may be admitted in evidence. 
Clause 26 se eks to lay  down that the Reserve  Ban k and its officers are to be dee med to b e 
public officers.  
Clause 27 seeks to empower the Reserve Bank of debar the holder of Subsidiary general ledge r 
account from  tr ading with the subsidiary ge neral ledger account facilit y tem porarily or  
permanently.  
Clause 28 seeks to provide for creat ion of pledge, hy pothecation of lien in respect of 
Government security.  
Clause 29 se eks to e mpower the Re serve Bank to  call for any  information in relation to 
Government security, to cause inspe ction of the offices of  any  agent or holder of subsidiar y 
general ledger account including co nstituent subsidiary ledger account and to i ssue directions 
regarding Government security.  
Clause 30 seeks to provide for punishment with im prisonment or  fine f or m aking false 
statements in  the course o f an inquir y, etc., i mposition of penalti es by  the Reserve Bank for 
contravention of the provisions of the Act, regulation, notification, etc. 
Clause 31 seeks to lay  down that the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944) and the Depositories 
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall not apply to Government securities.  
Clause 32 seeks to empower the Reserve Bank to make regulations with the previous approval 
of the Central Government to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
Clause 33 se eks to provide that any reference in th is Act to a law which is not  in force in t he 
State of Ja mmu and Kashmir shall, wherever nec essary, be construed as including a referen ce 
to the corresponding law if any, in force in that State.  
Clause 34 seeks to empower the Central Gove rnment to make order for rem oving an y 
difficulty, which may arise in givi ng effect to the provisions of thi s Act and ev ery such orde r 
made under this clause to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 35 seeks to repeal the Indian Se curities Act, 1920 (10 of 1920) and to save any action 
taken thereunder. 
 61

 62
 
  
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to empower the Reserve Bank of India to make regulations with the 
previous approval of the Central Government for carrying out the purpose of this Act. The 
matters in respect of which such regulations may be made relate, inter alia, to the form in which 
and the terms and conditions subject to which the Government Securities may be issued, the 
form of and the fee to be charged for openi ng and maintenance of, s ubsidiary general ledger 
account including constituent's subsidiary gene ral ledger account and bond ledger account, the 
form and manner in which Government securities sh all be transferred, the manner in which any 
document relating to any Government security shall be transferred, the manner in which any 
document relating to any Government security or  any endorsement on a promissory note may 
be executed on behalf of a pers on who is unable to write, the documents to be produced for 
recognition of title to the Government security of a deceased sole holder or all deceased joint 
holders, the manner in which and the conditions subject to which the Reserve Bank of India 
may recognize title to a Government security, th e form and the manner in which a nomination 
may be made, varied or cancelled and the manne r in which any person may be appointed in 
whom the government security woul d be deemed to have vested in the event of death of holder 
or joint holders of Government security durin g the minority of a nominee, the fee for and 
conditions governing the issue of duplicate G overnment securities, the manner in which the 
Bank may determine title to a Government security , the form of bond that may be required to 
be executed by the person in whose favour an or der is to be made by the Bank, the procedure 
for making vesting order, the circumstances and the manner in which and the conditions subject 
to which inspection of Government securities,  books, registers and other documents may be 
allowed or information there from may be given,  and the terms and conditions subject to which 
pledge or hypothecation or lien may be created.  
2. Clause 34 of the Bill relates to power to remove difficulties. The provisions of 
the said clause empower the Central Government to make orders for removing any difficulty, 
which may be arise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. It is also being 
provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date of 
commencements of the proposed legislation and ev ery such order shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
3. The matter in respect of which the regulations may be made under 
Clause 32 of the Bill are all matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the proposed legislation itself. The regulations have 
to be laid before Parliament. The delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
 
 