35 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
 
         FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS  
(REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka) 

 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS  
(REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2006 
               Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………….…                  (III) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………                   (v) 
 
 
REPORT………………….………………………………………………….                    1 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
19 JANUARY, 2006, 20 APRIL, 2006, 01 MAY, 2006, 10 MAY, 2006  
AND 19 MAY, 2006…………………………………………………………     
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
      THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005… 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2005-2006    
 
 
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
23. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
24. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
25. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
26. Shri Amar Singh 
27. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
28. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
29. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia  
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri S.B. Arora   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by the Committee to 
submit the Report on their behalf present this Thirty-Fifth Report on the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2005. 
2.    The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Am endment Bill, 2005 introduced in Lok Sabha on 
16 December, 2005 was referred to the Committee on 23 December, 2005 for examination and report 
thereon, by the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Ru le 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. 
3.   The Committee obtained written informa tion on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Departmen t of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at 
their sitting held on 19 January, 2006. 
  4.      Written views/Memoranda were receive d from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Indian Banks ’ Association (IBA), National Housing Bank (NHB), 
State Bank of India (SBI), Housing Development Fi nance Corporation of India (HDFC), ICICI Bank 
Ltd., Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), Prognosis Capital Advisors, Bombay Stock Exchange 
(BSE) and National Stock Exchange (NSE). 
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 20 April, 2006, heard the views of the 
representatives of Reserve Bank of India and Securities Exchange Board of India. 
6.    At their sitting held on 1 May, 2006, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of  
Indian Banks’ Association, State Bank of India, Life Insurance Corporation of India and Housing 
Development Finance Corporation. 
7.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) on 10 May, 2006. 
8.   The Committee, at their sitting held on 19 th May, 2006 considered and adopted the draft 
report and authorised the Chairman to finalise the same and present it to Parliament. 
9.   The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Finance, 
(Department of Economic Affairs), representatives of the RBI, SEBI, IBA, NHB, LIC, SBI, HDFC, 
ICICI Bank Ltd. and other Organisations/Associations for their co-operation in placing before them their 
considered views and perceptions on the provisions  of the Bill and for furnishing written notes and 
information that the Committee had desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
10.  For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type. 
 
    New Delhi;              MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
_19_May, 2006                                Chairman 
29 Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Finance 
 

REPORT 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
 The Finance Minister in the Budget Speech, 2005-06, proposed to : 
 
 amend  the definition of ‘securitie s’ under the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 so as to provide a legal framework for 
trading of securitized debt incl uding mortgage backed debt; and 
mortgage backed debt and 
 appoint a high level Expert Co mmittee on corporate bonds  and 
securitization to look into the legal, regulatory, tax and market 
design issues in the development of the corporate bond market.  
 
2. The report of High Level Ex pert Committee on Corporate Bonds 
and Sec uritization appointed by  the Gove rnment was  submitted on Dec ember 
23, 2005.  
3. The amendments to the Securiti es Contracts (Regulation) Ac t, 
1956 prop osed through the Securities Co ntracts (Regulatio n) Amendment Bill,  
2005 are: 
(i)   to include securit isation certificates   or instruments under the definition of 
“securities”. Accordingly,  a  new  sub- clause (ie) is proposed t o be inserted in 
clause (h)  of section 2 of the SCR Act, 1956. This  brings an y certificate or  
instrument (by whatever name called), -  
(a) issued to an investor by  any s pecial purpose dis tinct entity which 
possesses any financial asset repres enting debt or receivable by such 
entity and acknowledging the beneficial interest of su ch investor in suc h 
financial asset; and 
(b) which may, by general or special order, be specified by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India;”. 
- within the definition of “securities” under the SCR Act. 
 1

(ii) Further, the Bill provides for obt aining approval from SEBI for issue of the 
proposed certificate or instrument and proc edure for such issue. Accordingly, it 
proposes to insert for the said purpose a new section 17A in the SCR Act, 1956. 
(iii) It also provides for the manner in wh ich contents of such certificates or 
instruments, are to be disclosed.  
 
 4.  Securitization is a form of financing involving pooling of financial assets 
and the issuance of securities that are re -paid from the cash flows generated by  
the assets.  This is generally  ac complished by actual sale of the assets to a 
bankruptcy remote vehicle, that is, a Special Purpose Vehicle, which finances the 
purchase t hrough the issuanc e of bonds.  These bonds are backed by future 
cash flow of the asset pool.  T he assets for securitization tr ansactions include,  
mortgages, credit cards, auto and consum er loans, student loans, corporate 
debt, export receivables, off-shore remittances, etc. 
 
A)   Residential Mortgage Backed Securitization (RMBS) Transactions: 
 
5. Residential Mortgage Backed Secu ritization (RMBS) T ransactions 
are the more common of the securitization transactions.  The stages  or 
processes involved in such tra nsactions are delineated as follows from the 
information furnished to the Committee: 
 
(i) Assignment and Transfer of a pool  of housing loans along with the 
underlying mortgages, from the primary len ding institution to Spec ial 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV).   
(ii) On acquiring the pool along-with the underlying mortgages, the SPV 
packages the cashflows of the pool of mortgages and designs instruments 
of securitization such as Resident ial Mortgage Backed Securities (RMBS) 
which may  be in the form of Pass Th rough Certificates (PTCs), Debt 
Obligations or any other forms. 
(iii) The SPV then issues RMBS to potential investors in Capital Market. 
(iv) The investors in the RMBS then rely  on the repayments in respect of the 
underlying mortgage loans for redeeming their investments and r ealising 
 2

the returns thereon. 
 
6. Details of the activities involved in the securitisation process include: 
 
(i) Selection of Pool of Housing Loans: 
 
The pool of housing loans  is selected by t he Primary Lending Institution  
from its existing housing loans based upon a ‘ pool selection criteria’ stipulated by 
the purchaser i.e. the SPV. 
(ii) Due Diligence Audit: 
A due diligence audit of the loan accounts is conducted by a firm of  
Chartered Accountant s to ensur e that eac h of the housing loans in the pool 
conforms and satisfies the selection criteria laid down by the SPV. 
(iii) Rating and Credit Enhancements:  
Rating of the instruments reflects the level of probability that the principal and 
interest will be paid/repaid in time and in accordance with the in dentures of the 
transaction. This is considered necessary to build up investor confidence in the 
instrument and help them assess risks associated with the instrument.  The Rating 
Agencies accord their rating grades on the basis of perceived adherence to payment 
schedules of the financial obligations based on the strength of the cash pool flows, 
the credit enhancement mechanism, payment structure, pool originator profile and 
track record and collateral quality. 
In order to maintain a spec ified rating grade and to improve the 
performance of the pool as also to ensure uninterrupted cash flow for yielding the 
indicated coupon interest to the purchaser  or subsequent investors in the  RMBS 
paper, the Rating  Agency (or even the SPV)  may  insist for additio nal credit 
support (called credit enhancement) under the transaction. The credit  
enhancement may be provided in various  forms such as s etting aside a cash 
pool (called cash collateral acc ount), limited corpora te guarantee, third party 
guarantee, setting aside an additional  mortgage pool (called  over-
collateralisation), inv estment in sub- ordinated RMBS paper (in the event of 
 3

securitisation) etc. In the event of secu ritisation of mortgage debt ab-initio, cr edit 
support is sought on the basis of recommendation of the credit rating agency.  
(iv) Valuation of the Pool and Consideration of Assignment: 
 The SPV makes payment of considerat ion for the purchase of mortgage  
debts (for holding it in it s own book or for the purpose of securitization ab initio) 
after issue of allotment letters to inv estors or after execution of the leg al 
documents relating to the transaction or on such date as mutually agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller. 
 
The purchase consideration to the Primary Lending Agency may be decided 
based on t he valuation of the pool of mo rtgages utilising any of the following 
methodologies: 
 
a) Par Pricing Methodology:  
The consideration pay able to the Primar y Lender for transferring the pool is  
equal to the total future outstanding princi pal balances of the individual loans 
on a Cut-Off Date. 
b) Premium Pricing Methodology: The consideration paid to the Primary Lender  
for transferring the pool is dec ided and paid on the basis of dis counting of 
future stream of net cash flows rela ting to the pool. It shall normally  be higher 
than the total outstandi ng principal balances of the individual loans on a Cut -
Off Date as the discounting rate used shall be lower than the weighted 
average coupon of the pool.  
c) Discount Pricing Methodology : The cons ideration paid to the Primary Lender  
for transferring the pool is  lower than t he total outstanding pr incipal balances 
of the individual loans on a Cut-Off Date as the discounting rate used shall be 
higher than the weighted average coupon  of the pool due to higher risk  
perception. 
 
(v) Appointment of Servicing and Paying Agent(s) 
 The SPV appoints a Servicing and Payi ng Agent to handle Post-Issue 
Servicing Operations which inc ludes Cust odial services (for holding mortgage 
 4

documents), Loan Administration and Recovery operations, Appropriations of the 
Payments to Investors and Service Provid ers, Management In formation System 
and Reporting, Maintenance of Accounts and Records.  
 
7. The SPV finances the financial assets transferred to it by the iss ue 
of securities/agreements whic h may be in the form of Pass Through Certificates 
(PTCs), Debt obligations, or other forms of mortgage backed securities which are 
generally monitored by Trustees or the Managers of the SPV.   
8. The SPV may issue two or multip le classes or tranches of RMBS, 
sliced from cashflows of the same underlying pool of residential mortgages.  
9.    As seen from the information furnished to the Committee, the National 
Housing Bank’s (NHB) RMBS issues typically inv olve two classes of PTCs viz.  
the “Senior Class” and the “Subordinated Class” slic ed from cashflows of the 
same underlying pool of residential mort gages. The PTCs are in the nature of 
trust certifi cates of b eneficial interest. Each PT C represents a proportionat e 
undivided beneficial interest in t he pool of hous ing loans and in the sec urities 
thereof, issued pursuant to the v arious documents entered into by and between 
different parties to the transaction of securitization. 
10.   From the information delineated  above the touchstones of secur itisation 
can be listed out as under: 
• Legal true sale of assets to an SPV with narrowly d efined pur poses 
and activities 
• Raising of funds by t he SPV by  issue of s ecurities to the investors,  
either representing benef icial interest in the underly ing assets (“pass 
through securities”) or representing a s enior or subordinated interest in 
the cash flows realiz ed from t he underly ing assets  (“pay through 
securities”) 
• Reliance by the inv estors on the performance of the assets for  
repayment - rather than the credit  of their Originator (the seller) or the 
issuer (the SPV) 
• Consequent to the above, “ Bankruptcy Remoteness” from the 
Originator. 
 
 5

B. Disclosure Requirements and Credit Enhancement Facilities: 
 
11. In February, 2006, the Rese rve Bank of India, issued 
comprehensive Guidelines providing the regulatory framework on Securitisation of 
standard assets as applic able to banks,  financial ins titutions and non-banking 
financial companies.  The guidelines have been grouped under various categories 
or heading s viz.  true sale,  criteria to be met by SPV, Prov ision of credit  
enhancement facilities, disclosures etc. 
12.  On the disclos ure requirements to  be fulfille d by the SPV/ trustee, as 
per the information furnished by the Ministry , ‘such’ entities ar e required to make 
available to the regulatory authorities, as  and when r equired, a copy of the trust 
deed, the financ ial accounts and statement of affairs, it s constitution, owner ship, 
capital structure, size of the securitizati on issue, terms of offe r including interest 
payments/yield on instruments, deta ils of underlying asset  pool and its 
performance history, i nformation about origi nator, transaction structure, service 
arrangement, credit enhancement details, risk factors etc’.  
13. As for the  specifics of the disclosur es to be made by the 
SPV/Trustee partakin g in sec uritization transactions, the Reserve Bank’s 
Guidelines inter alia provide as follows: 
“ The SPV/trustee is required to provi de continuing disclosures by way  
of a Disclosure Memorandum, signed a nd certified for correctness of  
information contained therein jointly by  the servicer and the trustee, and 
addressed to each securities  holder individually  at periodic interv als 
(maximum 6 months or more frequent). In  case the securities holders are 
more than 100 in number then the me morandum may also be published in a 
national financial daily newspaper. In  addition to the above, data may be 
made available on websites  of the SPV/trustee. The conte nts of the 
memorandum would be as under: 
a) collection summary of previous collection period; 
b) asset pool behavior - delinquenci es, losses, prepayment etc. with 
details; 
c) drawals from credit enhancements; 
 6

d) distribution summary: 
 -in respect of principal and interest to each class of security holders; 
   - in respect of  servicing and administration  fee, trusteeship fee etc; 
e) payments  in arrears; 
f) current rating of the securities and any migration of rating during the 
period; and 
g) any other material / information relevant to the performance of the 
pool.   
 
The SPV/trustee is  also required to  publish a periodica l report on any  
re-schedulement, restructuring or re -negotiation of the terms of the 
agreement, effected after the transfer of assets to the SPV, as a part of  
disclosures to all the participants at  Quarterly/Half yearly intervals.  The 
authorization of investors to this effect may be ob tained at  the time of 
issuance of securitized paper.” 
 
14.  As regards the ‘Originator’, t he following disc losures, as notes to 
accounts, presenting a comparative posit ion for two years are required to be 
made in terms of the Guidelines: 
(i) total number and book value of loan assets securitized;  
(ii) sale consideration received for the securitized assets and gain/loss on 
sale on account of securitization; and  
(iii) form and quantum (outstandin g value)  o f services provided b y way of  
credit enhancement, liquidity support, post- securitization asset servicing,  
etc. 
15.  In addition to the above, balanc e sheet disclosures, Originating   
institutions of   the  securitisation  transactions  are required to provide the 
various disclosures as stated in the Guideli nes to   the   Audit   Sub-Committee   
of  their  Board, on a quarterly  basis.  
      16.  On the credit support that a SPV may require as protection agains t 
potential losses, and for ens uring uninterrupted cash flow f or yielding the 
 7

indicated coupon interest to the purc haser or subsequent investors in 
‘securitization instruments’, the ‘guidelines’ inter alia provide for: 
 
• A "first loss facility" which represents the first level of financial support to a 
SPV as part of the proce ss in bringing the securities issued by the SPV to 
investment grade.  The prov ider of the facility bears the bulk (or all) of the 
risks associated with the assets held by the SPV; 
 
• A "second loss facility" which represents a credit enhancement providing a 
second (or subsequent) tier of pr otection to an SPV against potential 
losses; 
 
 C. Securitization: International Trend and Indian experience: 
 
17. The evolut ion of Residential Mortgage Backed Sec uritization in 
USA – as seen from the information furnis hed - has been facilitated by large 
scale Government intervention in the initial stages to increase the volume of loan 
originations from primary market financ ial institutions, bringing about market 
discipline and the dev elopment of the market in an or ganized manner. In USA, 
the Government is said to be playing a defining role in creation of Spec ialized 
forms of Secondary Market Intermediat ion through the creation of Secondary 
Mortgage Market Institutions (SMMIs) viz. Federal National Mortgage Association 
(Fannie Mae) and Federal Home Loan Mo rtgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) 
(both are better known as Government Sponsored  Enterprises (GSEs)) and 
Government National Mortgage Associati on (Ginnie Mae) which is a department 
of the Government.  
 
18. On the development of resident ial mortgage based sec uritization in 
the USA vis-à-vis, the policy measures pursued in this direction in India, a written 
note furnished by the Ministry, inter alia reveals as follows: 
“NHB has  in its promotional r ole been actively  involved in 
building up long term stakes in th is segment, exploring appropriate 
institutional mechanism for supporting, sustaining and expanding the 
secondary mortgage market. Keeping in view the specific Charter on 
securitization as envisioned for the Bank under the National Housing 
Bank Act, 1987 (as amended till date), and in the lig ht of various 
reports and recommendations in the context of securitization  of 
residential mortgages in India,  NHB is in the process of 
 8

commissioning a study by an experi enced consultant on developing 
a road map for promoting secur itization operations on  larger scale 
akin to the model of Fannie Mae/ Ginnie Mae of the USA. The above 
Study proposes to undertake a detailed analysis of the various  
issues pertaining to securiti zation and evolve a model for 
securitization mechanism for iss uance of RMBS in India supported 
by a Secondary Mortgage Institution al ong similar lines as GSEs in 
USA.” 
  
19.  The Committee, in the course of evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance and the Na tional Housing Bank point ed out inter alia that in 
countries such as the United States and Canada, mortgage backed securitized 
debt instruments are backed by either fu ll or partial government guarantees.   
Questioned specifically whether the NHB would be  playing a similar role of 
extending guarantees on m ortgage backed se curitized instruments, the 
Executive Director, NHB responded by stating inter alia as follows: 
 “If you go by the US example or Canadian model, there we hav e the 
backing, implicit or explicit, by the Federal Government on these papers 
which are issued by the Government -sponsored entities.  In the US 
context, it  is Fannie Mae, which is  a government-sponsored entity.  
Then, we have Ginnie Mae, whic h is  100 per cent gov ernment 
sponsored and all their papers are 100 per cent and explicitly insured by 
the Federal Government.  They  are serving a public housing 
programme.  Then, their private se ctor counterpart, which is Freddie 
Mae, is also securitizing big size loans.” 
 
 20.   Elaborating further on the role being played or proposed to be played 
by NHB on ensuring guaranteed returns to the investors in mortgage backed 
debt instruments, the Executive Director, NHB also added: 
 “…I may submit that we have stru ctured different designs  for these 
instruments over a period of time and learning from our experience on 
every issue, about a year back, we  introduced a new structure wher e 
NHB was providing  parti al guarantee to these pape rs as a measure of 
credit enhancement.  There, we are actually transferring the cost of credit 
enhancement from the lender s to the NHB itself and we are providing 
partial guarantee to the papers whic h are ultimately invested by the 
institutional investors.  This guar antee mechanism is  not 100 per cent 
guarantee, but through adequate discl osures, we are telling the 
institutional investors what am ount of risk is embedded in these 
transactions and thes e structures.  To a certain exte nt their interest is 
protected.  If it passes through certif icate, whatever amount is received 
from the borrower, that is passed thr ough to the inves tors.  In case the 
 9

borrowers are defaulting, then we hav e cre dit  enhancement measures 
which take care of the protection of the investors’ interest.  In that, if we 
have 100 per cent protection to the inve stors, that can have a high cost.  
So, we have to balance out the experi ence, the finality of the mortgages.   
That is why, we pick those mortgages which are seasoned and which are 
known to perform well.  We securitise those assets so t hat the investors’ 
risk is minimized and whatever risk is  there, that gets covered through 
credit enhancement.” 
 
 21.  On  the issue of following the US and Canadian system of providin g 
the backing of guarantee to the investor s, the Executive Director informed as  
follows: 
 
 “As regards those entities, we ar e working on those models, but those 
entities have an implicit or  ex plicit guarantee  fr om the Federal 
Government.” 
 
 22.  On issues relating to ex tending government guarantee on r eturns to 
the investors in securitized debt  instrum ents, a representativ e of the Ministry 
stated as follows during evidence: 
 “… the idea is not to give a guar antee because here the State does come 
into the pic ture.  There is an ind ividual private entity, which  is securitizing 
its receiva bles, an d it is makin g an issue, which  is  c ompletely based on  
disclosure exactly  lik e an equity issue.  Therefore, any potential investor 
does an assessment of the risks and t he conditions of this particular 
instrument, and then buys or does not buy based on his assessment of that 
risk.” 
 
D. Initiatives for development of Securitization Market: 
 
23. Two major initiatives for develop ment of the securitiz ation market, 
which have been taken in the past are, the amendment of t he National Housing 
Bank Act, 1987 (NHB Act) in 2000; and enactment of the Securitization and 
Reconstruction of F inancial Ass ets and En forcement of Securit y Interest Act, 
2002.  
 
(a)    National Housing Bank Act, 1987  
 
 24. The National Housing Bank (A mendment)  Act, 2000 has, inter alia 
entrusted NHB to undertake securitization of residential mortgages originat ed by 
different housing finance institutions and banks and ensure the developm ent of 
 10

secondary market for residential mortgages. The enabling provisions in NHB Act 
– as they presently stand - for Mort gage backed Securitization and secondary  
market include: 
 
(i) Section 14 (ea) of the Act, which specifically authorises  NHB to purchase, 
sell, or otherwise deal in any loans or advances secured by mortgage or  
charge on the immovabl e property relating to Scheduled Ba nks or 
Housing Finance Institutions (HFIs); 
(ii) Section 14  (eb), which allo ws NH B to create one or more Trusts and 
transfer loans or advances together wit h or without securities therefor to 
such Trust(s) for consideration; 
(iii) Section 14  (ec), which authorise s NHB to set aside loans or advances, 
and issue or sell Mortgage Back ed Securities (MBS) based on such loans 
or advances so set aside, in the form of debt obligations, Trust Certificates 
of benefic ial interest or other instruments whatev er name called , and t o 
act as Trustee for the holders of such securities. 
(iv) Section 18A, which facilitates t he transfer of MBS issued by Nationa l 
Housing Bank to securitise the l oans granted by Scheduled Banks and 
HFIs, without Compulsory Registration,  both at the time of issue of 
securities by NHB and at the time of their transfer by the investors.  
(v)     Further, in terms of Section 18 B of  the NHB Act, the Bank acting as a 
trustee or otherwise in t he transaction relat ing to securitization of loans  
has been authorised to recover the dues as arrears of land revenue for 
instilling confidence among the investors in the Securities issued by NHB. 
 
(b)  SARFAESI Act: 
 
 25.   The amendments in the NHB Ac t were followed by the enactment of 
the Securitization and Reconstruction of  Financial As sets and Enforcement of  
Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act), an act enacted to regulate, inter 
alia, the business of securitization. The provisions under the SARFAESI Act, inter 
alia prov ide that on securitization of an asset, the  securitization company is 
placed in the same position as if  it was t he original lender.  Besides this, the Act 
 11

amended the definition of  “securities” as given in the Securities Contract 
Regulation Act, 1956 to include security receipts issued by a securitization 
company.   
26. The legis lative measures cited above are said to have not fully 
helped in achiev ing the desired result of securing a deep and liquid secur itised 
debt market owing to the absenc e of the facility of trading on sto ck exchanges.  
The securitization instruments under NHB are not covered under the definition of 
“securities” in the SCR Act.  Under the SARFAESI Act, while “security receipts” 
have been covered under the definition of “securities” , the Act restricts sale and 
purchase of such ‘receipts’ only amongst qualified institutional buyers.  Moreover, 
the “security receipts” under the SAR FAESI Act can be iss ued only by a 
securitization company or a reconstruc tion company registered with the Reserve 
Bank of India.  This is perceived to lim it t he interest  in the inst rument and the 
market has not taken off at all. 
 
 E. Constraints to the development of securitisation market: 
  
27. As brought  out above, since secu ritised papers are not includ ed 
under the definition of ‘securities’ under the Securities Contract (Regulation) Act, 
1956, such instruments are not permitted to be listed in the stock exchanges, and 
consequently, the trading is restricted. 
 28. As per the information furnished to the Committee, the NHB has, till 
date completed securitisation transactions  involving over 38,000 housing loans  
amounting to Rs. 763 crore.  Currently , selection of housing loans for  
securitisation is confined to six states, which have fixed the stamp duty in respect 
of ‘instruments of securitisation’ at 0.1% of the size of the securitised assets. 
29. Stamp duty is perceived as one of the major hindrances to the 
development of securitisation in Indi a.  As mortgage debt is  regarded as  
‘immovable property’ its transfer can be affe cted only by means of an instrument 
in writing. Such a transf er deed attracts stamp duty as a ‘conv eyance’ and is 
required to be stamped on ad valorem bas is at the rates prescri bed under the 
relative pr ovisions of the stamp laws  of the conc erned st ates, and is  also 
 12

required to be registered with the concer ned Sub-Registrar of Assurances under 
the Indian Registration Act, 1908. 
 30. The varying stamp duty rates on ‘securtisation transactions’, whic h 
range from 0.1 per cent to 8 percent and varies from state to state; the 
registration charges applic able under the In dian Registration Act, 1908; as wel l 
as issues relating to taxation of income  of various entities of securitisation 
transactions have a direct bearing on the economics of mortgage backed 
securitisation market. 
 
F. The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2005 
  
31. The Sec urities Contracts (R egulation) Amendm ent Bill, 2005 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 16.12.2005 and referred to the Standing Commit tee 
on Finance on 23.12. 2006 for examination and report.  The rationale behind the 
amendment proposals of t he Bill, which seek to  enable secondary m arket 
liquidity for securitised debt instrum ents, as furnished by  the Ministry are 
delineated as under: 
(i) Under the existing legal framework,  Securitisation transactions cannot be 
listed and traded on stock exchanges as these transactions  are not 
included in the definition of “securities” in th e Securities Contracts  
(Regulation) Act, 1956.  
(ii)      At present, securitization t ransactions are being structured under Trust law 
and are transacted among a few financial institutions on private placement 
basis. List ing and trading on sto ck exchanges would allow wider  
participation of investors, both of retail and institutional investors. 
(iii)    In the absence of the facilit y o f trading o n stock exchanges, potential 
buyers of securitized instruments get  discouraged by the possibility of 
having to hold the c ertificate or instru ment in respect of sec uritisation 
transactions till maturity.  This, in turn, restricts the growth of business of 
housing finance companies and banks.   
(iv)   The entire institutional, super visory and regulator y architec ture of 
securities law could be made applicable to securitization transactions also.  
 13

(v) Investment by institutional inve stors seek would be possible only when 
these instruments are elig ible instruments for investment whic h in turn  
requires an active s econdary market  and appropriate regular  disclosure 
about the quality of assets  inc luding recovery mechanism in case of  
default. The institutional partic ipation would help in f urther developing the 
securitized debt market.  
 
32. The amendments to the  Securi ties Contracts (Regulation) Act, 
1956 proposed through the Bill are: 
(i)   to include securit isation certificates   or instruments under the definition of 
“securities”. Accordingly,  a  new  sub- clause (ie) is proposed t o be inserted in 
clause (h)  of section 2 of the SCR Act, 1956. This  brings an y certificate or  
instrument (by whatever name called), -  
(a) issued to an investor by  any s pecial purpose dis tinct entity which 
possesses any financial asset repres enting debt or receivable by such 
entity and acknowledging the beneficial interest of su ch investor in suc h 
financial asset; and 
(b) which may, by general or special order, be specified by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India;”. 
- within the definition of “securities” under the SCR Act. 
(ii) Further, the Bill provides for obt aining approval from SEBI for issue of the 
proposed certificate or instrument and proc edure for such issue. Accordingly, it 
proposes to insert for the said purpose a new section 17A in the SCR Act, 1956. 
(iii) It also provides for the manner in wh ich contents of such certificates or 
instruments, are to be disclosed.  
33. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the various  
provisions of the Bill f rom (i) Reserve Bank of India, (ii) Se curities and Exchange 
Board of India, (iii) Prognos is Capital Adv isors, (iv) National Ho using Ba nk, (v) 
National Centre for Advocacy Studies (vi) ICICI Bank Ltd., (vii) SBI, (viii) LIC,  (ix) 
HDFC and (x) Indian Banks ’ Association.  The Com mittee also had pers onal 
 14

hearings of the views of t he representatives of RBI, SEBI, IBA, ICICI, SBI, LIC 
and HDFC. 
 34.  The Committee, upon consider ing the various aspects of the  
securitisation market in the Co untry, observe that despite the initiatives taken  
earlier towards development of the mark et, which include, the amendment to  
the National Housing Bank (NHB) Act in  2000 for facilitating securitization of 
residential mortgages originating from housing finance institutions and banks, 
and enactment of the SARFAESI Act in 2002, trading of securitized papers has 
been rather restricted.  While the secu ritized instruments issued un der the 
NHB Act are not covered und er the definiti on of ‘securities’ in the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 for enabling listing and trading of such 
instruments on the stock exchanges, ‘ security r eceipts’ issued u nder the 
SARFAESI Act, 2002, though  categorized as ‘securities’, can be sold and 
purchased onl y b y qualified institutio nal bidders, thereby precluding t he 
possibility of listing of such instruments. 
35. Enabling for listing and trading of securitized debt on the stock 
exchanges b y including securitization certificates/instruments un der the 
definition of  ‘securities’ throu gh the proposed Bill viz., Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2005 is expect ed to result in improved l iquidity 
by providing an exit option to the in vestors and increase the volume o f funds 
for furthe r lending.  The Committee, after having consid ered the various 
viewpoints expressed, recognize the n eed for listing and trading of such 
instruments on the stock exchanges and express their agreement w ith the 
broad objectives of the amendment proposals.  However, in the course of their 
deliberations, various issues p ertaining to the legal framew ork envisioned i n 
the proposed Bill for trading o f securitised instruments,  the disclosure norms 
and rating requirements of such instruments, ensuring assured returns to the 
investors stability in the capital market, as well as the structure of stamp dut y 
and registration charges etc., w hich ar e conceived to be hindrances to the 
development of securitization market we re discussed.  These issues and the 
observations/recommendations of the  Committee are dealt w ith in the 
subsequent paragraphs of the report.  
 15

AMENDMENTS PROPOSED BY  GOVERNMENT: 
 
Clause 2 (Amendment of Section 2) and Clause 3 (Insertion of new section 17 A) 
 
36. Clause 2, which seeks to include ‘securitisation certificate or instrument’ 
under the definition of ‘Securities’ by inserting for t he purpose, a new sub-c lause (ie) 
in clause (h) of Seciton 2 of the SCR Act, 1956 reads as under: 
(1) In section 2 of the Securities Cont racts (Regulation) Act, 1956(42 of 1956)  
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) , in clause (h), after sub-clause (id), the 
following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-- 
"(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called),-- 
(a) issued, to an investor by any special purpo se distinct entity which 
possesses any financ ial asset representing debt or receivable by  such entity , 
and, acknowledging t he benefic ial interest of such investor in such financial 
asset; and 
(b) which may, by general or specia l order, be specified as s uch by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India;". 
 
37. Clause 3, which stipulates the ‘due  process’ or lays  down the legal 
framework by way of which the ‘certificates’ or ‘instruments’ (securities) referred to in 
Sub-clause (ie) of Clause (h) of Section 2 are to be issued provides as follows: 
After section 17 of the principal Act, t he following section shall be inse rted, 
namely;-- 
"17A. Approval of Securities and Exchange Board of India for securities referred 
to in sub-clause (ie) of clause ( h) of section 2.--(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, no 
securities of the nature referred to in s ub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2 
shall be is sued to any investor or tr ade on any recognised stock exchange 
unless suc h securities have been approv ed by the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India. 
(2) Every special purpose distinct entity referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) 
of section 2 shall-- 
(a) make an applicat ion, for specifyi ng any certificate or instrument 
under sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2, as s ecurities, to she 
 16

Securities and Exc hange Board of India, in such  form and manner as 
may be specified by regulations; 
(b) file along with an a pplication made under clause (a) the draft of the 
certificate or instrument which such  entity proposes  to issue to the 
investor as securities of the natur e referred to in sub-clause (ie) of 
clause (h) of section 2 
(3) The Securities and Exc hange Board of India may, to protect the interest of 
investors in the securities of the nature re ferred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) 
of section 2, specify by regulations,-- 
(i) the contents of the certificate or  instrument to be filed under c lause 
(b) of sub-section (2) and to be issu ed as securitie s of the n ature 
referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2, to the investors; 
(ii) the manner in which such c ontents shall be disc losed in the 
certificate or instrument to be i ssued as securities of the nature 
referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2". 
 
38. An instrument or certificate issued  to an inv estor by a ‘Special Purpose 
Distinct Entity’ (SPE), which  possesse s financia l assets representin g debt or 
receivable and acknowledges th e beneficial interest of the investor in such financial 
assets would be construed as a ‘security’ in  terms of the propos ed Section 2 (h) (ie) 
subject to the condition that it  is specified as such by  a ‘general’ or ‘special’ order of 
SEBI. 
39. For the purpose of ‘issue’ and trading on any stock exchange, the 
instrument or certificate (Security ) – refe rred to in the proposed Section 2 ( h) (ie) – 
has to be approved by SEBI in  terms of t he propos ed Section  17 (A) (I).   The 
process relating thereto, as per the stipul ations of the proposed Section 17 (A) (2) 
involve int er alia, making an application by the ‘Special Purpos e Distinct Entity’ to  
SEBI alon g with a draft of the certificate or instrument.  Further, in terms of th e 
proposed Section 17 (A) (3), S EBI may, in the interest of  the i nvestors, specify by 
regulations, the ‘Contents of the certificate or instrument’ proposed to the issued and 
the manner in which such contents ‘shall be disclosed in the certificate or instrument’. 
 
 17

 40. With the amendments proposed s eparately to Section 31 (2) of the 
SCRA Act  (Clause 4 ), SEBI is to be con ferred with powers to make regulation s 
relating to : 
 
• the form and manner  in whic h an applic ation shall be made und er clause 
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 17A; 
• the contents of the certif icate or instrument under clause (I) of sub-section 
(3) of section 17 A; 
• the manner in which such contents sha ll be disc losed in the cert ificate or 
instrument under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 17 A.” 
 
ISSUE OF SECURITIES (SECURITIZATION INSTRUMENTS/CERTIFICATES): 
 
41. The amendment proposal s envisaged v ide Section 17 (A) (I) inter alia 
stipulate that the securitiza tion certificates/instruments re ferred to in the proposed 
Section 2 (h) (ie) shall not be is sued to ‘any investor or traded on any recognised 
stock exchange unless approved by SEBI’. In this regard, the institutional participants 
in the secrutisation market, as well as SEBI, in their Memoranda and als o in the 
course of making oral submissions before the Committee, opined t hat the proposals, 
as envisaged, would imply that no securi tised debt could be iss ued in the country 
without SEBI’s approval.  As most of the securitisati on deals were done on private 
placement basis through bilateral negotiations involving Qualified Institutional Buyer s 
(QIBs), it has been emphasised that in a manner similar to  issue of debt and equity 
securities, the requirements of approval by SEBI for issue of ‘securitisation 
instruments/certificates’ to investors need to be made app licable only for public issue 
of such securities. 
42. Questioned about the consequential effect of the amendment proposals 
of the Bill, as envis aged,  whereby it co uld be implied that pr ivate placement of 
securitised debt would be possible only with SEBI’s approval, the Ministry of Finance, 
in a written reply, inter alia stated as follows: 
“it would b e clarified in the lega l drafting of the Bill that issue of  
security type to investor “through pub lic issue” will be poss ible only  after  
SEBI’s approval.” 
 
 18

 43. The Minis try, in a subsequent  reply, specified the cha nges 
proposed in Section 2 (h) (ie)  and Section 17 (A) (I) to  mandate that the issue of  
securtised debt to investors through a public offer will need SEBI’s appro val, 
meaning thereby that private placement of securitised can continue to take plac e 
without such approval by SEBI.  The cha nges in the provisions as proposed by  
the Ministry, read as follows: 
 i) Section 2 (h) (ie) (Clause2): 
  
“(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called)- 
(a) issued to an investor through a public  offer  by any specia l 
purpose distinct entity which possesses any financial asset 
representing debt or r eceivable by such entity, and, acknowledging 
the beneficial interest of such investor in such financial asset; and 
(b) which may, by general or special order, be specified as such by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India.” 
 
ii) Section 17 (A)(1) (Clause 3) – wit hout prejudice to the provisions 
contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, no 
securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of 
section 2 shall be issued to any investor through a public offer or 
traded on any recognised stoc k exc hange unless s uch securit ies 
have been approved by the Securi ties and Exchange Board of 
India. 
 
SEBI’S PERCEPTION/SUGGESTIONS ON THE PROPOSALS OF THE BILL: 
 
44. Apart from the issue  relating to  the perception t hat the Bill, as 
introduced, gives that privat e placement of ‘securitis ed debt’ too would require 
SEBI’s a pproval – which has b een soug ht to be rectified with  the chan ges 
proposed, as indicat ed in the precedi ng paragraphs - SEBI, in a writ ten 
memorandum raised certain issues on the ‘provisio ning’ propos ed in the Bill.   
Some of the issues raised by the capital market regulator are delineated in brief 
as under: 
 19

i) The Securtisation instrument/certificate to be issued by the 
SPE – in terms of the proposed Section 2 (h) (ie) could either 
be defined comprehensively in the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act or alternativel y, the attributes of such 
instrument enumerated by Regu lations instead of providing 
for a scheme of specification of such instruments by SEBI by 
means of a ‘general’ or ‘special order’; 
ii) The ’approval’ based approach envisaged for enabling  issue 
‘Securitization inst ruments’ in terms of the proposed 
Sections 17 (A) (I) and (2) was not in consonanc e with 
SEBI’s g uidelines/regulations go verning ‘is sues’, wh ich are 
disclosure based; 
iii) As per the propose d provis ions, the disclosures to be 
specified by SEBI would app ear on the ‘certifica te’ or 
‘instrument’ itself, which wou ld be unworkable inter alia by 
hindering ‘transferability’ of the instruments, and 
disappearance of the disclosures in the event of dematting;  
iv) Regulation making power should be conferred on SEBI for  
addressing matters such as, elig ibility criteria  of iss uers, 
procedural requirement for public offer, minimum size of the 
offer for public etc. 
 
45. SEBI also furnished to the Committee, a modified version of the Bill 
as proposed by them to address inter alia the concerns expressed, as  
enumerated above in brief.  
  46. The Cha irman, SEBI as well a s a representative of SEBI, in the  
course of evidenc e, dwelt at length inter alia on the issues raised on the 
proposed provisioning of the Bill as c ontained in the memorandum submitted  
to the Committee. 
  47. The suggestions made/ issues r aised by SEBI on the provisioning 
of the Bill vis-à-vis, the response/perception of the Ministry of Finance thereo n 
are discussed in brief in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 20

  48. The view-point expres sed to e nable for en umerating the attributes 
of ‘Securitised debt in struments’, instead of providing for SEBI to specify suc h 
instruments in terms of a ‘general’ or  ‘s pecial order’, as envisaged in  the 
proposed Section 2 (h) (ie), has been responded to as under by the Ministry, in 
a written reply : 
 
“Securitised debt is a special c lass of security as it c ombines attributes of 
both debt and equity.  Since securitisa tion structure admits of product 
innovation, it is not conceivable to think about all the securitisation products.” 
 
“…the attributes of securitisation in strument would be specified in the 
regulations.  Howev er, SEBI will still have power s to approve specif ic 
securitised debt instruments on the sa me analogy on whic h SEBI approv es 
specific derivative contracts as there can be complex securitisation structures.  
The main statute should be time invariant and should not try to conceive of all 
possible products.” 
 
49. Asked to clarify the framew ork envisaged for deciding on the 
tradeability of securiti sation instruments by means of a ‘general’ or ‘special’ 
order,  the Ministry, in a subsequent reply, informed as under: 
“Through the “General” or “special or der” by SEBI, it is env isaged 
that only the tradabilit y aspect of a securitized instrument would be  
listed out. Since the securitized instruments are innovative products, 
one cannot, in an exhaustive manner vi sualize what attributes it  
would have. In case such a new in strument is envisaged by m arket 
players which is  not c overed under the rubric of “general” order of 
SEBI, it is  being gran ted powers under the “special order” route to 
provide legal sanction for its trading.” 
 
50. The principal content ion of t he regulator has been that the ‘due 
process’ envisaged for listing of the ‘securities’ –  which, a s per the  
‘memorandum’ submitted involved a doub le approval, one under Section 2 (h)  
(ie) read with Section 17 (A) (2) and t he other under Section 17  (A) (I) – was 
not in consonance with the Guidelines/R egulations governing is sues, whic h 
were mainly disclosur e based and not appr oval bas ed.  In thi s regard, the 
Ministry, in a written reply continued as follows: 
“Presently there could be some si mple vanilla type products, whic h 
may be subsumed under a ca tegory and could be issued to investors as  
a part of some generic category of se curitisation.  On the other hand, 
there could be som e highly s tructured products which may  require 
 21

specific approval bef ore these are o ffered to inv estors.  The word 
approval has been used deliber ately in t he Bill so that only “securities”  
which could be construed as liquid se curities or hav e other desirable 
attributes of good credit rating or credit enhancement etc. only pass the 
SEBI approval test.  Since the securitised debt is not pure equity, there is 
a need to have some kind of quality check before these securities are 
offered to investors.  The approval involved by SEBI  is not dou ble, but  
only single.  Only single process is stipulated whereby the special 
purpose entity, whic h wants to issue securitised debt to instruments, 
applies to SEBI with a draft of the ce rtificate or instruments giving the  
salient features of such  instruments. SEBI, with a  view to protecting 
interest of investors would specify by regulations the contents of the 
certificates or instruments and the m anner in which s uch contents shall 
be disclosed to investors in the form of regulations. If the securitised debt  
passes the general approval test under t he regulations, it can be deemed 
to have been approve d by SEBI.  However, in other cases, where a new 
instrument is offered to investor s, SEBI will hav e specific power to 
approve of such instruments.” 
 
 
51.    The Ministry also added as under in this regard: 
 
“Even under the exist ing SEBI Act, 1992 though SEBI  allows iss ue 
of shares subject to disclosure bas ed regulation, it exercises power to 
disapprove a public  issue under sub- section (4) of Section 11 of the 
SEBI Act.  So  the present  scheme of the Bill a llows b oth genera l 
approval of securitised debt through disclosure based regulation as well 
as specific approved based regulation. 
 SEBI has  been ap proving s pecific de rivative contracts and  
securities, which are being traded on th e stock exchanges.  So, it is not  
correct to say that SEBI does not appr ove of the securities, which ar e 
traded on the stock e xchanges.  SEBI’s ap proval for derivative securities  
is necessary only because these are complex contracts and they should 
have some public purpose of hedging befo re these are allowed.  In the 
same manner, there could be c omplex se curitised debt contracts, which 
will require specific approval of  SEBI.” 
 
52. Questioned about the processes fo llowed in respec t of specific  
derivatives contracts and securities, t he Chairman,  SEBI inter alia stated as  
under during evidence: 
“I think it is  a question of what it is t hat we approve.  After the futures  
and options segments come, subject to ce rtain eligibility be ing fulfilled, 
certain stocks are allowed to be traded and that is something that we tell the 
exchanges that we have not been objecting if these are traded.  It is not that 
every instrument gets cleared by us.  T he market is now in it s nascent 
stage.  There could be a situation wher e everyday there would be 20  to 25 
 22

applications filed with us saying that  we intend to do this and you pleas e 
give us approval for these documents.” 
 
53. In this regard, the C hairman, SEBI, also stated as under during 
evidence: 
“When the Ministry talks in terms of our approving  specific 
products in the F&DO segm ent which is relatively  new in India, there 
are products which we initially started in the stock futures, and then we 
started with index futures and stock options, etc.  But these are not  
company specific products  that we approv e.  If  we have to approve 
this, then tomorrow  one instituti on will come with an applic ation 
requesting to please approve this and som ebody else will come with 
an application and this can multiply and we will be doing just that. 
…If we prescribe what ought to be the qualities of the issuer and 
what ought to be the ca tegory underlying disclosur es, if we state that 
the underlying consists of so many a ssets of this quality, then that is  
something which is in the document t hat is filed with us.  We satisfy 
ourselves as in the case of IPOs that all disclosures are in place.” 
 
54. When asked whether SEBI were in a agreement with the Statement 
and Objects of the Bill viz., to provide a legal framework for trading of securitised 
debt, the Chairman, SEBI responded by saying as follows: 
“As far as the Statement of Ob jects and Reasons is concerned, 
I think it fully deta ils t he felt nee d … .. we fully su bscribe to that it is 
necessary to give these people an ex it opt ion.  It also adds further 
depth to the market.  Therefore, it  is cle arly something that SEBI 
supports.” 
 
55. Questioned about the interactions that SEBI may have had with th e 
Ministry in formulating the legal framewor k envisa ged in the Bill for trading of  
‘securitised debt’, the Chairman, SEBI said: 
“No….When the draft Cabinet note was prepared, our officer 
who was attending the m eeting associated with its preparation raised 
these issues.  But s omehow they were not heard.  Since  I have an 
opportunity to make s ubmissions before this Committee, I thought that 
before it becomes a law, we need to state the facts.” 
 
56. As regards the perception that the Bill gives that the ‘disclosures’ to 
be specified would appear on the ‘offer docum ent’, which, as per SEBI, would be 
unworkable, the response received from the Ministry, reads as under: 
 
 23

“This is true of the existing equity  shares also as all the disclosures 
are given by the issuer company  in t he form of prospectus.  
However, after this there are me chanisms of continuous disclosure 
in the form of regular filings  by the company and dissemination of 
this information through the stock exc hanges.  The equity shar es 
also dematerialized so initial disclosure on the c ertificate and 
continuous disclosure there are exchanges run two m echanisms of 
disclosure for equity shares. The same mechanisms would be used 
for disclosures for the securatised debt also.” 
 
57.    Questioned whether it  was not esse ntial to specify in the Bill  the 
aspect of the SPV proposing to issue a ‘Sec uritization instrument’ requiring to file 
an offer document (apart from making an  application) discl osure requirements 
relating to which are t o be determined by  SEBI,  the  Ministry, in reply, stated as  
under: 
 
“The contents of “offer document” of a com pany going in for public 
issue of “securities” are ment ioned in the  SEBI (Dis closure an d 
Investor Protection) (DIP) Guidelines. These Guidelines have been 
framed in exercise of SEBI’s powers under Se ction 11 of the SEBI  
Act, 1992. The same power can be used by SEBI to provide for 
disclosure requirements in t he offer document incase of 
securitization instruments. These may not be specified in the Act as 
securitized debt would be subsumed under the word ‘securities’.” 
 
58. As per the Ministry’s respons e, the initial disc losures would  be 
made in t he offer document and the ‘s pecial pur pose entit y’ issuing the 
certificates and the s tock exchanges wo uld be continuously giving disc losures 
about such instruments to investors as is the case with shares. 
59. As informed by SEBI, matters pertaining to continuous disclosur e 
and other continuous  listing requirements are proposed to be covered in a new 
listing agreement that woul d be devised for such inst ruments under the ge neral 
provisions available u nder section 11A(2) of the SEBI Act, 1992 and Sectio n 21 
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. 
60. As regards the disclosure requir ements to be fulfilled by the SPVs 
in terms of Reserve Bank’s Guidelines on  ‘Securitisation of Standard Assets’, the 
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank, in the course of evidence, stated as under: 
“what should be the structure of  the SPVs and what would be 
the obligations, what  would be the transparency and disc losure 
 24

requirement of the origi nating institutions as we ll as the SPVs.  We 
have laid down dis lcosure requir ement for both the banks and the 
SPVs.  T hese could be usefully  ad opted even when framin g 
regulations under the proposed legislation.” 
 
61. The Committee, in the course of evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Finance, s pecifically questioned the represent atives on the  variation 
in perception with SEBI on the proposed provisioning of the Bill to enable listin g 
and trading of securitization instruments.  In response thereto, a representative of 
the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“I would like to clarify this.  Here  again, the issue of instruments will 
continue to be disclosure-based.  If you recall, when the derivativ e 
instruments were introduced in the Indian market, the movement was very 
similar to t his.  In fact , in o ur written response to the Committee we have 
mentioned this.  SEBI approv ed in the case of derivative contracts inde x 
futures as a category in May, 2001;  index option as a category in June 
2001; single stock opt ions in July, 2001 single stock futures in November, 
2001; interest rates futures in June, 2003.  So, the attempt here is an 
identical regime.  The actual issue will be disclos ure bas ed.  Individual 
instruments need not be approved.  The idea here is a generic category of 
instruments.  That is why we ha ve used both gener al and s pecial order  
and that has been clarified in our response.” 
 
 62. Asked to specify whether it wa s not essential to have a re-look at 
the provisioning of the Bill, as propos ed to assess the need for carryi ng out  
modifications/changes to clearly bringing out the aspect of each securitization 
instrument not requiring the approval of SEBI, the repr esentative of the Ministr y 
stated: “we will do that”,  The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs als o 
assured the Committee that the matter would be examined by  holding wider  
consultations. 
 63. Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance,  in a post evidenc e 
communication dated 15 May, 2006 info rmed the Committee that the matter 
relating to definition of securitized inst ruments, as proposed  in the Bill was  
discussed at a meeting wit h SEBI on 13 May, 2006.  The communication from 
the Ministry, inter alia reveals as follows: 
 “After detailed discus sion, it was fe lt that the issue of securitized 
instruments would be subject to disclosure based regulation to be made by  
SEBI.  Since the issue process would be supervised by SEBI, it may not be 
necessary for SEBI t o spec ify or appr ove each  suc h instrume nt by any 
 25

general or special order.  Hence part (b ) of the clause 2 (h) (ie) could be 
dropped.  This would,  however, require consequential amendments in 17A 
and 31 to enable SEBI to govern the issue and trading of such instruments 
by Regulations.” 
 
 
VIEWS OF THE RESERVE BANK ON THE PROPOSALS OF THE BILL 
 
64. The Reserve Bank in a Memo randum submitted to the Committee 
inter alia suggested that the word ‘ possesses’ in Clause 2 (A) (a) needed to be 
replaced with the words ‘has ac quired’.  The substitution of the word has  been 
proposed, as per the memorandum, as the ‘assets or receivables are usually  
acquired b y the Trust or SPE’ owin g to  which, it has been  felt that the  
expression ‘possession’ would not be appropriate. 
 
65. By way of giving the rationale for the propo sed substitution of the 
words, the Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank, in the course of evidence stated: 
“We had suggested that the word ‘acquired’ could be used 
instead of ‘possessed’ because posse ssion could mean constructive 
possession.  We will then get into issues whether how do you possess 
all financ ial loans and if a loan is  to be transferred how do you 
possess a loan etc.  The word ‘po ssession’ has something to do with 
tangible assets.  We do feel t hat probably the word possession does  
not fully reflect the range of ass ets or the securities that could be 
securitised.  Therefore, we have suggested the word ‘acquisit ion’ 
rather than ‘possession’.” 
 
66.   Questioned on the viewpoint ex pressed by the Reserve Bank, the 
Ministry, in reply stated as under: 
“The word “possesses” appearing in Clause 2 (1) (a) need n ot be 
replaced by the words “has acquired”  as the Special Purpose Vehicle, 
when it iss ues the securitised debt papers to investors, is already in 
possession of the financial asset s. The stage of ac quisition gets over 
when the securities are issued to investors.  So, the expres sion 
“possesses” is an appropriate expression.” 
 
67. The Reserve Bank also suggest ed that it may be appropriate to 
empower the Central Government to make  rules to provide for the contents of 
both the documents to be filed  with SEBI  {by Trusts or SPV for listing the 
certificates or instruments to be issued by them} and the documents to be iss ued 
 26

to the investors by such Trusts or SPV as the requirement to be complied with for 
listing. 
 
68.  In response to a quer y posed in this regard, the Ministry responded as  
under in reply: 
“The suggestion of prescribing listing conditions for securitised debt is 
valid.  However, the contents of t he securitised debt or manner in 
which these contents would discl osed to investors are already  
provided for in clause (c) and (d) of the sub-section (2) of Section 31 
of the proposed Securities Contract s Regulations (Amendment) Bill,  
2005. Since securitised debt  is a form of “securities,” listing 
requirements can be stipulated by SEBI u nder SEBI  Act, 1992 and  
Section 21 of the SCRA by the st ock exchanges. There is no need to 
prescribe the listing requirem ents under rules framed by the 
Government.”  
 
69. The Reserve Bank als o suggeste d that the essential difference 
between ’securitised paper ’ and other corporate debt  secur ities needed be 
addressed while designing the listing and disclosure requirements; and that care 
should be taken to ensure that no restri ction was placed – while designing the 
listing requirements – on the OTC transactions in such instruments. 
 
70. In response to the related issues , the Ministry, in a written reply 
inter alia stated as follows: 
“The difference between securitised paper  and corporate debt 
securities would be addressed wh ile designing the listing  and 
disclosure requirements by SEBI under the regulation making po wer 
under the proposed Bill.  This  does  not have a bearing on the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill 2005 as such. 
The entire objective of the Bill is to create secondary market 
liquidity and develop the market for securitised debt.  Listing is a k ey 
strategy for developm ent of this scheme.  SEBI will b e making t he 
disclosure requirements for investor s keeping in mind the investor 
protection mandate.  The listing requirements would be framed by the 
stock exchanges keeping in mind the broad policy framework of the 
disclosure regime.  Neither SEBI  nor stock exchanges hav e any 
regulatory jurisdiction over the transactions, which ar e outside t he 
exchanges or Over-the-Counter (OTC ).Again, this  issue is  not 
connected with the legislative amendments.” 
 
 27

71. By way of giving the rationale for expressi ng the need to addres s 
the difference between ‘securitised paper’ and other corporate debt securities, 
and ensuring that no restrictions were placed on OTC transactions while devising 
the listing requirements, the Reserve Bank , in a post-evidence reply inter alia 
stated: 
“…The disclosure and reporting requirements from corporates 
are not suitable for s ecuritization issues since such r equirements do 
not elic it relevant information about  securitization issues.   For 
instance, there are no management, financial or bus iness structures 
in the case of securitization issues on which information to the market 
regulator or investors w ould be of relevance.  There would be rather  
information about performance of underlying asset pools , 
securitization structure, service providers and rating of different 
tranches of the securitization i ssues etc . which would be more 
relevant.  Therefore, the registra tion and disclosure requirements are 
required to be distinctly designed for securitization.” 
 
72.  It was also added: 
 “Since the securitization market is essentially driven by institutional 
investors like banks, it may be advisable not to limit secondary market 
trading to any spec ific platfo rm like exchanges.  Allowing such 
transactions also in OTC market would go a long way in development  
of securitization markets.” 
 28

 
73.   The Committee note that the sti pulations of the pr oposed Section 17 A 
whereby no such securities (securitised instruments) can be issued  ‘to an y 
investor unless ap proved b y SEBI’ could be inferred to mean that ever y 
securitization transaction inclusive of private placem ent deals w ould 
necessarily require the approval of SEBI.  The Ministry have, in response to the 
questioning in this regard,  so ught to address th e issue b y specif ying in th e 
proposed sections [2 (ie) (a) and 17 (A)] that the issue of securitized debt to 
investors ‘through a public offer’ w ill need to be approved  b y SEBI.   
Incorporation of the words, ‘through a public offer’ after ‘to any investor’ in the 
related sections, as proposed ,  w ould make it clear that private placement of  
securitized debt ou tside the stock exc hanges could continue to take place 
without SEBI’s approval.  The Committee, therefore, endorse the same. 
74.  With regard to the legal framework or procedure per se for issue of 
securitized instruments, the Committee note that there has been  a variation in 
the perception of the Mini stry of Finance and the capital market regulator, 
SEBI.  While the proposed provisioning, inter alia envisions the tradable 
securitised instruments to be specified b y a ‘ general’ or ‘special’ order, 
[Section 2 (ie) (b)] and involves approval  of the applications for issue of such  
instruments (Section 17 A), SEBI has emphasized on a regulator y frame work 
which w ould be in consonan ce w ith the disclosure based  
guidelines/regulations governing issue of securities.     
75.      At the insistence of the Committee, the Ministry of Finance have, after 
having detailed consultations with SEBI, informed in clear terms that the issue 
of securitised instruments o n the st ock exchanges w ould be su bject to  
 29

‘disclosure based regulations’.  Conseque ntly, it has been  proposed  to drop 
Section 2 (h) (ie ) (b) relating to spec ification of the tr adable securitized 
instruments by SEBI b y means of a ‘genera l’ or ‘special’ order.   As the issue 
process of securitized instruments is to be supervised  on the basis of  
‘disclosure based regulations’, the Co mmittee note that it would not be 
necessary for SEBI to specif y or approve each su ch instrument b y a ‘general’ 
or ‘special’ order.  The  Co mmittee, therefore, exp ress agreement w ith the 
proposal to drop Section 2(h) (ie) (b).   
76.  The Committee, how ever, note th at for enabling SEBI to govern the 
issue and  trading of securitized instru ments b y regulations, consequential 
changes w ould also be required in Sect ions 17 A (approval  process) and 31 
(regulation making  pow er).  Main ly on account of w itnessing varied  
interpretation of the proposed provisions of the Bill, the Committee are inclined 
to recommend that the consequential ch anges be carried out by  holding wider 
consultations, particularly with the capital market regulator, and by  taking into 
consideration the specifics of securitised instruments vis-à-vis other securities 
traded on the stock exchanges. 
77.   From the  information furnishe d, the Committee also no te that  
SEBI proposes to address issues relating to continuous disclosures relating to 
securitised instruments b y devising a ne w listing agreement.  The disclosur e 
norms and rating will be the t ouchstones on the viability  and performance of 
securitised instruments. In terms of  the Reserve Ban k’s guidelines on  
‘securitization of standard assets’ as a pplicable to banks etc. the disclosure 
requirements to be fulfilled involve, in ter alia, furnishing a summary account of 
 30

collection of receivables, draw als from credit en hancement, details of asset  
pool behavior etc.  The disclosure related guidelines formulated by the Reserve 
Bank could serve as an aid for devisi ng the disclosure norms for securitized 
instruments traded on the st ock exch anges.  Also, as p ointed ou t b y the 
Reserve Bank, the Committee feel the need  to emphasize on ensuring that the 
specific characteristics of securitised in struments as distinct from corporate 
bonds are taken into consideration w hile stipulating the dis closure norms for 
such instruments. 
 31

ISSUES RAISED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
78. In addition to the suggestions/o bservations on the provisioning of  
the Bill delineated above, the Committee also feel it to be essential to delve upon 
some other issues, which hav e a bearin g on the development and growth of 
securitization market. 
79. As touched upon in brief in the earlier part of the report, stamp duty 
and registration charges as well as taxation related issues significantly impact the 
market for mortgage backed securitization in particular. 
80. Asked about the impact of these issues on t he economic viability of 
securitization, the Ministry, in a written reply inter alia stated as under: 
“The rates of stamp duty and regi stration have a direct bearing on 
the economics of mortgage bac ked securitization transactions and can 
make the securitization transaction unviable. The viability of the 
transactions depends upon the extent to  which these transaction c osts 
can be reduced and the amount of sp read that is available to the 
transaction stakeholders.  
The stamp duty and registration char ges being State subjects vary 
significantly across the country. Cu rrently, there are only  six s tates 
which hav e lowered the stamp duty in respect of instruments of 
securitization to 0.1% of the size of the securitized assets. Selection of 
housing loans for securitization is done specifically from these above 
states so as to keep the process costs to the minimal. This significantly 
restricts the size of the housing loans to be taken up for securitization. 
In order to facilitate the growth of  securitized debt market from the 
investors point of view, fiscal incentives by way of tax exemption on the 
interest income on the securitiz ed instruments or the gains arising out  
of sale may be c onsidered which can effectively be passed on t o the 
ultimate borrowers in terms of lower cost funds. These tax incentives to 
the investors will result in lower c oupon on the instruments resulting in 
lower cost of funds. S uch tax conc essions may be considered in  the 
context of public policy progr ammes where the funds mobilized 
through such instruments (with tax in centives) are deployed only for 
ESW/ LIG/ rural housing etc. Several countries have adopted the fiscal 
route for addressing the public programmes for housing.”  
 
81. While the outstanding housing loans of banks and HFCs  is 
estimated to the tune of Rs. 1,48,000 cr ore, less than 5% of  this amount has 
been s ecuritized so f ar.  As br ought out  earlier, NHB has  sec uritized housing 
loans of banks and HFCs to the order of Rs. 763 crore.  Further, there have been 
 32

other transactions to t he order of Rs. 2000 crore.  The quant um of outstanding 
housing loans is indicative of the potential of MBS in the Country. 
82. Questioned specifically about the recommendations  of the High 
Level Expert Committee on Corporate D ebt and Securitization on measures 
relating to resolution of taxation and stamp duty issues for enabling the growth of 
mortgage backed securitization, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as follows: 
 
“The recommendations of High Level Expert Committee on 
Corporate Debt and Securitization relati ng to resolution of taxation and 
stamp duty issues for enabling t he gr owth of mortgage backed 
securitization are: 
 
(a) The Central G overnment shoul d consider establishing an 
appropriate institutional process  to  evolve a consensus across the 
States on the affordable rates and lev els of stamp duty on debt 
assignment, Pass Thr ough Certificates (PTCs) and s ecurity receipts  
(SRs). 
 
(b) The Central Government should provide an explicit tax pass through 
treatment to securitization Spec ial Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) and  NPA 
Securitization SPVs ( namely, trust SPVs set up by ARCs registered  
with RBI under SARFAESI) on par with the tax pass  through treatment 
applied under the tax la w to SEBI registered Ventur e Cap ital Funds  
under section 10(23F B) read with sect ion 115U of the Income tax Act. 
RBI and SEBI may frame appropriate regulations in this regard. 
 
(c) Recognizing the wholesale and Qua lified Institutional Buy ers (QIB) 
character of investors in secur itization trusts, there should be no 
withholding tax requirement on intere st paid by the borrowers (whose 
credit exposures are securitized) to  the securitization trust and on 
distributions made by the securitiza tion trust to its PTC and/or SR 
holders.” 
 
 33

 83.    The Committee note that the stamp dut y and  registration charges 
applicable on mortgage backed securiti sed instruments significantly  i mpact 
the econo mics of such transactions.  As mortgage debt is regarded as 
‘immovable property’,  its transfer can be  effected onl y by way of a ‘transfer 
deed’, which attracts stamp duty at the rates prescribed under the stamp laws 
of the States as w ell as re gistration charges under th e Indian Registration 
Act.  Less than 5% of the total outstanding housing loans of banks and HFCs,  
which is currently estimated to be of the order of Rs. 1,48,000 crore have been 
securitized thus far, w ith the transactions restricted to si x States w hich have 
lowered the stamp dut y ap plicable on secu ritization instruments to 0.1 % o f 
the size of securitized assets.  The recommendations made by the ‘High Level 
Expert Committee on Corpor ate Bonds and Secur itization’ for resolution of  
stamp duty and taxation issues to furt her the gr owth of mortgage backed  
securitization include, establishing an in stitutional process b y the Central 
Government for evolving a consensus across the States on rationalizing the 
stamp duty rates to an uniform level, and according favorable tax treatment to 
securitised instruments.  The Committe e expect the Government to urgentl y 
act on the recommendations of the H igh Level Expert Committee, w hich 
would give an impetus to the growth of the securitized debt market. 
 34

 
84. As brought out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, 
securitization is a complex proc ess of pooling of finan cial assets, which may or 
may not have the same characteristics. The market is presently institutional 
driven, who perform their internal due d iligence procedures before investing in 
such instruments.  
85. An issue b rought before the Commi ttee by SEBI in this regard is 
that on the lines of the restrictions app licable to deriv atives transactions, wher e 
an investor cannot enter into a transaction whose value is less than Rs. 2 lakhs – 
in the interest of the retail inv estors in  particular – it  w ould be preferable to 
stipulate the minimum value of su ch secur ities (Securitization 
instruments/certificates), which an investor may trade in the stock market. 
86. Questioned on the need felt fo r fixing the minimum value of 
‘securitization transactions’, which an investor may trade in the st ock market, the 
Ministry, in their reply, stated as follows: 
“… the issue of contract size of ‘securitization transactions ’ 
would be specified in the trading rules/circulars or guidelines of SEBI 
and is a matter of detail which c an be stipulated outs ide the main 
statute, as is the case with derivatives transactions” 
 35

 
 
87. Keeping i n view  the complexiti es of the securitization process, 
and the fact that this market is mainly  institutionally driven, as pointed out by  
SEBI, the Committee feel that it may  be preferable to fix a threshold limit on 
the value of such  securities, w hich an invest or may trade in th e stock 
exchanges.  The Committee, therefore,  expect  that on  the lines of the 
restrictions applicab le on derivative transactions w here an investor can not 
enter into a transaction of less than Rs . 2 lakhs, serious consideration be 
given to the need felt for pegging a limit on the value of securitization 
transactions that an investor may trade in the stock exchanges. 
 
 
New Delhi;              MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19 May, 2006                                        Chairman 
29 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36

 37
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
Submitted by Shri Rupchand Pal, MP 
 
Since the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2005-06 proposed to amend 
the definition of securities under the Securities Contract (Amendment) Act in order to 
provide a legal framework fo r trading of securitised debt including mortgaged debt, 
the situation in the Indian capital market  has changed a lot and  there are serious 
fluctuations in the market largely influenced by external factors. 
The Indian capital market by all indi cations has not matured enough to leave 
any healthy space for the proposed instrum ents and in spite of recommendations by 
two important JPCs pertaining to two previous Scams – one of Harshad Mehta 
variety and other Ketan Parekh variety, t he Indian capital market is heavily afflicted 
by scores of manipulations and influence of foreign inst itutional investors operating 
through dubious routes. 
Despite the limited endeavor s to monitor and continue  surveillance, the SEBI 
as regulator has not been successful enou gh and even the steps taken by SEBI in 
the process of monitoring and control have been too little and sometimes very late 
and then again many of the decisions of  SEBI have been turned down by the 
concerned Appellate Authority.  The overall situation is detrimental to the interest of 
the investors.  In such a scenario the entry of the proposed instruments will lead to a 
further complicated situation and lot of distortions will follow. 
Since the Finance Minister had come out with the above proposal, the role of 
the Indian bank vis-à-vis Home Loans and Real Estate has been a matter of concern 
to RBI also and the latest caution by RBI to Banks is only corroboration of 
widespread apprehension prev ailing about the questionabl e Home Loans and Real 
Estate involvement in chunks of Bank loans for some time. 
In view of the above dist urbed situation, the proposed venture to facilitate 
trading of securitised debt including mortgage etc. is not welcome measure atleast 
for the present. 
Hence my Note of Dissent. 
-Sd/- 
(Shri Rupchand Pal) 
 

Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 19 th January, 2006 from 1030 to 1210 hrs and 
1225 to 1305 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6.   Shri K.S. Rao 
7.  Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh  
2. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) 
 
1. Shri Ashok K. Jha, Secretary  
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Addl. Secretary 
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary 
 
National Housing Bank 
1. Shri R.V. Verma, Executive Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of  Ministry of 
Finance and invited their attention to the provisions contai ned in Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker. 
 
 

PART – I 
(1030  - 1210 hours) 
 
3.   XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
PART – II 
(1225 – 1305 hours) 
 
4.  Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance briefed the Committee on 
the various provisions cont ained in the Securities Co ntracts (Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2005.  The Members asked clarificator y questions which were replied to by the 
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information 
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available with them might 
be furnished to the Committee later on. 
5.  The briefing was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
             The witnesses then withdrew 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 20th  April, 2006 from 1030 to 1315 hrs and 1430 to 1630 
hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3.  Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
4.  Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
5.   Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6.  Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
7.  Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
8.  Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.   Dr. Smt. P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary  
2.   Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary   
3. Shri S.B. Arora  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -  Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
Part – I 
(1030 to 1145 hrs.) 
 
2.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(1400 to 1430 hrs.) 
 
3.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Part – II 
(1430 to 1510 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
 
1. Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor 
2. Shri S.R. Kolarkar, Legal Advisor 
3. Shri K. Damodaran, General Manager (Deptt. of Banking Operations and  
Development) 
4. Shri T. Rabi Shankar, Deputy General Manager 
 
SECURITIES & EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA 
 
1. Shri M. Damodaran, Chairman 
2. Shri G. Anantharaman, Whole Time Member 
3. Shri Amarjeet Singh, Regional Manager 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman we lcomed the representatives of  Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) and Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3.  The Committee then took oral evidence  of the witnesses on the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2005 .  The Members asked clarificatory 
questions which were replied to by the representatives. T he Chairman, then, directed 
the representatives that the information wit h regard to queries of the Members which 
was not readily available with them might be furnished to the Committee later on. 
4.  The evidence was concluded 
5.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
             The witnesses then withdrew 

Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 1st May, 2006 from 1030 to 1215 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
6. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
7. Shri K.S. Rao 
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
2. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
3. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
4. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -  Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri S.B. Arora  -   Deputy Secretary 
      3. Shri T.G. Chandrasek har    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Indian Banks’ Association 
(i) Shri S.C. Gupta, Chairman,  Punjab National Bank and Deputy 
Chairman, Indian Banks’ Association 
 
2. State Bank of India 
(i)        Shri T.S. Bhattacharya, MD & Group Executive 
(ii) Shri N. Raja, Chief General Manager (Treasury) 
 
3. Life Insurance Corporation of India 
(i) Shri T.S. Vijayan, MD 
(ii) Shri V.K. Kukret i, Chief (Investment) 
 

4. Housing Development Fina nce Corporation (HDFC) 
(i) Ms. Renu Karnad, Executive Director 
(i) Shri Sudhir Jha, Head, Legal 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the representatives of the Indian 
Banks’ Association, State Ba nk of India, Life Insuranc e Corporation of India and 
Housing Development Finance Co rporation (HDFC) to the si tting of the Committee and 
invited their attention to the direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in connection 
with the examination of the Se curities Contracts (Regulat ion) Amendment Bill, 2005. 
The Chairman then asked the repr esentatives to furnish written notes on certain issues 
on which clarifications were sought by the Members, in respect of which information 
was not readily available with them. 
 
4. The evidence was concluded. 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept 
The witnesses then withdrew 
The Committee then adjourned 

Minutes of the Twenty-Fifth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th May, 2006 from 1500 to 1645 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
6. Shri Ajit Singh 
7. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Shri Yashwant Sinha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -  Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri S.B. Arora  -   Deputy Secretary 
      3. Shri T.G. Chandrasek har    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary 
2. Shri K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.V. Verma, Executive Director, National Housing Bank 
4. Shri M.S. Sahoo, Director (Capital Market) 
 
 2.   Before the start of  the meeting, the Chairman made a reference to the 
sad demise of S/Shri Mahboob Zahedi, A.B.A. Ghani K han Chowdhury and 
Pramod Mahajan, sitting Members of Parlia ment.  The Members mourn the loss 
of their esteemed colleagues  and stood in silence for a while as a mark of 
respect to the deceased. 
3. The witnesses then called in  and the Chairman welcomed the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department  of Economic Affairs) and 
invited their attention to the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the 
Directions by the Speaker. 
…..2/- 
 

-2- 
 
4.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the witnesses on the provisions of 
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2005 .  The Members asked 
clarificatory questions which were  replied to by the represent atives of the Ministry of 
Finance. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information with 
regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available with them might be 
furnished to the Committee at the earliest. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
             The witnesses then withdrew 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

 Minutes of the Twenty-sixth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 May, 2006 from 0930 to 1030 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Rupchand Pal 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Addi tional Secretary  
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -   Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri S.B. Arora  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
5.  Smt. Anita B. Panda            -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3.  The Committee first took up for consid eration the draft report on Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill , 2005 and adopted the same without any 
amendment. However, one Member desired to submit note of dissent on certain 
proposals of the Bill. The Ch airman informed him that he could send the note at the 
earliest. 
4.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(i) XX   XX   XX   XX 
(ii) XX   XX   XX   XX 
(iii) XX   XX   XX   XX  
(iv) XX   XX   XX   XX  
(v) XX   XX   XX   XX  

 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to  finalise the Reports in the light 
of modification as also to make verbal an d other consequential changes arising out of 
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005 
[Bill No. 162 of 2005] 
A 
BILL 
PREAMBLE 
further to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-six th Year of the Repu blic of India as 
follows:-- 
1. Short title.-- 
This Act may be called the Securities  Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2005. 
2. Amendment of Section 2.-- 
(1) In section 2 of the Securities Cont racts (Regulation) Act, 1956(42 of 1956) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Ac t), in clause (h), after sub-clause (id), 
the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-- 
"(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called),-- 
(a) issued, to an investor by an y special purpose distinct entity 
which possesses any financial asset representing debt or 
receivable by such entity, and, acknowledging the beneficial 
interest of such investor in such financial asset; and 
(b) which may, by general or special order, be specified as such by 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India;". 
 

3. Insertion of new section 17A.-- 
After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section sh all be inserted, 
namely;-- 
"17A. Approval of Securities and Exchange Board of India for 
securities referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2.-- (1) 
Without prejudice to the provisions c ontained in this Act or any other law 
for the time being in force, no securiti es of the nature referred to in sub-
clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2 shall be issued to any investor or 
trade on any recognised stock exchange unless such securities have been 
approved by the Securities and Exchange Board of India. 
(2) Every special purpose distinct entity referred to in sub-clause 
(ie) of clause (h) of section 2 shall-- 
(a) make an application, for specifying any certificate or 
instrument under sub-clause (ie)  of clause (h) of section 2, 
as securities, to she Securities and Exchange Board of India, 
in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations; 
(b) file along with an applicat ion made under cl ause (a) the 
draft of the certificate or instrument which such entity 
proposes to issue to the investor as securities of the nature 
referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2 
(3) The Securities and Exchange B oard of India may, to protect the 
interest of investors in the securities of the nature referred to in sub-
clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2, specify by regulations,-- 
(i) the contents of the certific ate or instrument to be filed 
under clause (b) of sub-sectio n (2) and to be issued as 
securities of the nature referre d to in sub-clause (ie) of 
clause (h) of section 2, to the investors; 
(ii) the manner in which such contents shall be disclosed in 
the certificate or instrument to be issued as securities of the 
nature referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 
2". 
4. Amendment of section 31.-- 
In section 31 of the principal Act for s ub-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely-- 

"(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-- 
(a) the manner in which at least fi fty-one per cent, of equity share 
capital of a recognised stock exchange is held within twelve months 
item the date of publication of the order under; sub-section (7) of 
section 4B by the public other than the shareholders having trading 
rights under sub-section (8) of that section; 
(b) the form and manner in wh ich an application shall be made 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 17A; 
(c) the contents of the certificate or instrument under clause (1) of 
sub-section (3) of section 17A; 
(d) the manner in which such c ontents shall be disclosed in the 
certificate or instrum ent under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of 
section 17A" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
During the Budget Session of Parliament  in the current year 2005, it was 
proposed to amend the definition of "Secur ities" in the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (the SCR Act) so as to provide a legal framework for 
trading of securitised debt including mortgage backed debt. 
2. Securitisation is a form of financing in volving pooling of financial assets and 
the issuance of securities that are re-paid from the cash flows by the assets. This 
is generally accomplished by actual sale  of the assets to a bankruptcy remote 
vehicle, that is, a special purpose vehi cle, which finances the purchase through 
the issuance of bonds. These bonds are backed by future cash flow of the asset 
poof. The most common assets for securi tisation are mortgages, credit cards, 
auto and consmer loans, students loans co rporate debt, export receivables, off-
shore remittances, etc. 
3. Besides other advantages, securiti sation (a) allows banks and financial 
institutions to keep these loans off their balance-sheet, thus reducing the need 
for additional capital; (b) provides t he hanks and financial institutions with 
alternative forms of funding risk transfer, a new investor base,  potential capital 
relief and capital market development; (c) can reduce Sending concentration, 
improve liquidity and improve access to al ternate sources of funding for banks 
and financial institutions; (d) facilitates atta inment of funding at lower cost as a 
result of isolating the asse ts from potential Bankruptcy risk of the originator; (e) 
facilitates better matching of assets and liabilities and the development of the 
long-term debt market; (f) provides divers ified pools of uniform assets; and (g) 
has the advantage of converting non-liquid loans or assets which cannot, be 
easily sold to third party investors into liquid assets or marketable securities. 
Lower funding costs are also a result of  movement of investments from less 
efficient debt markets So more efficient  capital markets through the process of 
securitisation. 
4. In India, the securitisation mark et remains underdeveloped. Although two 
major legislative initiatives, namely, (a) the amendment to the National Housing 
Bank Act, 1987 (NHB Act) in the y ear 2000; and (b) the enactment of the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest Act, 2002, (SARFAES I Act), have been taken, the market has 
not picked up because of the absence of  the facility of trading on stock 
exchanges, The potential buyers get discour ged by the possibility of having to 
hold the certificate or instrument in re spect of Securitisati on transactions till 
maturity. This, in turn, restricts the growth of business of housing finance 
companies and banks. 
5. The Securitisation transactions under the NHB Act are not covered under the 
definition of "securities" under the SCR Act. As such, trading in certificates or 
instruments relating to such transactions  cannot take place on stock exchanges 

and buyers of such securitised financial ce rtificates or instruments are left with 
few exit options. Under the SARFAESI Act, while "security receipts" have been 
covered under the definition of "securities", the provisions of the said Act restrict 
sale and purchase only amongst qualified institutional buyers. Besides, the 
"security receipts" under the SARFAESI Act can be issued only by a 
Securitisation company or a reconstruction company registered with the Reserve 
Bank of India. This obviously limits the interest in such receipts and the market 
has not taken off at all. 
6. Keeping in view the potential of the se curities market for the certificates or 
instruments under Securitisation transactions, international trends and 
consultations held with major institutional  participants and market experts, it has 
been decided to amend the SCR Act, inter alia.-- 
(i) include Securitisation certificate or  instrument under the definition of 
"securities" and to insert for the said purpose, a new sub-clause (ie) in 
clause (h) of section 2 of the SCR Act, 1956; 
(ii) to provide for obtaining approval  from the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India for issue of the propos ed certificate or instrument and 
procedure therefor and inse rt for the said purpose a new section 17A in 
the SCR Act, 1956; and 
(iii) to provide for the manner in wh ich contents of such certificate or 
instrument, being the securities" and acknowledging beneficial interest 
shall be disclosed. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
P. CHIDAMBARAM 
NEW DELHI;  
The 7th December, 2005. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend se ction 31 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 so as to confer power upon the Securities and Exchange Board 
of India to make regulations on the matters such as specifying the form and manner in 
which an application shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 17 A; 
specifying the contents of the certificate or instrument under  clause (i) of sub-section 
(3) of section 17 A and the manner in which such contents shall be disclosed in the 
certificate or instrument under clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 17A. 
2. The regulations made by the Securi ties and Exchange Board of India shall 
be laid, as soon as may be, after they are made, before each House of Parliament. 
3. The matters in respect of which regulations may be made are generally 
matters of procedure and administr ative details and it is not practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of le gislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
 