10
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
CREDIT FLOW TO AGRICULTURE—CRISIS IN RURAL
ECONOMY AND CROP INSURANCE SCHEME
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Credit flow
to Agriculture—Crisis in Rural Economy and Crop Insurance Scheme of
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)]
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 ( Saka)


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
CREDIT FLOW TO AGRICULTURE—CRISIS
IN RURAL ECONOMY AND CROP
INSURANCE SCHEME
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Credit flow
to Agriculture—Crisis in Rural Economy and Crop Insurance Scheme of
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.12.2004
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka)


COF No. 10
Price : Rs. 27.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................. 27
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations  which  the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................... 32
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/observations  in  respect  of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ..................................... 40
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/observations  in  respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited .......................................................................... 57
A
NNEXURES
I. Constitution of Joint Group to study the impro-
vements required in  existing  Crop  Insurance
Scheme regarding ....................................................... 58
II. Minutes of the sitting of  the  Committee  held
on 20 December, 2004 ............................................... 60
III. Modifications/Amendments  made  by Standing
Committee on Finance in their draft  report  on
action taken report on credit flow to agriculture
crisis in  rural  economy  and  crop  insurance
scheme of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) at their  sitting  held  on
20 December, 2004 ..................................................... 62
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by  Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth
Report of the Standing Committee  on  Finance
(Thirteenth  Lok  Sabha)  on  Credit  Flow  to
Agriculture-Crisis in Rural Economy  and  Crop
Insurance  Scheme  of  the Ministry of Finance-
Deptt. of Economic Affairs. . .................................. 64

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2004-2005
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Tenth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report of the Committee
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Credit Flow to Agriculture—Crisis in Rural
Economy and Crop Insurance Scheme of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs).
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 22 December, 2003. The Government furnished the replies
indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 14th October,
2004. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Standing Committee on Finance at their sitting held on
20 December, 2004.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on recommendations
contained in the Tenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
20 December, 2004 Chairman,
29 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-Fifth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Credit
flow to agriculture—Crisis in rural economy and Crop Insurance
Scheme of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.03.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 4, 6 & 8
(Para Nos. 76, 77, 89, 120)
(Total 4)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 8, 9
Para Nos. 35, 64, 65, 84, 117, 118, 119, 133
(Total 8)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10
Para Nos. 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 44, 66, 102, 103, 104, 132, 184,
185, 186, 187, 188, 189
(Total 17)
(Chapter IV)

2
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply
of the Government is still awaited:
Sl.No. Nil
(Nil)
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that replies in respect of the
recommendations contained in Chapter-I should be furnished to the
Committee expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

DIRECT AND INDIRECT AGRICULTURAL ADVANCES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 32, 33, 34, 36, 37)
5. The Committee noted that as per RBI guidelines, banks had to
deploy 40 percent of the total net bank credit (NBC) in the priority
sector. Out of this 40 percent, minimum 18 percent (13.5% for direct
lending and 4.5% for indirect lending) should be used for lending to
agriculture. However, the Committee found that actual credit
disbursement by most of the banks was far short of stipulated level.
The percentage of total agricultural advances as in March, 2003 was
15.34% for public sector banks out of which 10.84% of NBC was
deployed for direct financing of agriculture and 4.54% of NBC was
given as indirect credit to agriculture. The share of total agriculture
lending by private sector banks was 10.78 percent in March, 2003,
with 6.28% of NBC going for direct lending and 8.06% for indirect
lending to agriculture. The Committee expressed their deep concern
over this dismal performance of the banks in agriculture lending.
Moreover they were perturbed by the continuous decline in share of
direct credit disbursement of public and private sector banks. Most of
the banks had not been able to reach the prescribed target in agriculture
lending by specified period of March, 2003. The Credit Deposit Ratio
in rural areas for both public and private sector banks was substantially
low as against urban and metropolitan areas. It was startling to note
that as on June 2003, this ratio was 42.70% for public sector banks,
even though they had large network of rural branches. The credit
deposit ratio for private sector banks was equally low being 33.32%.
The banks’ unwillingness to step up agricultural credit disbursement
and Government/RBI’s failure to exert pressure on them in this regard
was revealed by the low CD ratio. Therefore, they recommended that
the Government and RBI should take measures to bring about a change
in attitude of bankers. Further, the banks should develop necessary
relationship with the rural clients. In addition they should launch more
innovative products in rural areas specific to their credit needs and
take steps to make farmers aware of such products.
6. It was seen that as per extant guidelines new private sector
banks were required to open up 25 percent of branches in rural/semi-
urban areas. However, these banks had only 9.52% of branches in
rural areas and the old private sector banks had 24.23 percent of such
branches. As a result these banks had failed to reach rural masses on
3

4
a large scale. Hence the Committee opined that the private banks
should be asked to open more branches in rural areas and step up
their credit disbursement in such areas.
7. Further, the Committee had found more proclivity towards
indirect agricultural finance rather than direct loans for undertaking
agricultural activities. That is why there had been spectacular growth
particularly in certain private sector banks in indirect credit as against
faltering growth registered in the case of direct credit. The Committee
took serious note of this disturbing trend. They recommended that the
target for direct lending by banks should be monitored independently.
Besides, the RBI should ensure that banks did not increase the indirect
lending at the cost of direct lending in order to cover up the shortfall
under the overall limit of 18%.
8. The Committee took note of the recent directive to charge a
single digit interest rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop
loans up to a ceiling of Rs. 50,000. The Committee felt that
Government’s specification of maximum 9% rate of interest for
agricultural loans was still on higher side in the present day scenario
of falling interest rates. Moreover, the Committee felt that the limit of
Rs. 50,000 was very meagre and such a limit would hardly provide
any relief to farmers. It was widely known that the rate of interest in
other sectors had fallen sharply and in housing sector it had reduced
to as low as 6% but the falling interest rate had not been witnessed
in agricultural sector. The Committee, therefore, recommended that
the rate of interest of 9 percent should be reduced further in tandem
with the rate of interest in other sectors.
9. The Committee were concerned to note that banks generally
compounded interest in defiance of clear instructions issued in this
regard by RBI. They wanted that Banks should invariably follow the
RBI instructions scrupulously in this regard which should be monitored
by RBI.
10. In reply to this, the Government have stated following in their
action taken note:
“The observations of the Committee have been noted. As per the
Standing guidelines, domestic scheduled banks are required to meet
a target of 18 percent of net bank credit for lending to agriculture
under the system of direct lending. There is a further stipulation
that indirect lending should not exceed 4.5 percent of net bank
credit or one-fourth of credit target of 18 percent, to ensure that
banks concentrate on the direct advances, to agriculture.

5
Although most public and private sector banks did not meet this
target, advances to agriculture in absolute terms have steadily increased
over the years, as may be seen from the table given below:
Outstanding Credit to Agriculture by Public and
Private Sector Banks
March, 1994 March, 2003 March, 2004
Public Sector Banks
Net Bank Credit 1,40,914 4,77,899 5,56,500
Total Agri advances 21,204 73,507 86,681
outstanding
Direct Agri. advances 19,256 51,799 61,692
Indirect Agri. advances 1,949 21,708 24,989
Private Sector Banks
Net Bank Credit 9,545 71,760 1,11,515
Total Agri. advances 591 11,873 16,599
outstanding
Direct Agri. advances 515 5,201 8,606
Indirect Agri. advances 76 6,671 8,926
The table given below shows that many banks were yet to reach
the required level by March, 2004.
As of last Public Sector Banks Private Sector Banks
Reporting
Friday
On Target Off Target On Target Off Target
March, 2001 4 23 1 30
March, 2002 6 21 2 1
March, 2003 5 22 2 27
March, 2004 7 20 2 28

6
A meeting was taken by Finance Minister on 9th September, 2004
with Chief Executives of public sector banks in which agriculture
lending by public sector banks was also reviewed. The banks have
been advised to make all possible efforts to achieve the target of 18%
of net bank credit to agriculture during 2004-05.
Reserve Bank of India has advised both old and new private sector
banks to make earnest efforts to open more branches in rural areas
vide its communication in April, 2003.
11. Further the Ministry stated:
It may be mentioned that for computing a bank’s performance
under the 18% target, indirect advances are reckoned to the extent of
only 4.5% of NBC even if the actual indirect advances of the banks
are above this level.
12. Further, as for lending by private sector banks, the outstanding
advances to agriculture, both direct and indirect, as at March 2001,
2002, 2003 and 2004 are as under:
March, 2001 March, 2002 March, 2003 March, 2004
Direct Agriculture 2269.26 2533.66 4865.38 8718.04
Indirect Agriculture 3125.14 5489.12 6575.00 8930.54
Total Agriculture 5394.40 8022.8 12087.78 17648.58
% of total agriculture 8.52 8.53 10.84 12.31
to NBC (taking
indirect agriculture
only upto 4.5%)
13. It may be observed from the above table that after March,
2001, both direct and indirect advances have increased significantly
especially in March 2003 and March 2004. The total agricultural
advances at 12.31 percent of net bank credit as on the last reporting
Friday of March 2004 was after taking indirect advances only up to
4.5% of NBC. If the entire amount of indirect advances to agriculture
are taken into account, the outstanding advances of private sector banks
to the agriculture sector will be at a higher level than what is shown
above.
14. Over a period of time various rates have been falling, and the
bank’s benchmark rates i.e. the prime lending rates have also been
declining. However, there has been some concern expressed that some

7
of the sectors have benefited more on account of the fall whereas
sectors like agriculture etc. have been benefited in equal measure. The
Indian Bank’s Association (IBA) has, therefore, advised all public sector
banks to prescribe lending rate for agriculture at not more than 9%
per annum on crop loans upto Rs. 50,000. This lending rate is expected
to benefit most of the crop loan account holders and cover almost all
small and marginal farmers, enabling them to access credit and boost
productivity of agriculture.
15. The interest rates charged by banks are a function of many
variables and hence may vary from bank to bank. However, some of
the banks have even gone below the level of 9%. Further, the NABARD
Act, 1981 has been amended to enable NABARD to provide refinance,
subject to certain conditions, directly to District Central Cooperative
Banks (DCCBs), thereby reducing one tier in the system. This is
expected to reduce the interest rate charged to the ultimate borrower.
16. The Vyas Committee has observed in its report that the interest
rate is an important aspect of credit. It takes cognizance of the growing
borrower expectations of uniformly lower interest rates on loans by
different agencies extending credit to agriculture. As single mandatory
rate for all banks is, however, not feasible at present, as capacity of
the various agencies to deliver agricultural loans at lower rate of interest
varies due to their differential cost structure. What ultimately matters
to the borrowers in addition to the rate of interest is the timeliness
and adequacy of credit as well as the concomitant costs that they may
have to incur to avail credit. Accordingly, the banks have been advised
to pay attention to their systems and procedures to make their lending
cost effective and also consider measures to save the borrower avoidable
expenses for getting a loan sanctioned.
17. Banks have been advised to follow the instructions in the matter
of compounding of agricultural loans. Besides this, the instructions are
being reiterated from time-to-time while extending additional relief
package for the persons/farmers affected by natural calamities.”
18. The Committee are not willing to accept the reply of the
Government that increase in absolute advances to agriculture by
banks should be taken as an excuse for low percentage of their
agricultural disbursement. If mere increase in absolute terms were
deemed satisfactory, then why the targets for credit delivery to
agriculture were fixed for banks. The Committee are unhappy to
find that as many as 20 public sector banks and 28 private sector
banks were off target in respect of agricultural credit, till March

8
2004. They further note that a meeting was convened by the Finance
Minister with Chief Executives of Public Sector Banks on
9th September, 2004, in which banks were advised to make all
possible efforts to achieve the target of 18% of net bank credit to
agriculture during 2004-05. The Committee are of the view that the
Government/RBI should take effective measures to impress upon
the banks to achieve the targets immediately. They further
recommend that the Government should make it mandatory for all
banks (both public and private sector) to meet the target of 18 per
cent in agricultural credit disbursement and take punitive action,
other than requiring to deposit the shortfall in RIDF, against those
banks who make default in this respect. In addition banks should
be asked to increase their rural credit deposit ratio as this will result
in increased benefit to agriculture sector in the long run. The
Committee again recommend that the Government and RBI should
take measures to bring about a change in attitude of bankers as this
alone can help in bringing about sea change in agricultural credit
disbursement by banks.
19. The Committee had found that new private sector banks had
only 9.52 percent of their branches in rural areas while old private
sector banks had 24.23 per cent of such branches inspite of the fact
that there were specific guidelines for new private sector banks to
have 25 per cent branches in these areas. They, therefore, desired
that these private sector banks should open more branches in rural
areas and step up their credit disbursement in such areas. The
Government in their action taken replies have simply informed that
a communication was issued by the RBI in April, 2003 advising
both new and old private sector banks to open more branches in
rural areas. They are not satisfied with the casual reply of the
Government to a specific recommendation. The Government should
have furnished the details of the branches opened by these banks
after April, 2003. Hence, while reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
total number of branches and number of branches in rural areas
(both absolute and as percentage of the total branches) opened by
private sector (both old and new) and public sector banks during
2003, 2004 and as on date. Further the Committee would like to
have a copy of the communication issued by RBI for their perusal.
20. The Committee observe that after March, 2001, both direct
and indirect advances increased significantly especially in March 2003
and March 2004 in case of private sector banks. The total agricultural

9
advances of private sector banks was 12.31 percent of NBC as on
the last reporting Friday of March 2004. While the Committee
appreciate the rapid growth in credit to agriculture by private sector
banks, they desire that this pace should be maintained and these
banks should meet the targeted 18% of agricultural lending soon.
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Government have not
mentioned anything about independent monitoring of all the banks
in case of direct lending. Therefore, in order to enhance the
component of direct lending, they reiterate that the target for direct
lending should be monitored independently.
21. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government that the maximum lending rate of 9% per annum on
crop loans upto Rs. 50,000 is expected to benefit most of the crop
loan account holders and cover almost all small and marginal farmers
enabling them to access credit and boost productivity of agriculture.
In their view the maximum rate of interest could further be lowered.
Besides the loan limit is too meagre against the rising cost of
agricultural operations. They have been informed that a single
mandatory rate for all Banks is not feasible because capacity of the
various agencies to deliver agricultural loans at lower rate of interest
varies due to their differential cost structure. They want Government/
RBI to advise the banks to take effective steps towards lowering
their cost so that interest rates could be lowered. They further want
that loan limit for agricultural loans should be suitably hiked.
22. It is seen that the Banks have been advised to follow the
instructions with regard to compounding of interest on agricultural
loans. The Committee are, distressed to find that these instructions
are old and have not been issued just recently but the Banks are
compounding interest in defiance of these instructions. Hence, they
are not willing to accept the casual reply from the Government in
this regard. The Government should have informed the Committee
about outcome of these instructions as to whether these are being
followed by all the Banks in right earnest. They want to be informed
in this regard at the earliest.

PROBLEM OF SMALL AND MARGINAL FARMERS/ORAL
TENANTS/SHARECROPPERS
Recommendation (No. 2, Para No. 44)
23. The Committee had observed that there was a large number of
farmers in India who did not actually own the land but cultivated the
land of others without any legal documents and were called oral
tenants. The Committee were given to understand that since these
tenants did not have any security to offer, they could not get loans
from the banks. Also, there were no separate schemes of loans for
such farmers. However, various banks suggested that they (the banks)
would be able to extend loans to them only if they (farmers) formed
groups and collectively approached for loans. They were given to
understand by Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) about the prevalent
practices for disbursement of credit to such tenants. The Committee
also noticed that Anant Geete Committee had recommended that
tenancy of landless farmers should be given recognition to do away
with problems of these farmers in obtaining bank credit for their
farming operations. The Committee felt that inspite of several schemes
for this purpose, majority of them remained on paper. The oral tenants
were still reeling under severe resource crunch which could be checked
only if the policy decisions taken in this regard were actually translated
into action. Therefore they recommended that the oral tenancy should
be given recognition and they should be provided credit for agricultural
activities.
24. In their Action Taken notes, the Government have furnished
following reply:
“The Vyas Committee constituted by Reserve Bank of India has
recommended that Joint Liability Group (JLG) and Self Help Group
approaches have the potential of addressing the issues relating to
the oral tenants and lessees. Accordingly, the banks have been
advised by RBI to explore these financing models through pilot
projects until such time as States address the issues relating to
legislating tenancy.”
25. The Committee have been informed by the Government that
in case of oral tenants the banks have been advised to explore the
10

11
financing models such as Joint Liability Group (JLG) and Self Help
Groups (SHG) through pilot projects until such time as States address
the issues relating to legislating tenancy. They want that banks should
be advised by Government/RBI to popularise these schemes among
poor and landless farmers so that large number of such groups could
be formed to avail the benefit of getting agricultural loan from banks.
They further want the Government to persuade the States to make
their tenancy laws without further delay. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard from time
to time.

RURAL INFRASTRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
Recommendation (No. 3, Para No. 66)
26. The Committee were constrained to find that required demand
for funds were not coming from NABARD which was revealed by the
fact that as on 31 January, 2002 out of Rs. 15755.84 crore allocated,
only Rs. 8455.32 had been drawn. As the demands were less than
shortfall in agricultural lending, these funds were not deposited by
the banks in different tranches of RIDF maintained by NABARD and
the Bank’s money remained with the banks for several years despite
the default committed by them. This paucity of demand was due to
slow disbursements of loans as against sanctions since State
Governments were not able to expeditiously complete the projects
financed by RIDF. This was resulting in under-utilisation of RIDF funds.
In view of the above, it was imperative to review and evaluate the
scheme. The Committee felt that measures should be taken to impress
upon State Governments to expedite the rural infrastructure projects
and get them financed through NABARD without delay. They further
recommended that farmers fora might also be involved invariably to
identify the rural infrastructure projects linked with agriculture
production with more emphasis on irrigation, power etc. and post-
harvesting activities such as storage, marketing etc.
27. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance have stated
as under:
“The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was
established with NABARD in the year 1995-96 in terms of the
Budget Speech. The fund is to be used for assisting State
Governments/State-owned corporations in quick completion of on-
going projects relating to medium and minor irrigation, soil
conservation, watershed management and other forms of rural
infrastructrure. The domestic scheduled commercial banks, both in
the public and private sectors, having shortfall in lending to priority
sector/agricultural lending target, are required to deposit in RIDF.
Funds under RIDF are disbursed to the State Governments on
reimbursement basis depending on the physical progress in
implementing the approved projects.”
12

13
28. The Committee express their unhappiness over the terse reply
from the Government with regard to RIDF funds. Mere parking of
funds by banks in this corpus will not solve the problems of
agricultural credit and infrastructure. Utmost priority should be given
to proper utilization of funds. As the implementation part of RIDF
scheme has not been very encouraging the Committee again
emphasise the need for review and evaluation of the scheme. They
desire that they should be informed of the results of such review.
They further reiterate that farmers fora may also be involved
invariably to identify the rural infrastructure projects linked with
agricultural production with more emphasis on irrigation, power etc.
and post-harvesting activities such as storage, marketing etc.

COOPERATIVE BANKS
Recommendation (No. 7, Para Nos. 102, 103, 104)
29. The Committee observed that cooperative banks played an
important role in rural credit delivery system with credit cooperatives
forming almost 70% of the rural credit outlets. They noted that about
55 per cent of the short-term production loans for the agriculture sector
came from cooperative credit institutions. However the Committee were
disturbed by the fact that even though Cooperative banks were getting
cheap funds from NABARD, they were charging exorbitant rates of
interest on loans lent to farmers. They were alarmed to note that the
rates of interest charged by the cooperative banks were far higher
than the Commercial Banks. As against interest rates ranging between
5.5% p.a. to 6.75% p.a. charged by NABARD on refinance, the rate of
interest charged by Cooperative banks ranged between 12% to 18%
p.a. These banks normally charged interest rates between 12% to 16%
per annum for loans upto Rs. 25000/-and between 12.25% to 17% for
loans upto Rs. 2,00,000/-. For loans above Rs. 2,00,000, the maximum
interest charged was upto 17%. In addition these banks were also
charging penal rate of interest on overdue amount, with cooperatives
in Rajasthan, Haryana & Karnataka, charging highest penal rate on
short term loans.
30. The Committee found that this higher rate of interest was on
account of various problems such as high transaction cost,
mismanagement, lack of professionalism, multiplicity of control, lack
of audit, multilayered structure etc. The Committee observed that the
Task Force to study the functioning of Co-operative Credit System
under the Chairmanship of Shri Jagdish Capoor and the Joint
Committee on Revitalisation Support to Co-opertive Credit Structure’
headed by Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil, were constituted to go into the
working in the cooperative banks. All these Committees had repeatedly
recommended for strengthening these banks but still the problems of
these banks were prevalent. Therefore, the Committee desired that the
Government should take necessary expeditious steps to overcome the
deficiencies noticed by various Committees so that farmers might be
able to avail loans from the cooperative banks at lower rate of interest
as being charged by commercial banks.
14

15
31. The Committee observed that NABARD Act had been amended
recently which would dispense with one intermediary layer. In the
opinion of the Committee this was a welcome step. However mere
abolition of one layer might not result in substantial reduction in rate
of interest. Therefore, Committee opined that NABARD should finance
Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACSs) directly instead of routing
the funds through different layers. Hence, the Committee strongly
recommended that the structure of Cooperative banks should be recast
to bring down the cost of transaction and margin of rate of interest.
The Committee also took note of the fact that in many States PACS
were required to obtain case by case approval of crop loans even
when PACS disbursed loans from their own deposit resources. This
system should be changed as it unnecessarily delays granting of loans.
32. In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry have stated as under:
“Some Co-operative Banks have reduced the rate of interest charged
to farmers on crop loans. However, in the three tier cooperative
credit structure, each tier adds its margin to the rate of interest,
thus leading to a higher rate being charged to the ultimate
borrower. The amendments to Sections 21 and 22 of NABARD
Act, 1981, enabling NABARD, subject to concurrence of the
concerned State Government, to extend refinance support to the
District Centre Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) directly for financing
Short Term Seasonal Agricultural Operations {ST (SAO)} is expected
to reduce the interest rates charged by cooperative banks. The
Vyas Committee has observed in its report that, a single mandatory
rate of interest would affect various institutions differentially, mostly
adversely, and is therefore not feasible at present. Measures to
reduce costs of funds, transactions and risks, could lower the cost
to borrowers without impairing viability of rural financial
institutions (RFIs).
In terms of the announcement made by the Union Finance Minister
in his Budget Speech for the year 2004-05, Government of India has
appointed a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. A
Vaidyanathan, Madras Institute of Development Studies, Chennai. The
Terms of Reference are as follows:
(a) To recommend an implementable action plan for reviving
the Rural Cooperative Banking Institutions, taking into
consideration, inter-alia, the main recommendations made by
various Committees including Jagdish Capoor Committee
and Vikhe Patil Committee in this regard.

16
(b) To suggest an appropriate regulatory framework and the
amendments which may be necessary for the purpose in
the relevant laws.
(c) To make an assessment of the financial assistance that the
Cooperative Banking Institutions will require for revival, the
mode for such assistance, its sharing pattern and phasing.
(d) To suggest any other measures required for improving the
efficiency and viability of Rural Cooperative Credit
Institutions.
The Task Force is required to submit its report by
October 31, 2004.
The NABARD Act has been amended to enable NABARD to
provide direct short term refinance to DCCBs for financing Seasonal
Agricultural Operations. The Scheme is not applicable generally but
selectively, i.e., only to those DCCBs which comply with Section 11 (1)
of B.R. Act, 1949 (AACS) and certain other conditions.
As a result of lack of proper management information system for
PACS in many States and PACS not being under the domain of BR
Act, 1949 a reliable view of the methodology of the working of the
PACS may not be possible as RBI does not have any supervisory
power over them. Direct finance to PACS by NABARD may also
militate against the federal structure of cooperative credit delivery
system. The present federal structure also empowers the apex institution
to play a supervisory role over the lower tiers besides providing policy
and financial support to them. Most importantly the higher tiers ensure
adherence to financial discipline by the lower tiers. Choosing the
ground level layer for direct finance from NABARD would weaken
the principle of risk sharing enshrined in the fundamental structure of
cooperatives. Administratively, it may neither be feasible nor cost
effective for NABARD to provide direct finance to PACS.”
33. The charging of excessive rates of interest by cooperative
banks from farmers is a cause of major concern since a large chunk
of agricultural loans are made available to farmers by them. The
Committee agree that multi layered structure of cooperative banks
may have contributed towards shooting up the interest rate charged
from ultimate borrowers. They also note that a number of committees
and task forces have been formed to address these problems in the
past. However they are distressed to note that the Government

17
instead of taking any action based on earlier reports has formed
another task force to look into the same problems as analysed earlier.
Therefore, they are constrained to state that the Government has
merely engaged itself in constituting Committee after Committee to
address the problems of cooperative banks without taking any
concrete action in this regard. In their opinion such an exercise by
Government would merely delay the revival and restructuring of
cooperative banking system. Hence, the Committee, expect that the
Government would take suitable measures immediately after the
submission of report by the latest Task Force. The Government
should also apprise the Committee of the recommendations of the
Task Force and action taken by the Government thereon.
34. The Committee further note the reply of the Government
with regard to Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) wherein
it has been stated that as these are not under the domain of Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 a reliable view of the methodology of the
working of the PACS may not be possible as RBI does not have any
supervisory power over them. Therefore in their view the State
Governments should be asked to make a proper evaluation of
working of PACS and accordingly make changes in their respective
Acts to help efficient disbursement of funds for agricultural
operations through PACS.

OTHER ISSUES
Recommendation (No. 9, Para No. 132)
35. The Committee found that the stamp duty on mortgage for
agriculture loans in various States was very high. In addition, the
plethora of documentation that was required in ordinary course was
also combersome for illiterate farmers. This discouraged farmers from
availing loans from banks and they would fall in the clutches of
usurious moneylenders. The Committee, in view of this, desired that
stamp duty should be lowered besides minimizing the requirement of
documentation. For this State Governments might be persuaded to
reduce stamp duty. They desired that the norms with regard to
providing credit to farmers should be simplified and paper work
involved therein should be reduced to the barest minimum. This would
attract the farmers to institutional finance and save them from falling
prey to the moneylenders trap. Further, in consonance with the views
of ICICI bank, the Committee desired that the concession for
documentation and stamp duty on mortgage for agriculture loans which
had been made available to the borrowers by some of the States,
should not only be extended to all the States but should also be
made applicable in the case of loans taken from other Institutional
lenders.
36. The Ministry have replied in their action taken note stated as
below:
“The stamp duty exemptions are not uniform. Banks generally
approach the State Governments through SLBC, meetings of the
State concerned for granting stamp duty exemption on agricultural
and non-farm sector loans.”
37. The Committee have been informed that the stamp duty
exemptions are not uniform. Besides this the banks generally
approach the State Governments through State Level Bankers
Committee (SLBC) meetings of the State concerned for granting stamp
duty exemption on agriculture and non farm sector loans. The
Committee are of the view though stamp duty exemptions are
negotiated by banks through SLBC meetings of the State
Governments, the Union Government could still impress upon States
to reduce stamp duty.
18

19
38. They are deeply concerned to note the Government’s silence
on their recommendation on simplification of paper work. They are
of the view that the Government should have taken the views of
the Committee seriously and furnished a suitable reply. They,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the concession
available in some of the States regarding stamp should be extended
to all the States and this concession should be made available in
respect of loans taken from all other institutional lenders without
further delay. Besides, the procedural formalities should also be
minimised. They want to be informed of steps taken by the
Government in this regard at the earliest.

CROP INSURANCE SCHEME
Recommendation (No. 10, Para Nos. 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189)
39. The Committee found that an all risk Comprehensive Crop
Insurance Scheme (CCIS) for major and crucial crops introduced in
April, 1985 by the Government of India with active participation
(optional) of State Governments and the Experimental Crop Insurance
Scheme (ECIS) implemented only for one season during Rabi 1997-98
could not achieve the desired results. Accordingly a broad based new
Crop Insurance Scheme known as National Agriculture Insurance
Scheme (NAIS) or the Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana (RKBY) was
introduced in the country w.e.f. Rabi 1999-2000 season. At
present (Kharif 2003), the scheme was being implemented in 24 States/
UTs.
40. As the scheme provided for the setting up of a separate agency
for implementation of NAIS, a new agency namely the Agriculture
Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC) promoted by GIC, NABARD
and four existing public sector general insurance companies were
incorporated on 20 December, 2002 which had taken over the
implementation of NAIS w.e.f. April, 2003.
41. The Committee were, however, deeply concerned to observe
that even the National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS) which
inter-alia had aimed at stabilising the farm incomes particularly in
disaster years and to encourage farmers to adopt progressive farming
practices, had also fallen short of achieving the desired objectives due
to the poor coverage of non-loanee farmers, slow inclusion of new
crops within the Scheme, high premium rates for commercial crops
like cotton, withdrawal of subsidy in premium meant for small and
marginal farmers on sunset basis in 3 to 5 years, dispute between
Centre and States in sharing premium subsidy, large size of unit area
for insurance, non-coverage of perennial horticultural crops, medicinal
crops, agricultural allied activities namely aquaculture, animal
husbandry and poultry etc. within the ambit of the Scheme.
42. The Committee were further perturbed to find that the apathy
on the part of the bankers in participating in the Scheme, inadequate
20

21
branch network of the implementing agency, saddling the States with
the entailing financial burden of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs),
absence of adequate redressal mechanism, delayed/tardy claim
disbursals and low penetration of the scheme into muffsil/remote areas
had immensely affected the utility of the Scheme in addressing the
growing concerns of the farmers in general and the small and marginal
farmers in particular. They also noted with concern that the non
availability of past yield data on CCEs had been depriving the North
Eastern States from the benefits of the crop insurance scheme.
43. The impeding issues which had hindered the sustainability
and viability of the erstwhile Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme
and Experimental Crop Insurance Scheme were also evident in NAIS
but Government had not taken any step to resolve the persisting
lacunae in the NAIS.
44. In view of the above and considering the need to have an
effective mechanism to squarely meet the growing demands of farming
community to a greater extent and to make the NAIS successful, the
Committee recommended as under:—
(i) The Scheme should be extended to all farmers which might
include oral and landless farmers, sharecroppers, tenant
farmers etc.
(ii) As far as possible all field crops, annual commercial/
horticulture crops, medicinal crops, agricultural allied
activities like aquaculture, animal husbandry, poultry etc.
should be included in the ambit of National Agriculture
Insurance Scheme (NAIS);
(iii) The banking industry had been one of the main beneficiaries
of the scheme. Their huge network might be utilised for
popularising the scheme. At the same time it was important
that they should create friendly environment and extend
helping hand to the illiterate farming community. The
documentation should be made less cumbersome and
procedure should be made simple so that the farmers might
feel free to avail of the institutional financial help. Proper
receipt and other documents should be given to the loanee
farmers so that they might claim the amount of insurance
in case of failure of their crops.

22
(iv) The unit area or the area approach for insurance which
differed from State to State and varied from Gram Panchayat
in A&N Island to Distt. in J&K might be standardised and
fixed as Gram Panchayat for the whole of the country. This
area approach might operate through Small Area Crop
Estimation Method (SACEM) which might report yields at
Gram Panchayat level as designed by the Ministry of
Agriculture in consultation with the Indian Agriculture
Statistics Research Institute (IASRI).
(v) As per estimation of the Agriculture Insurance Company
the expenditure for conducting Crop Cutting Experiments
(CCEs) at Gram Panchayat Level came about Rs. 180 crore
for all the crops in the whole country. Accordingly, the
Committee felt that it may not be difficult for the Govt. of
India to provide the financial assistance to State
Governments which might otherwise strain their finances
and show reluctance to conduct CCEs.
(vi) The advanced technology i.e. Remote Sensing Technology
provided greater credibility and unbiased objective
independent data to cross check and supplement other field
information inputs for crop insurance. Therefore, this
advanced technology should be used to assess the reliable
crop yield. This would help to check the unbridled inflated
claims.
(vii) Threshold yield should be based on preceding normal 3-5
years instead of immediate past 3-5 years;
(viii) The Committee found that the premium on annual
commercial/horticulture crops which was calculated on the
actuarial rates, is very high. They felt that this actuarial
rate together with interest was unaffordable for loanee
farmers with the result that they were not inclined to avail
of the financial assistance form banks and ultimately were
not able to derive the benefits of the Scheme. The
Committee, therefore, desired that the Government should
reduce the premium rate on annual commercial/horticulture
crops to the extent possible.
(ix) Premium subsidy for small and marginal farmers @ 50%
which was to be phased out as per the scheme on sunset
basis in a period of 3 to 5 years should not be withdrawn
and wherever it had been withdrawn, it should be restored.

23
(x) The Government might also reconsider the sharing of
premium subsidy and insurance claims in the ratio of 2:1
which was presently being shared between the Centre and
the States in the ratio of 1:1.
(xi) The cropping pattern and local conditions should be taken
into account and loan might be disbursed close to agriculture
seasons or as and when required by the farmers.
(xii) A proper redressal mechanism should be evolved within
the AIC for the redressal of farmers’ grievances where
maximum period for resolving the disputes should be
prescribed.
(xiii) Since the ‘claim’ was the main area which invites complaints
from the farmers, the Committee desired that the data entry
and processing of insurance claims might be computerised
and the claims might be settled and disbursed within the
stipulated time. In case of disputes, the matter might be
referred to the ‘Redressal Cell’ for settlement. While referring
the case to such a Cell, all the facts and documents might
be submitted to it in one go so that the disputes could be
resolved expeditiously.
(xiv) Government of India and State Governments should set up
the National Agriculture Credit Relief Fund for giving relief
to farmers affected by consecutive crop failures.
45. The following replies were received from the Government in
their action taken note:—
(i) “All farmers including sharecroppers, tenant farmers growing the
notified crops in the notified areas are eligible for coverage under
the National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS).
(ii) Under the National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS), the
following three broad groups of crops are covered subject to
availability of past yield data of requisite number of years and
capacity of the State Government to conduct requisite number of
crop cutting experiments.
(a) Food crops ( i.e. cereals, millets and pulses).
(b) Oilseeds.
(c) Annual Commercial/horticultural crops i.e. sugarcane, potato,
cotton, ginger, onion, turmeric, chillies, pine-apple, banana,
jute and tobacco.

24
Ministry of Agriculture, the nodal Ministry of Crop Insurance has
set up a Joint Group on 31st August, 2004 to study the improvements
required in existing Crop Insurance Scheme. The group will explore
the possibility for extending the scope of coverage under the scheme.
(iii) The crop Insurance Programme is conceived in such a way
that not only the existing infrastructure of Banks, but also
the framework and guidelines of Seasonal Agricultural
Operations (SAO) loans are being used in the effective
implementation of the scheme. Crop loan taken by the
farmers for growing insurable crops is automatically covered
under NAIS. The claims, if any, at the end of the crop
season are adjusted against the loan taken by the farmer.
Therefore, simplification in lending procedures help in the
coverage of loanee farmers and also making timely payment
of insurance claims. RBI & NABARD have issued guidelines,
from time to time, for effective implementation of the
scheme. The Banks are also paid service charge @ 2.5% of
premium for the services rendered by them under the
scheme.
(iv) At present, the Scheme is operating on the basis of Area
Approach for wide spread calamities. The unit of insurance
under Area approach could be Gram Panchayat, Mandai,
Hobli, Circle, Firka, Block, Taluka, etc. as decided by State
Government, for each notified crop. For localised calamities,
such as hailstorm, landslide, cyclone and localised flooding,
the scheme operates on individual farmer basis. However,
it is tried out in limited areas only, and will be extended to
more areas in the light of operational experience. The
reduction in unit area of insurance will help in more realistic
assessment of claims, but it may be difficult for
implementing States to an assessment of yield based on
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) at smaller unit area level
as it will involve a large number of CCEs. The implementing
States do not have adequate infrastructure to conduct
required number of CCEs. Ministry of Agriculture has made
efforts to explore alternative methods for making assessment
of yield at smaller unit area through Small Area Crop
Estimation Method (SACEM), which was based on farmer’s
appraisal, was experimental in selected districts/crops and
it was not proved as an effective method. Inspite of all this,
the issue of reduction in the unit area of insurance is under
consideration as a part of the review of NAIS.

25
(v) The Joint Group set up to study the improvement required
in NAIS will look into all possibilities. A copy of the order
dated 31st August, 2004 issued by the Ministry of
Agriculture is annexed.
(vi) Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AICL) is
already implementing a pilot project using Remote Sensing
Technology (RST) in 3 districts one each in the States of
Andhra Pradesh (Ananthpur District), Maharashtra
(Ahmednagar District) and Gujarat (Rajkot District) for
average estimation, crop health report and yield estimation
during kharif 2004. On the basis of findings of the pilot
project, expansion of the project will be considered.
(vii), (viii) & (ix) A joint Group has been set up to study the
improvements required in the existing Crop Insurance
Scheme i.e. NAIS. The Group will consider various
suggestions including the suggestion given by the
Committee.
(x) Keeping in view the risk involved and the limitation of
financial resources the matter, at present, is not under the
consideration of the Government.
(xi) Under the existing Crop Loan system loans are provided
on the basis of scale of finance for different crops which
are fixed, after taking into account all the requirements i.e.
cost of cultivation, cropping pattern, variation in local
climatic conditions etc. Loans are provided to the farmers
close to agriculture season and as per the requirement of
the farmers. Apart from this, the Kisan Credit Card has
facilitated timely access of agricultural credit to the farmers.
(xii) & (xiii) The Government is already aware about the need for
timely payment of the admissible insurance claims.
Currently, all the operations of AIC are computerised but
the delay in settlement of claim is mainly due to time lag
involved in submission of yield data and release of matching
funds by the State Governments. The Joint Group recently
constituted to study the improvements required in the
existing Crop Insurance Schemes will deliberate and suggest
appropriate mechanism for monitoring and disbursal of
timely insurance claims.
(xiv) To help the farmers affected by consecutive crop failures
due to natural calamities, Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)/

26
National Calamity and Contingency Fund (NCCF) are
available. Besides this, National Agricultural Insurance
Scheme (NAIS) is in vogue since Rabi 1990-2000. The scheme
envisage coverage of all farmers (loanee and non-loanee
both) irrespective of their size of holdings, more crops
(including annual/horticultural/commercial crops) and more
risks. To broad base the scope of its coverage and to make
it more comprehensive a review process has already been
initiated. In view of the above, setting up of the National
Agriculture Credit Relief Fund is not required.”
46. The Committee find that a Joint Group has been constituted
w.e.f. 31 August 2004 to review various aspects of National
Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS) including recommendations/
suggestions put forward by Committee to improve its functioning. It
is expected to submit its report by 31st October 2004. The Committee
hope that this group may have submitted the report by this time.
They therefore desire that reports of the Groups may be provided to
them as early as possible. Besides, the Government should take
concerted efforts with regard to implementation thereof so that
concerns of the farmers are addressed adequately.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para Nos. 76, 77)
“It is observed that the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme is being
implemented in all the States and Union Territories by all the Public
Sector Commercial Banks, State Cooperative Banks/District Central
Cooperative Banks and RRBs. It is facilitating quick accessibility to
minimum amount of loan required for farming. The Committee note
that respective shares of Commercial banks, Cooperative Banks and
RRBs in issue of KCCs are 30.01%, 61.01% and 8%. Since at times
there is inordinate delay in the issue of KCC hence the Committee are
of the view that a maximum period of 15 days as suggested by the
Geete Committee should be fixed for processing and issuing the Kisan
Credit Cards and the same should be adhered to scrupulously.
“The Committee have been informed that the National Council of
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) was engaged to undertake a
study of KCC scheme to see its effectiveness. They hope that NCAER
might have submitted its report by now. The deficiencies noticed by
NCAER may be addressed properly with a view to make the scheme
more effective. The Committee may be apprised of the findings of
NCAER and the action taken by the Government in this regard. At
the same time efforts to generate more and more awareness about the
benefits of the KCC Scheme should be intensified. In this regard, the
highlights of the scheme may be given wide publicity by banks through
various modes of communication to enlighten the farmers of the benefit
of the scheme.”
Reply of the Government
As recommended in the Report of the Committee on Issues
pertaining to Rural Credit (Chairman: Shri Anant Geete), Commercial
Banks have already been advised to issue Kisan Credit Cards within
15 days of the receipt of the application, complete in all respect.
The National Impact Assessment Survey (NIAS) of Kisan Credit
Card (KCC) Scheme was commissioned by Reserve Bank through
27

28
National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), New Delhi
to make an objective assessment of the scheme. The report submitted
by NCAER has brought to light several positive developments out of
the scheme which are as under:
•C redit flow to agriculture sector has been augmented.
• The cost of borrowings for the KCC holders works out about
3% lower than that for non-KCC holders.
• There has been a significant drop in the number of
borrowers depending exclusively on informal sources for
their short-term credit needs.
•W ith the introduction of the KCC scheme, interest rates in
the informal sector have registered a decline.
• Farmers are able to save on time and avoid the hassels of
the pre-KCC system.
• The scheme has benefited financial institutions in that it
has helped them avoid repeat appraisals, processing of
papers, etc. The savings in terms of time and effort have
been noted by bankers covered in the survey.
The  study has also helped to identify some areas where further
fine-tuning is warranted. These are as follows:
• Security conscious banks are imposing many restrictions on
the issuance of KCCs. This is restricting credit flow to
agriculture.
• Card holders are unable to use KCCs in branches other
than the issuing branch due to the restrictions imposed by
the banks.
• Customers perceive that there are no incentives/rewards
extended to them for timely repayments.
•C redit limits are thought to be too low by farmers. The
study has estimated that credit limits need to be raised by
1.5 times on an average, to meet the farmers’ requirements.
• The awareness level/provision of the Personal Accident
Insurance Scheme appears to be quite low.
Reserve Bank of India intend to follow up the study for making
KCC scheme more farmer friendly in terms of smooth access to bank

29
credit, savings in cost and increase in coverage without making
sacrifices on financial disciple.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 89)
The Committee note that Self Help Groups (SHGs) have emerged
as an important channel for providing credit to agriculture. They note
that the SHG Bank Linkage programme has a wide acceptance in the
southern States and has picked great momentum in Andhra Pradesh.
50 per cent of the total SHGs are being financed by commercial banks
while RRBs and cooperatives have a share of 39% and 11% respectively
in financing of these groups. These groups also have excellent
performance in terms of recovery. Therefore, they are provided finance
easily. The Committee are of the view that increasing number of such
groups should be financed. Also poor farmers should be made aware
of benefits of these groups. They should be encouraged to form such
groups and take assistance of any NGO, or a bank branch or a
Government agency called Self Help Promoting Institution (SHPI). This
will increase the flow of credit to these farmers. In addition, emphasis
should be given to increase area coverage of SHGs. There is great
regional variation in the presence of SHGs. Micro financing should be
stressed in all the areas and across the States. Therefore, special efforts
need to be made to encourage such groups in other parts of the
country.
Reply of the Government
As on 31st March 2004, more than 10.79 lakh SHGs have been
credit linked with banks of which 3.98 lakh SHGs were formed and
financed in the 13 Priority States in North and Eastern Regions. As at
the end of August, 2004, additionally 59,118 groups have been credit
linked to banks during the current year, of which 26,000 SHGs were
in the Non-Southern States. NABARD has initiated pilot projects in
10 States, i.e. in Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal, to evolve a sustainable and replicable model for providing
hand holding services to the members of the matured SHGs for
undertaking Micro Enterprise activities. Government of India has also
announced credit linkage of 5.85 lakh SHGs during the next three
years, of which 1.85 lakh SHGs would be linked during the current
year, 2 lakh SHGs in the year 2005-06 and another 2 lakh SHGs in
2006-07.

30
RBI has issued comprehensive guidelines to banks, vide circular
dated February 18, 2000, for mainstreaming micro credit and enhancing
the outreach of micro credit providers. These guidelines stipulated that
micro credit extended by banks to individual borrowers directly or
through any intermediary would henceforth be reckoned as part of
their priority sector lending. The banks were given freedom to
formulate their own model(s) or choose any conduit/intermediary for
extending micro credit. Banks were advised that such credit should
cover not only consumption and production loans for various farm
and non-farm activities of the poor but also include their other credit
needs such as housing and shelter improvements. Banks were asked
to keep the loan application forms, procedures and documents simple
for providing prompt and hassle-free micro credit.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 120)
As observed by the Committee elsewhere in the report, the share
of RRBs in the issue of KCCs is just 8%. Expressing their displeasure
for this abysmally poor performance, the Committee strongly
recommend that RRBs should step in to increase their share in issuing
KCC to a reasonable level. Likewise, they should increasingly come
forward to finance SHGs which is at present only 39%.
Reply of the Government
As on 30 June, 2004, the agency-wise cumulative position of Kisan
Credit Cards issued is as under:
Cooperative Banks — 2,48,56,703
Regional Rural Banks — 40,77,081
Commercial Banks — 1,32,42,927
Total — 4,21,76,711
It may be seen from the above that the share of RRBs in issue of
KCCs has increased to about 9.66% as on 30th June, 2004.
RRBs have been playing an important role in promoting Self-Help
Groups (SHGs) in rural areas. The cumulative number of SHGs linked
by RRBs as of March 31, 2004 was 405998. The SHGs linkage has

31
helped RRBs to increase their outreach and has become a platform for
successful implementation of many other development programmes.
The details of progress with regard to SHGs and KCD by RRBs
during the last three years are given below:
SHG
Year No. of SHGs linked Amount of Bank Cumulative Position Amount of Bank
during the year Loan (Rs. Crore) No. of SHGs linked Loan (Rs. Crore)
2001-02 82137 189.53 188738 345.94
2002-03 102268 381.24 277340 727.18
2003-04 128658 551.08 405998 1278.26
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 35)
The Committee note that percentage of recovery in agriculture is
fairly satisfactory. This is self evident in the data on NPAs in agriculture
vis-a-vis other sectors. The Committee were told in their discussions
with various banks that agriculture lending was a profitable venture.
Since NPAs in agriculture sector has been lower than that of other
sectors, they are of the view that there is no reason why the credit
disbursement to agricultural sector should not be stepped up. The
Committee, therefore, desire that lending institutions should increase
the component of agricultural lending so as to meet the stipulated
target.
Reply of the Government
The credit flow to agriculture is monitored by the Banking Division
and Reserve Bank of India closely and the need for increased flow of
credit to agriculture from banking sector is constantly impressed upon
commercial banks. Recently, Government has announced a series of
measures on 18th June, 2004 envisaging doubling the flow of
agricultural credit in three years.
The Kisan Credit Card Scheme, is being implemented to provide
hassle free credit facilities to farmers. Financing of Agriclinics and
Agribusiness centres was included as direct finance to agriculture. The
scheme aims at supplementing the existing network to accelerate the
process of technology transfer to agriculture and supplement the efforts
of State agencies in providing input and extension services to farmers.
Advances by dealers in drip irrigation/sprinkler irrigation system/
agricultural machinery, irrespective of their location qualify as indirect
finance to agriculture. In order to further improve credit delivery to
the priority sector the credit limit to farmers against pledge/
hypothecation of agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts)
has been increased to Rs. Five Lakh (from Rs. 1 lakh) for inclusion
under priority sector as direct finance to agriculture. The repayment
32

33
schedule for such credit has also been enhanced to not exceeding
twelve months’ from six months. It is expected that with this
liberalization, farmers can have maximum benefit in marketing their
agricultural products.
In addition, subsequent to FM’s announcement on June 18, 2004,
the flow of credit to agriculture for the year 2004-05 has been projected
to increase by 30 per cent from Rs. 80,000 crore to Rs. 1,05,000 crore.
Banks have been advised to implement measures to provide relief for
farmers affected by natural calamities, to provide for One Time
Settlement (OTS) Scheme for small and marginal farmers, to provide
fresh finance to farmers whose earlier debts have been settled and to
provide relief measures for farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 64, 65)
It is distressing to note that almost all of the banks have failed to
meet the stipulated requirement of agricultural lending and are
depositing the fund equivalent to shortfall in Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) with NABARD. The banks, in turn are
receiving interest on these NPA free funds. This means that banks are
being rewarded for giving lesser credit to agriculture.
The Committee note that in pursuance of the recommendations of
V.S. Vyas Committee interest rates have now been inversely related to
the shortfall in agriculture lending however the Committee find that
the rate of interest of 8% on a shortfall of less than 2 percentage
points in agriculture lending is still on the higher side. This is not a
penal rate of interest in any case. They are not inclined to accept the
views of RBI that total abolition of interest on RIDF funds would
hamper the interests of depositors and banking system as a whole.
They are of the view that unless strict compliance is impressed upon
the defaulting banks, they would continue with shortfall. Therefore,
they recommend that RBI should step in to check/prevent misuse of
this provision. In view of the Committee, the most effective disincentive
for banks would be to totally abolish provision of interest on RIDF
funds. A recommendation to this effect was made by them earlier
while considering the Demand for Grants for the year 2003-04.
Maintaining their earlier stand, the Committee reiterate, that the
provision of interest on RIDF funds should be dispensed with
immediately. At the same time, they also want that accountability/

34
responsibility may be fixed on the concerned officials and appropriate
penalty imposed on them.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the declining interest rates scenario and with a
view to further proving disincentive to the banks for not achieving
the agricultural lending target, the lending and deposit rates in respect
of the undisbursed amounts of RIDF IV to IX were restructured, with
the approval of the Government of India, with effect from November 1,
2003. Accordingly, the banks would be paid 6 per cent in respect of
the disbursed amounts of RIDF IV to VII uniformly and varying rates
of interest between the Bank Rate minus 3 percentage points (i.e.
currently varying between 6% to 3%) in respect of RIDF VIII and
RIDF IX.
In the case of RIDF-VIII and IX, therefore, the rates of interest on
deposits continued to be linked to the shortfall in lending to agriculture
and were as follows:
Sl.No. Shortfall in lending to agriculture Rate of interest on the entire deposit to
in terms of percentage to be made in RIDF-VIII and RIDF-IX
Net Bank Credit (Per cent per annum)
1. Less than 2 percentage points Bank Rate (6% at present)
2. 2 and above, but less than 5 percentage points Bank Rate minus 1 per cent
3. 5 and above, but less than 9 percentage points Bank Rate minus 2 per cent
4. 9 percentage points and above Bank Rate minus 3 per cent
Thus banks having a larger shortfall in lending to agriculture are
being given interest at a lower rate ( i.e. currently 3%, this being
substantially lower than the banks’ average cost of funds) and this
should prove to be disincentive for such banks to make deposits in
RIDF and induce them to improve their agricultural lending. Further
reduction of interest rates on deposits placed by banks in RIDF would
drastically affect the profitability of banks, particularly the smaller
banks, thereby endangering the interest of the depositors.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 84)
It is observed that gold loans are available to farmers only in
southern parts of the country. It is an innovative scheme of financing

35
poor farmers who do not have land, but may have gold, which could
be pledged for obtaining loans. The Committee find that, though
otherwise good, this scheme has one lacuna i.e. lack of nomination
facility. In this regard, they take note of suggestions tendered by banks,
that such facility could be extended by them if Section 45 of Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 is amended. The Committee find that as per
prevailing system the banks release assets taken as security in case
there is no dispute and all the legal heirs join in indemnifying the
bank or the bank has no doubt about the genuineness of the claimants.
But they find that the existing system does not redress the grievances
of the farmers as non fulfillment of safeguards will empower the banks
to call for succession certificate which may entangle them in prolonged
legal battle failure of which may deprive the families of poor farmers
of their precious possession. The Committee are of the view that due
to lack of such facility poor and landless farmers are losing even this
avenue to avail credit from banks of finance agricultural operations.
The Committee are of the opinion that this is a necessary facility,
which should be provided by the banks as they have provided in
respect of other deposits/accounts. The Government should initiate
measures to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
Reply of Government
Nomination facility can be afforded without any difficulty when
there are no dues to the bank. It is because of this that the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 provides nomination facility in respect of deposits,
safe custody of articles and contents of lockers with the bank. It does
not, however, provide for release of other assets, such as securities for
loans, to the nominees. Hence it is not considered necessary to amend
BR Act to include Gold loans for providing nomination facility.
However, in order to mitigate the difficulties faced by the survivors
of deceased customers, RBI has advised banks, in the matter of release
of assets (including securities) to such claimants, subject to the following
safeguards:
• There are no disputes and all legal heirs join in indemnifying
the bank or,
• The bank has no doubt about genuineness of the claimants
being the only legal heir/s of the customer.
In case the above safeguards are not available, banks are free to
call for legal representation from the claimant/survivor of the borrower
before releasing the security.

36
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para Nos. 117, 118, 119)
The RRBs were set up in 1976 with manifold objectives of rural
development. The foremost of these was to mobilize rural savings and
channelise them for supporting productive activities in rural areas.
The Committee note that many of the RRBs have plunged into heavy
losses. They, however, note that due to recapitalisation, they have been
able to make a turn around. The viability based categorization of RRBs
as on 31 March, 2002 shows that of the total 196 RRBs, 86 RRBs have
wiped off their accumulated losses and attained sustainable viability
whereas 81 other RRBs have achieved a turn-around and attained
current viability status, leaving only 29 RRBs which have continued to
incur losses. The Committee take note of the recommendations of the
Working Group headed by Shri M.V .S. Chalapathi Rao which was
formed to suggest amendments in the RRB Act. This working group
has recommended inter alia that ownership pattern and capital structure
of RRBs should be changed and role of sponsor institutions should be
that of owners. The regulatory framework for RRBs should be on the
lines of those for commercial banks. They desire that recommendations
of Chalapathi Rao Group should be implemented at the earliest. They
also desire that the Government may consider the setting up of an
apex body viz. National Rural Bank of India with State-wise zonal
centres.
The Committee find that Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in these
banks is on higher side. It was 36% in 1999, 32% in 2000 and 29% in
2001. Hence they are of the opinion that recovery of NPA dues from
borrowers should be accorded top priority so that these banks are
able to recycle the funds for providing further rural credit.
The Committee note with utmost concern that as in the case of
Cooperative Banks, the RRBs also have massive spread in interest rates.
The rate of interest charged by RRBs varies between 11 to 17% as
against rate of interest on NABARD refinance ranging between 5.5 to
6.75%. The Committee are of the view that rural lending through RRBs
can not be of any help unless the rate of interest is reduced. They
recommend that RRBs should evolve a mechanism for ensuring efficient
management of funds. For this, sponsoring banks must be assigned a
greater role. The sponsoring banks should ensure that RRBs do not
deviate from their basic objective while maintaining viability at the
same time. The Committee recommend that sponsoring banks should
be made responsible for ensuring greater credit disbursement in rural
areas by RRBs. Besides the officers and management of RRBs should
be made accountable for failure in agricultural credit delivery. RBI
should issue guidelines to banks in this regard.

37
Reply of the Government
As on 31.3.2004 165 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) were making
profit whereas loss making RRBs were 31. Similarly, 105 RRBs have
wiped off their accumulated losses as on 31.3.2004.
The RRBs financial health has been indifferent from their inception.
Financials have recently improved mainly on account of the
recapitalisation done by shareholders and by taking recourse to
investment route for making profits. The indifferent financial health of
the RRBs is caused by factors such as limited area of operation, narrow
client base, high cost of servicing of numerous small accounts, poor
human resources of RRBs and their managerial deficiencies. Several
Committees have suggested various remedies—lending to non-target
groups (Dantwala Committee 1978), recapitalisation and investment in
high yield Government securities (Kelkar Committee 1986) and possible
merger with rural subsidiaries of sponsor banks (Narsingam Committee
1995).
The Chalapathy Rao Committee (2002) made extensive
recommendation on the capital structure, share holding pattern etc.
These suggestions involved extensive amendments in the RRB Act.
Employees of the RRBs were totally opposed to the Chalapahty Rao
recommendations on restructuring.
A select group of CMDs of Public Sector Banks under the
Chairmanship of SBI was asked to conduct a study and suggest a
restructuring proposal. The Group considered several options for
restructuring and come to the tentative conclusion that RRBs should
be amalgamated on a zonal basis (6 Regions), so as to make it viable
on a sustainable basis in the current competitive environment. The
proposal for consolidating the RRBs under a National Rural Bank or
NABARD has not been favoured so far for various reasons. State
Governments and sponsor banks were consulted in a meeting taken
by Secretary (FS) on 1.5.2004 on the proposal made by the select Group
of CMDs. Sponsor Banks were supportive of the proposal but most of
the States favoured state level amalgamation without any additional
financial support.
Prof. Vyas Committee appointed by RBI has also looked into
restructuring of RRBs and has submitted its report on 30.6.2004. The
Committee considered the various options for restructuring of RRBs.
The Committee noted that each of options considered has certain merits

38
and demerits. Subsidization of the RRBs may require huge capitalization
by the sponsor bank. Creation of the National Rural Bank of India
may lead to monolithic institution with a vast area of operation and
an unmanageable number of branches. Continuing with the existing
structure would result in perpetuation of the problems, zonal level
merger of RRBs will result in loss of the regional and state focus
while the State level mergers may cause problems of amalgamation of
diverse work cultures. The Committee felt that none of the above
options could apply in isolation because of the diverse socio-economic
conditions and region-specific problems prevailing across the country.
The Committee also felt that a hybrid model combining several options
has to be evolved to make RRBs more vibrant. Any restructuring of
the RRBs will involve extensive amendments in the RRB Act. The
Committee, therefore recommend that RRBs Act 1976 may be repealed
and replaced by a new Act with suitable provisions for functional
autonomy to the restructured RRBs and professionalisation of
management and Board of Directors.
Therefore, discussions on the restructuring of RRBs at this stage
are inconclusive. In the meantime Government has decided that each
sponsor bank will be held squarely accountable for the performance of
RRBs under its control. RRBs that adopt a new governance standard
and that abide by the prudential regulations will qualify for receiving
funds from the Government for restructuring. Sponsor Banks have
since been advised to take effective measure to improve the
performance of RRBs.
The RRBs had non-performing assets of Rs. 3289 crore as on
March 31, 2004. The RRBs showed steady improvement on this front
as witnessed from the gradual decline in their NPAs from 43.07% as
on March 31, 1996 to 12.61% as on March 31, 2004.
In order to reduce the interest rates of RRBs, NABARD reduced
the rates of interest to 6% to 6.5% on the refinance provided to RRBs
for various purposes under agriculture and requested them to revise
their margin and lending rates so that the benefit of reduced rates of
interest is passed on to ultimate borrowers. One of the terms of
reference of Vyas Committee appointed by RBI in January 2004 is to
suggest measures to increase the credit flow to agriculture and to
reduce the rate of interest on agriculture credit given by commercial,
co-operative and RRBs. The committee is expected to submit its
recommendations in this regard by April 30, 2004. In his budget speech
for 1997-98, the Hon’ble Finance Minister stated that he intended to
allow a greater role to sponsor banks in ownership and management
of RRBs. In pursuance of the above, RBI has issued a circular RPCD.

39
RRB. No. BC. 57/03.05.85/97-98 dated November, 29, 1997 advising
sponsor banks that the entire responsibility of monitoring and guiding
(ownership functions) RRBs would henceforth be taken over by sponsor
banks except for those supervisory/regulatory matters which are
required to be performed statutorily by RBI/NABARD.
The Union Finance Minister has announced in his Budget speech
for the year 2004-05 that each sponsor bank would be held squarely
accountable for the performance of RRBs under its control. RRBs that
adopt a new governanace standard and those that abide by the
prudential regulations will qualify for receiving funds from the
Government for their restructuring.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 133)
The Committee are concerned to note that the farmers are not
getting adequate loans commensurate with their land holdings. In this
regard they are not satisfied with the reply of the Government wherein
it has been stated that land valuation is done as per norms fixed by
NABARD i.e. land has to be valued at 8 times the annual incremental
income arising from it or the valuation adopted by the land registry
offices for stamp duty purposes, whichever is lower. They desire that
the formula should be changed so that the value of land is determined
as per the prevalent market value. Besides the banks should be asked
to call for security of value commensurate with loan amount.
Reply of the Government
In the matter of security norms it may be stated that as
recommended by the R.V . Gupta Committee, commercial banks have
been advised to use their discretion on matters relating to margin/
security requirements for agricultural loans above Rs. 10,000. Banks
have also been advised to ensure that the value of security taken is
commensurate with the size of the loan and desist from asking
additional collateral by way of guarantors where the land mortgaged,
is considered adequate.
As per RBI’s policy announced on 18th May, 2004, collateral/margin
money for loans upto Rs. 50,000 under Farm Sector and upto
Rs. 5,00,000 in respect of agri-clinic and agri-business centres has been
waived. Necessary instructions in this regard have been issued to
Commercial Banks by RBI and to Cooperative Banks and RRBs by
NABARD.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 32, 33, 34, 36, 37)
The Committee note that as per RBI guidelines, banks have to
deploy 40 percent of the total Net Bank Credit (NBC) in the priority
sector. Out of this 40 percent, minimum 18 percent (13.5% for direct
lending and 4.5% for indirect lending) should be used for lending to
agriculture. However, the Committee find that actual credit
disbursement by most of the banks is far short of stipulated level. The
percentage of total agricultural advances as in March, 2003 was 15.34%
for public sector banks out of which 10.84% of NBC was deployed for
direct financing of agriculture and 4.54% of NBC was given as indirect
credit to agriculture. The share of total agriculture lending by private
sector banks was 10.78 percent in March, 2003, with 6.28% of NBC
going for direct lending and 8.06% for indirect lending to agriculture.
The Committee express their deep concern over this dismal performance
of the banks in agriculture lending. Moreover they are perturbed by
the continuous decline in share of direct credit disbursement of public
and private sector banks. Most of the banks have not been able to
reach the prescribed target in agriculture lending by specified period
of March, 2003. The Credit Deposit Ratio in rural areas for both public
and private sector banks was substantially low as against urban and
metropolitan areas. It is startling to note that as on June 2003, this
ratio was 42.70% for public sector banks, even though they have large
network of rural branches. The credit deposit ratio for private sector
banks was equally low being 33.32%. The banks’ unwillingness to step
up agricultural credit disbursement and Government/RBI’s failure to
exert pressure on them in this regard was revealed by the low CD
ratio. Therefore, the Government and RBI should take measures to
bring about a change in attitude of bankers. The banks should develop
necessary relationship with the rural clients. In addition they should
launch more innovative products in rural areas specific to their credit
needs and take steps to make farmers aware of such products.
40

41
It is seen that as per extant guidelines new private sector banks
are required to open up 25 percent of branches in rural/semi-urban
areas. However, these banks have only 9.52% of branches in rural
areas and the old private sector banks have 24.23 percent of such
branches. As a result these banks have failed to reach rural masses on
a large scale. Hence the Committee opine that the private banks should
be asked to open more branches in rural areas and step up their
credit disbursement in such areas.
Further, the Committee find that there is more proclivity towards
indirect agricultural finance rather than direct loans for undertaking
agricultural activities. That is why there has been spectacular growth
particularly in certain private sector banks in indirect credit as against
faltering growth registered in the case of direct credit. The Committee
took serious note of this disturbing trend. They recommended that the
target for direct lending by banks should be monitored independently.
RBI should ensure that banks do not increase the indirect lending at
the cost of direct lending in order to cover up the shortfall under the
overall limit of 18%.
The Committee take note of the recent directive to charge a single
digit interest rate of not more than 9% per annum on crop loans up
to a ceiling of Rs. 50,000. The Committee feel that Government’s
specification of maximum 9% rate of interest for agricultural loans is
still on higher side in the present day scenario of falling interest rates.
Moreover, the Committee feel that the limit of Rs. 50,000 is very meagre
and such a limit would hardly provide any relief to farmers. It is
widely known that the rate of interest in other sectors has fallen sharply
and in housing sector it had reduced to as low as 6% but the falling
interest rate has not been witnessed in agricultural sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the rate of interest of 9%
should be reduced further in tandem with the rate of interest in other
sectors.
The Committee are concerned to note that banks generally
compound interest in defiance of clear instructions issued in this regard
by RBI. They want that Banks should invariably follow the RBI
instructions scrupulously in this regard which should be monitored by
RBI.

42
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. As per the
Standing guidelines, domestic scheduled banks are required to meet a
target of 18 percent of net bank credit for lending to agriculture under
the system of direct lending. There is a further stipulation that indirect
lending should not exceed 4.5 percent of net bank credit or one-fourth
of credit target of 18 percent, to ensure that banks concentrate on the
direct advances, to agriculture.
Although most public and private sector banks did not meet this
target, advances to agriculture in absolute terms have steadily increased
over the years, as may be seen from the table given below:
Reserve Bank of India has advised both old and new private sector
banks to make earnest efforts to open more branches in rural areas
vide its communication in April, 2003.
Outstanding Credit to Agriculture by Public and
Private Sector Banks
(Rs. in Crores)
March, 1994 March 2003 March 2004
Public Sector Banks
Net Bank Credit 1,40,914 4,77,899 5,56,500
Total Agri advances 21,204 73,507 86,681
outstanding
Direct agri advances 19,256 51,799 61,692
Indirect agri advances 1,949 21,708 24,989
Private Sector Banks
Net Bank Credit 9,545 71,760 1,11,515
Total agri advances 591 11,873 16,599
outstanding
Direct agri advances 515 5,201 8,606
Indirect agri advances 76 6,671 8,926

43
The table given below shows that many banks were yet to reach
the required level by March, 2004:
Number of Banks Achieving Target for Agriculture Credit
As of last Public Sector Banks Private Sector Banks
Reporting
Friday
On Target Off Target On Target Off Target
March, 2001 4 23 1 30
March, 2002 6 21 2 1
March, 2003 5 22 2 27
March, 2004 7 20 2 28
A meeting was taken by Finance Minister on 9th September, 2004
with Chief Executives of public sector banks in which agriculture
lending by public sector banks was also reviewed. The banks have
been advised to make all possible efforts to achieve the target of 18%
of net bank credit to agriculture during 2004-05.
It may be mentioned that for computing a bank’s performance
under the 18% target, indirect advances are reckoned to the extent of
only 4.5% of NBC even if the actual indirect advances of the banks
are above this level.
Further, as for lending by private sector banks, the outstanding
advances to agriculture, both direct and indirect, as at March 2001,
2002, 2003 and 2004 are as under:
(Amount in Rs. Crore)
March, 2001 March, 2002 March, 2003 March 2004
Direct Agriculture 2269.26 2533.66 4865.38 8718.04
Indirect Agriculture 3125.14 5489.12 6575.00 8930.54
Total Agriculture 5394.40 8022.8 12087.78 17648.58
% of total agriculture 8.52 8.53 10.84 12.31
to NBC (taking
indirect agriculture
only upto 4.5%)

44
It may be observed from the above table that after March, 2001,
both direct and indirect advances have increased significantly especially
in March 2003 and March 2004. The total agricultural advances at
12.31 percent of net bank credit as on the last reporting Friday of
March 2004 was after taking indirect advances only up to 4.5% of
NBC. If the entire amount of indirect advances to agriculture are taken
into account, the outstanding advances of private sector banks to the
agriculture sector will be at a higher level that what is shown above.
Over a period of time various interest rates have been falling, and
the bank’s benchmark rates i.e. the prime lending rates have also been
declining. However, there has been some concern expressed that some
of the sectors have benefited more on account of the fall whereas
sectors like agriculture etc. have been benefited in equal measures.
The Indian Bank’s Association (IBA) has, therefore, advised all public
sector banks to prescribe lending rate for agriculture at not more than
9% per annum on crop loans upto Rs. 50,000/-This lending rate is
expected to benefit most of the crop loan account holders and cover
almost all small and marginal farmers, enabling them to access credit
and boost productivity of agriculture.
The interest rates charged by banks are a function of many variables
and hence may vary from bank to bank. However, some of the banks
have even gone below the level of 9%. Further, the NABARD Act,.
1981 has been amended to enable NABARD to provide refinance,
subject to certain conditions, directly to District Central Cooperative
Banks (DCCBs), thereby reducing one tier in the system. This is
expected to reduce the interest rate charged to the ultimate borrower.
The Vyas Committee has observed in its report that the interest
rate is an important aspect of credit. It takes cognizance of the growing
borrower expectations of uniformly lower interest rates on loans by
different agencies extending credit to agriculture. A single mandatory
rate for all banks is, however, not feasible at present, as capacity of
the various agencies to deliver agricultural loans at lower rate of interest
varies due to their differential cost structure. What ultimately matters
to the borrowers in addition to the rate of interest is the timeliness
and adequacy of credit as well as the concomitant costs that he may
have to incur to avail credit. Accordingly, the banks have been advised
to pay attention to their systems and procedures to make their lending
cost effective and also consider measures to save the borrower avoidable
expenses for getting a loan sanctioned.

45
Banks have been advised to follow the instructions in the matter
of compounding of agricultural loans. Besides this, the instructions are
being reiterated from time to time while extending additional relief
package for the persons/farmers affected by natural calamities.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para Nos. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 44)
The Committee observe that there is a large number of farmers in
India who do not actually own the land but cultivate the land of
others without any legal documents and are called oral tenants. The
Committee were given to understand that since these tenants did not
have any security to offer, they could not get loans from the banks.
Also, there were no separate schemes of loans for such farmers.
However, various banks suggested that they (the banks) would be
able to extend loans to them only if they (farmers) formed groups and
collectively approach for loans. They are given to understand by Indian
Banks’ Association (IBA) about the prevalent practices for disbursement
of credit to such tenants. The Committee also notice that Anant Geete
Committee had recommended that tenancy of landless farmers should
be given recognition to do away with problems of these farmers in
obtaining bank credit for their farming operations. The Committee feel
that inspite of several schemes for this purpose, majority of them
remain on paper. The oral tenants are still reeling under severe
resource crunch which could be checked only if the policy
decisions taken in this regard are actually translated into action.
Therefore they recommend that the oral tenancy should be given
recognition and they should be provided credit for agricultural
activities.
Reply of the Government
The Vyas Committee constituted by Reserve Bank of India has
recommended that Joint Liability Group (JLG) and Self Help Group
approaches have the potential of addressing the issues relating to the
oral tenants and lessees. Accordingly, the banks have been advised by
RBI to explore these financing models through pilot projects until such
time as States address the issues relating to legislating tenancy.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]

46
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 25 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 66)
The Committee are further constrained to find that required
demand for funds are not coming from NABARD which is revealed
by the fact that as on 31st January, 2002 out of Rs. 15755.84 crore
allocated, only Rs. 8455.32 have been drawn. As the demands are less
than shortfall in agricultural lending, these funds are not deposited by
the banks in different branches of RIDF maintained by NABARD and
the Bank’s money remain with the banks for several years despite the
default committed by them. This paucity of demand is due to slow
disbursements of loans as against sanctions since State Governments
are not able to expeditiously complete the projects financed by RIDF.
This is resulting in under utilisation of RIDF funds. In view of the
above, it is imperative to review and evaluate the scheme. The
Committee feel that measures should be taken to impress upon State
Governments to expedite the rural infrastructure projects and get them
financed through NABARD without delay. They further recommend
that farmers fora may also be involved invariably to identify the rural
infrastructure projects linked with agriculture production with more
emphasis on irrigation, power etc. and post harvesting activities such
as storage, marketing etc.
Reply of the Government
The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was established
with NABARD in the year 1995-96 in terms of the Budget Speech. The
fund is to be used for assisting State Governments/State-owned
corporations in quick completion of on-going projects relating to
medium and minor irrigation, soil conservation, watershed management
and other forms of rural infrastructrure. The domestic scheduled
commercial banks, both in the public and private sector, having shortfall
in lending to priority sector/agricultural lending target, are required
to deposit in RIDF. Funds under RIDF are disbursed to the State
Governments as reimbursement basis depending on the physical
progress in implementing the approved projects.
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 28 of Chapter I)

47
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para Nos. 102, 103, 104)
The Committee observe that cooperative banks play an important
role in rural credit delivery system with credit cooperatives forming
almost 70% of the rural credit outlets. They note that about 55 per
cent of the short term production loans for the agriculture sector come
from cooperative credit institutions. However the Committee are
disturbed by the fact that even though Cooperative Banks are getting
cheap funds from NABARD, they are charging exorbitant rates of
interest on loans lent to farmers. They are alarmed to note that the
rates of interest charged by the cooperative banks are far higher than
the Commercial Banks. As against interest rates ranging between 5%
p.a. to 6.75% p.a. charged by NABARD on refinance, the rate of interest
charged by Cooperative banks ranges between 12% to 18% p.a. These
banks normally charge interest rates between 12 to 16% per annum
for loans upto Rs. 25000/-and between 12.25% to 17% for loans upto
Rs. 2,00,000/-. For loans above Rs. 2,00,000, the maximum interest
charged is upto 17%. In addition these banks were also charging penal
rate of interest on overdue amount, with cooperatives in Rajasthan,
Haryana & Karnataka, charging highest penal rate on short term loans.
The Committee find that this higher rate of interest is on account
of various problems such as high transaction cost, mismanagement,
lack of professionalism, multiplicity of control, lack of audit,
multilayered structure etc. The Committee observe that the Task Force
to study the functioning of Co-operative Credit System under the
Chairmanship of Shri Jagdish Capoor and the ‘Joint Committee on
Revitalisation Support to Co-opertive Credit Structure’ headed by
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil, were constituted to go into the working in
the cooperative banks. All these Committees have repeatedly
recommended for strengthening these banks but still the problems of
these banks are prevalent. Therefore, the Committee desire that the
Government should take necessary expeditious steps to overcome the
deficiencies noticed by various Committees so that farmers may be
able to avail loans from the cooperative banks at lower rate of interest
as being charged by commercial banks.
The Committee observe that NABARD Act has been amended
recently which will dispense with one intermediary layer. In the opinion
of the Committee this is a welcome step. However mere abolition of
one layer may not result in substantial reduction in rate of interest.
Therefore, Committee opined that NABARD should finance Primary
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) directly instead of routing the funds

48
through different layers. Hence, the Committee strongly recommend
that the structure of Cooperative banks should be recast to bring down
the cost of transaction and margin of rate of interest. The Committee
also take note of the fact that in many States PACS are required to
obtain case by case approval of crop loans even when PACS disbursed
loans from their own deposit resources. This system should be changed
as it unnecessarily delays granting of loans.
Reply of the Government
Some Co-operative Banks have since reduced the rate of interest
charged to farmers on crop loans. However, in the three tier cooperative
credit structure, each tier adds its margin to the rate of interest, thus
leading to a higher rate being charged to the ultimate borrower. The
amendments to Sections 21 and 22 of NABARD Act, 1981, enabling
NABARD, subject to concurrence of the concerned State Governments,
to extend refinance support to the DCCBs directly for financing Short
Term Seasonal Agricultural Operations [ST (SAO)] is expected to reduce
the interest rates charged by cooperative banks. The Vyas Committee
has observed in its report that, a single mandatory rate of interest
would affect various institutions differentially, mostly adversely, and is
therefore not feasible at present. Measures to reduce costs of funds,
transactions and risks, could lower the cost to borrowers without
impairing variability of rural financial institutions (RFIs).
In terms of the announcement made by the Union Finance Minister
in his Budget Speech for the year 2004-05, Government of India has
appointed a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Prof. A
Vaidyanathan, Madras Institute of Development Studies, Chennai. The
Terms of Reference are as follows:—
(a) To recommend an implementable action plan for reviving
the Rural Cooperative Banking Institutions, taking into
consideration, inter-alia, the main recommendations made by
various Committees including Jagdish Capoor Committee
and Vikhe Patil Committee in this regard.
(b) To suggest an appropriate regulatory framework and the
amendments which may be necessary for the purpose in
the relevant laws.
(c) To make an assessment of the financial assistance that the
Cooperative Banking Institutions will require for revival, the
mode of such assistance, its sharing pattern and phasing.

49
(d) To suggest any other measures required for improving the
efficiency and viability of Rural Cooperative Credit
Institutions.
The Task Force is required to submit its report by October 31,
2004.
The NABARD Act has been amended to enable NABARD to
provide direct short term refinance to DCCBs for financing Seasonal
Agricultural Operations. The Scheme is not applicable generally but
selectively, i.e., only to those DCCBs which comply with Section 11 (1)
of B.R. Act, 1949 (AACS) and certain other conditions.
As a result of lack of proper management information system for
PACS in many States and PACS not being under the domain of BR
Act, 1949 a reliable view of the methodology of the working of the
PACS may not be possible as RBI does not have any supervisory
power over them. Direct finance to PACS by NABARD may also
militate against the federal structure of cooperative credit delivery
system. The present federal structure also empowers the apex institution
to play a supervisory role over the lower tiers besides providing policy
and financial support to them. Most importantly the higher tiers ensure
adherence to financial disciple by the lower tiers. Choosing the ground
level layer for direct finance from NABARD would weaken the
principle of risk sharing enshrined in the fundamental structure of
cooperatives. Administratively, it may neither be feasible nor cost
effective for NABARD to provide direct finance to PACS.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 33, 34 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 132)
The Committee note that the stamp duty on mortgage for
agriculture loans in various States is very high. In addition, the plethora
of documentation that is required in ordinary course is also cumber
some for illiterate farmers. This discourages farmers from availing loans
from banks and they fall in the clutches of usurious moneylenders.
The Committee, in view of this, desire that stamp duty should be
lowered besides minimizing the requirement of documentation. For

50
this State Governments may be persuaded to reduce stamp duty. They
desired that the norms with regard to providing credit to farmers
should be simplified and paper work involved therein should be
reduced to the barest minimum. This will attract the farmers to
institutional finance and save them from falling prey to the
moneylenders trap. Further, in consonance with the views of ICICI
bank, the Committee desire that the concession for documentation and
stamp duty on mortgage for agriculture loans which have been made
available to the borrowers by some of the States, should not only be
extended to all the States but should also be made applicable in the
case of loans taken from other Institutional lenders.
Reply of the Government
The stamp duty exemptions are not uniform. Banks generally
approach the State Governments through SLBC meetings of the State
concerned for granting stamp duty exemption on agricultural and non-
farm sector loans.
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Banking Division)
u.o. no. 6-2/2004-AC dated]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 37, 38 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para Nos. 184,
185, 186, 187, 188, 189)
The Committee find that an all risk Comprehensive Crop Insurance
Scheme (CCIS) for major and crucial crops introduced in April, 1985
by the Government of India with active participation (optional) of
State Governments and the Experimental Crop Insurance Scheme (ECIS)
implemented only for one season during Rabi 1997-98 could not achieve
the desired results. Accordingly a broad based new Crop Insurance
Scheme known as National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS) or
the Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana (RKBY) was introduced in the country
w.e.f. Rabi 1999-2000 season. At present (Kharif 2003), the scheme was
being implemented in 24 States/UTs.
As the scheme provided for the setting up of a separate agency
for implementation of NAIS, a new agency namely the Agriculture
Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AIC) promoted by GIC, NABARD
and 4 existing public sector general insurance companies was

51
incorporated on 20th December, 2002 which has taken over the
implementation of NAIS w.e.f. April, 2003.
The Committee are, however, deeply concerned to observe that
even the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) which inter-
alia aimed at stabilizing the farm incomes particularly in disaster years
and to encourage farmers to adopt progressive farming practices, has
also fallen short of achieving the desired objectives due to the poor
coverage of non-loanee farmers, slow inclusion of new crops within
the Scheme, high premium rates for commercial crops like cotton,
withdrawal of subsidy in premium meant for small and marginal
farmers on sunset basis in 3 to 5 years, dispute between Centre and
States in sharing premium subsidy, large size of unit area for insurance,
non-coverage of perennial horticultural crops, medicinal crops,
agricultural allied activities namely aqua culture, animal husbandry
and poultry etc. within the ambit of the Scheme.
The Committee are further perturbed to find that the apathy on
the part of the bankers in participating in the Scheme, inadequate
branch network of the implementing agency, saddling the States with
the entailing financial burden of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs),
absence of adequate redressal mechanism, delayed/tardy claim
disbursals and low penetration of the scheme into muffsil/remote areas
had immensely affected the utility of the Scheme in addressing the
growing concerns of the farmers in general and the small and marginal
farmers in particular. They also note with concern that the non-
availability of past yield data on CCEs have been depriving the North-
Eastern States from the benefits of the crop insurance scheme.
The impending issues which have hindered the sustainability and
viability of the erstwhile Comprehensive Crop Insurance Scheme and
Experimental Crop Insurance Scheme are also evident in NAIS but
Government has not taken any step to resolve the persisting lacunae
in the NAIS.
In view of the above and considering the need to have an effective
mechanism to squarely meet the growing demands of farming
community to a greater extent and to make the NAIS successful, the
Committee recommend as under:
(i) The Scheme should be extended to all farmers which may
include oral and landless farmers, sharecroppers, tenant
farmers etc.

52
(ii) As far as possible all field crops, annual commercial/
horticulture crops, medicinal crops, agricultural allied
activities like aquaculture, animal husbandry, poultry etc.
should be included in the ambit of National Agriculture
Insurance Scheme (NAIS).
(iii) The banking industry is one of the main beneficiaries of
the scheme. Their huge network may be utilised for
popularizing the scheme. At the same time, it is important
that they should create friendly environment and extend
helping hand to the illiterate farming community. The
documentation should be made less cumbersome and
procedure should be made simple so that the farmers may
feel free to avail of the institutional financial help. Proper
receipt and other documents should be given to the loanee
farmers so that they may claim the amount of insurance in
case of failure of their crops.
(iv) The unit area or the area approach for insurance which
differ from State to State and vary from Gram Panchayat in
A&N Islands to Distt. in J&K may be standardised and
fixed as Gram Panchayat for the whole of the country. This
area approach may operate through Small Crop Estimation
Method (SACEM) which may report yields at Gram
Panchayat level as designed by the Ministry of Agriculture
in consultation with the Indian Agriculture Statistics Research
Institute (IASRI).
(v) As per estimation of the Agriculture Insurance Company
the expenditure for conducting Crop Cutting Experiments
(CCEs) at Gram Panchayat Level comes to about Rs. 180
crore for all the crops in the whole country. Accordingly,
the Committee feel that it may not be difficult for the Govt.
of India to provide the financial assistance to State
Governments which may otherwise strain their finances and
show reluctance to conduct CCEs.
(vi) The advanced technology  i.e. Romote Sensing Technology
provides greater credibility and unbiased objective
independent data to cross check and supplement other field
information inputs for crop insurance. Therefore, this
advanced technology should be used to assess the reliable
crop yield. This would help to check the unbridled inflated
claims.

53
(vii) Threshold yield should be based on preceding normal 3-5
years instead of immediate past 3-5 years;
(viii) The Committee find that the premium on annual
commercial/horticulture crops which is calculated on the
actuarial rates, is very high. They feel that this acturarial
rate together with interest is unaffordable for loanee farmers
with the result that they are not inclined to avail of the
financial assistance from banks and ultimately are not able
to derive the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Government should reduce the
premium rate on annual commercial/horticulture crops to
the extent possible.
(ix) Premium subsidy for small and marginal farmers @ 50%
which is to be phased out as per the scheme on sunset
basis in a period of 3 to 5 years should not be withdrawn
and wherever it has been withdrawn, it should be restored.
(x) The Government may also reconsider the sharing of
premium subsidy and insurance claims in the ratio of 2:1
which is presently being shared between the Centre and
the States in the ratio of 1:1.
(xi) The cropping pattern and local conditions should be taken
into account and loan may be disbursed close to agriculture
seasons or as and when required by the farmers.
(xii) A proper redressal mechanism should be evolved within
the AIC for the redressal of farmers’ grievances where
maximum period for resolving the disputes should be
prescribed.
(xiii) Since the ‘claim’ is the main area which invites complaints
from the farmers, the Committee desire that the data entry
and processing of insurance claims may be computerised
and the claims may be settled and disbursed within the
stipulated time. In case of disputes, the matter may be
referred to the ‘Redressal Cell’ for settlement. While referring
the case to such a Cell, all the facts and documents may be
submitted to it in one go so that the disputes could be
resolved expeditiously.
(xiv) Government of India and State Governments should set up
the National Agriculture Credit Relief Fund for giving relief
to farmers affected by consecutive crop failures.

54
Reply of the Government
(i) All farmers including sharecroppers, tenant farmers growing
the notified crops in the notified areas are eligible for
coverage under the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme
(NAIS).
(ii) Under the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS),
the following three broad groups of crops are covered subject
to availability of past yield data of requisite number of years
and capacity of the State Government to conduct requisite
number of crop cutting experiments.
(a) Food crops ( i.e. cereals, millets and pulses)
(b) Oilseeds.
(c) Annual Commercial/horticultural crops i.e. sugarcane,
potato, cotton, ginger, onion, turmeric, chillies, pine-
apple, banana, jute and tobacco.
Ministry of Agriculture, the nodal Ministry of Crop Insurance has
set up a Joint Group on 31st August, 2004 to study the improvements
required in existing Crop Insurance Scheme. The group will explore
the possibility for extending the scope of coverage under the scheme.
(iii) The crop Insurance Programme is conceived in such a way
that not only the existing infrastructure of Banks, but also
the framework and guidelines of Seasonal Agricultural
Operations (SAO) loans are being used in the effective
implementation of the scheme. Crop loan taken by the
farmers for growing insurable crops is automatically covered
under NAIS. The claims, if any, at the end of the crop
season are adjusted against the loan taken by the farmer.
Therefore, simplification in lending procedures help in the
coverage of loanee farmers and also making timely payment
of insurance claims. RBI & NABARD have issued guidelines,
from time to time, for effective implementation of the
scheme. The Banks are also paid service charges @ 2.5% of
premium for the services rendered by them under the
scheme.
(iv) At present, the Scheme is operating on the basis of Area
Approach for wide spread calamities. The unit of insurance
under Area approach could be Gram Panchayat, Mandal,

55
Hobli, Circle, Firka, Block, Taluka, etc. as decided by State
Government, for each notified crop. For localised calamities,
such as hailstorm, landslide, cyclone and localised flooding,
the scheme operates on individual farmer basis. However,
it is tried out in limited areas only, and will be extended to
more areas in the light of operational experience. The
reduction in unit area of insurance will help in more realistic
assessment of claims, but it may be difficult for
implementing States to an assessment of yield based on
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) at smaller unit area level
as it will involve a large number of CCEs. The implementing
States do not have adequate infrastructure to conduct
required number of CCEs. Ministry of Agriculture has made
efforts to explore alternative methods for making assessment
of yield at smaller unit area through Small Area Crop
Estimation Method (SACEM), which was based on farmer’s
appraisal, was experimented in selected districts/crops and
it was not proved as an effective method. Inspite of all this,
the issue of reduction in the unit area of insurance is under
consideration as a part of the review of NAIS.
(v) The Joint Group set up to study the improvements required
in NAIS will look into all possibilities. A copy of the order
dated 31st August, 2004 issued by the Ministry of
Agriculture is annexed.
(vi) Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. (AICL) is
already implementing a pilot project using Remote Sensing
Technology (RST) in 3 districts one each in the States of
Andhra Pradesh (Ananthpur District), Maharashtra
(Ahmednagar District) and Gujarat (Rajkot District) for
average estimation, crop health report and yield estimation
during Kharif 2004. On the basis of findings of the pilot
project, expansion of the project will be considered.
(vii), (viii) & (ix) A joint Group has been set up to study the
improvements required in the existing Crop Insurance
Scheme i.e.  NAIS. The Group will consider various
suggestions including the suggestion given by the
Committee.
(x) Keeping in view the risk involved and the limitation of
financial resources the matter, at present, is not under the
consideration of the Government.

56
(xi) Under the existing Crop Loan system loans are provided
on the basis of scale of finance for different crops which
are fixed, after taking into account all the requirements  i.e.
cost of cultivation, cropping pattern, variation in local
climatic conditions etc. Loans are provided to the farmers
close to agriculture season and as per the requirement of
the farmers. Apart from this, the Kisan Credit Card has
facilitated timely access of agricultural credit to the farmers.
(xii) & (xiii) The Government is already aware about the need for
timely payment of the admissible insurance claims.
Currently, all the operations of AIC are computerised but
the delay in settlement of claim is mainly due to time lag
involved in submission of yield data and release of matching
funds by the State Governments. The Joint Group recently
constituted to study the improvements required in the
existing Crop Insurance Schemes will deliberate and suggest
appropriate mechanism for monitoring and disbursal of
timely insurance claims.
(xiv) To help the farmers affected by consecutive crop failures
due to natural calamities, Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)/
National Calamity and Contingency Fund (NCCF) are
available. Besides this, National Agricultural Insurance
Scheme (NAIS) is in vogue since Rabi 1990-2000. The scheme
envisages coverage of all farmers (loanee and non-loanee
both) irrespective of their size of holdings, more crops
(including annual/horticultural/commercial crops) and more
risks. To broad base the scope of its coverage and to make
it more comprehensive a review process has already been
initiated. In view of the above, setting up of the National
Agriculture Credit Relief Fund is not required.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 57 (43)-Ins. I/2003, dated 5.10.2004]
Comments of the Committee
(Please refer Para No. 46 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
20 December, 2004 Chairman,
29 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
57

ANNEXURE-I
No. 16012/05/2004-Credit-II
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Deptt. of Agri & Coopn.
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 31st August 2004
Subject: Constitution of Joint Group to study the improvements
required in the existing Crop Insurance Schemes—regarding.
The undersigned is directed to say that while reviewing the status
of National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) Hon’ble Prime
Minister has directed that the Ministry of Agriculture will constitute a
Joint Group with Ministry of Finance to expeditiously study the
improvements required to be made in the existing Crop Insurance
Scheme. Accordingly, it has been decided to constitute a Joint Group
with following composition:
Sl.No. Name and Designation
1. Shri A.K. Shah, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Chairman
Agriculture, Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
2. Shri Satish Chander, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Member
Agriculture, Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi.
3. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary (Insurance & Member
Banking), Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic
Affairs, Jeevandeep Building, Parliament Street,
New Delhi.
4. Shri Suparas Bhandari, Chairman-cum-Managing Member
Director, Agriculture, Insurance Company of India
Ltd., New Delhi
2. The Terms of Reference of the Group are given as under:
(i) To review the status position of existing Crop Insurance
Schemes i.e. National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS),
Pilot Project of Farm Income Insurance Scheme (FIIS), Varsha
Bima Yojana and other agriculture related schemes floated
by Private General Insurance Companies.
58

59
(ii) Improvements required in NAIS.
(iii) To develop broad parameters/concepts paper of an
appropriate and farmer’s friendly crop insurance scheme
after taking into account the professional inputs obtained
from experts and private sector general insurance companies.
(iv) To make an assessment of up-front subsidy, if any, to be
paid by the Government.
3. The Group should finalise its recommendations and submit its
report by 31.10.2004.
4. This issues with the approval of competent authority.
Sd/-
(S.S. Prasad)
Director (Credit)
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, (Banking Division)
U.O. No. 6-2/2004-AC dated]

ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 20 December, 2004 from 1530 hrs.
to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. ** ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** ** **
60

61
5. ** ** ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** ** ** **
7. The Committee then considered the draft action taken report of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the Credit
Flow to Agriculture—Crisis in Rural Economy and Crop Insurance
Scheme and adopted the same with changes as suggested by some of
the Members as shown in Annexure IV .
8. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Reports in the light of amendments suggested as also to make verbal
and other consequential changes and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-III
[Modifications/Amendments made by Standing Committee on Finance in their
Draft Report on the Action Taken Report on Credit Flow to Agriculture—
Crisis in Rural Economy and Crop Insurance Scheme of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
at their Sitting held on 20 December, 2004]
Page Para Line Amendment/Modification
12 3 4
71 71 3 After immediately.
Add: “They further recommend that the
Government should make it mandatory
for all banks (both public and private
sector) to meet the target of 18 percent
in agricultural credit disbursement and
take punitive action, other than
requiring to deposit the shortfall in
RIDF, against those banks who make
default in this respect.”
71 7— After para 18
Add new para 19: The Committee had
found that new private sector banks
had only 9.52 percent of their branches
in rural areas while old private sector
banks had 24.23 percent of such
branches inspite of the fact that there
were specific guidelines for new private
sector banks to have 25 percent
branches in these areas. They, therefore,
desired that these private sector banks
should open more branches in rural
areas and step up their credit
disbursement in such areas. The
Government in their action taken replies
have simply informed that a
62

63
communication was issued by the RBI
in April, 2003 advising both new and
old private sector banks to open more
branches in rural areas. They are not
satisfied with the casual reply of the
Government to a specific
recommendation. The Government
should have furnished the details of the
branches opened by these banks after
April, 2003. Hence, while reiterating
their earlier recommendation, the
Committee would like to be apprised
of the total number of branches and
number of branches in rural areas (both
absolute and as percentage of the total
branches) opened by private sector
(both old and new) and public sector
banks during 2003, 2004 and as on date.
Further the Committee would like to
have a copy of the communication
issued by RBI for their perusal.
12 3 4

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON THE CREDIT
FLOW TO AGRICULTURE—CRISIS IN RURAL ECONOMY AND
CROP INSURANCE SCHEME OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
Total  % of total
(i) Total number of recommendations 29
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 4 13.79
been accepted by the Government:
(vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 6 & 8)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 8 27.58
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
(vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 8
and 9)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 17 58.62
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:
(vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7,
9 and 10)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of Nil
which final reply of the Government is
still awaited:
64