38
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 ( Saka)

THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.5.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 38
Price : Rs. 51.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
STATEMENT OF C ONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ................................... 34
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
19th April, 2006 ......................................................................... 43
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
19th May, 2006 .......................................................................... 46
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2005-2006)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
23. Shri Yashwant Sinha
24. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
25. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
(iii)

26. Shri Amar Singh
27. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
28. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
29. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirty-Eighth Report on the Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of the Ministry of Planning.
2. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Planning were laid
on the Table of the House on the 11th March, 2006. Under Rule 331E
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the
Standing Committee on Finance are required to consider the Demands
for Grants of the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and
make Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. Thereafter,
the Demands are considered by the House in the light of the reports
of the Committee. However, this year, the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Planning were passed by Lok Sabha on the 17th March,
2006 prior to their consideration by the Standing Committee on Finance.
Nonetheless, the Committee examined the Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Planning and issues arising out of these.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Planning at their sitting held on 19th April, 2006 in
connection with Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Planning. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at
their sitting held on 19th May, 2006.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Planning for the co-operation extended by them in
furnishing written replies and for placing their considered views and
perceptions before the Committee.
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 May, 2006 Chairman,
29 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
The Planning Commission was constituted in March, 1950 by a
Resolution of the Government of India, and it works under the overall
guidance of the National Development Council. The Planning
Commission consults the Central Ministries and the State Governments
while formulating Five Year Plans and Annual Plans and also oversees
their implementation. The Commission also functions as an Advisory
Planning Body at the apex level.
2. Following functions have been allocated to the Planning
Commission as per the Government of India (Allocation of Business)
Rules, 1961:
(a) Assessment of the material/ capital and human resources
of the country, including technical personnel, and
formulation of proposals for augmenting such of these
resources as are found to be deficient.
(b) Formulation of Plan for the most effective and balanced
utilization of the country’s resources.
(c) Definition of stages in which the Plan should be carried
out on a determination of priorities and allocation of
resources for completion of each stage.
(d) Determination of the nature of machinery necessary for the
implementation of the Plan in all its aspects.
(e) Identifying the factors which are tending to retard economic
development and determine the conditions which, in view
of current social and political situation, should be established
for the successful execution of the Plan.
(f) Appraise from time to time the progress achieved in the
execution of each stage of the Plan and recommend
adjustment of policies and measures that such appraisal may
show to be necessary.
(g) Public cooperation in National Development.
(h) Specific programmes for area development notified from
time to time.

2
(i) Perspective planning.
(j) Institute of Applied Manpower Research.
(k) The overall coordination of the Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya
Yojana (PMGY).
3. The overall Demands for Grants pertaining to Ministry of
Planning is as follows:—
Demand No. 71- Ministry of Planning – 123.83 crore.
4. In the present Report, the Committee have examined the
following issues:—
1. An overview of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
18th Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) pertaining to
the Ministry of Planning.
2. Geographical Information System (GIS) and Utility Mapping
Project
3. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
4. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)
5. Rural Telephone Connectivity
6. Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)
7. Labour and Employment
5. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2005-
06) of the Ministry of Planning, the Committee took up following
issues for examination and presented/laid Eighteenth Report thereon
to both Houses of Parliament on the 20th April, 2005:—
Demand No. 72
1. Modernisation of office system (office expenses)-Detailed
Head 03.01.13
2. Payment for professional and special services- object head
28
3. Grants-in-Aid - object head code 31
4. Tenth Plan
5. Fiscal performance in the Tenth Plan, and
6. Zero Based Budgeting

3
6. The Report contained eleven recommendations. Action Taken
notes were received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06). Under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker,
Minister is required to make a statement on the Floor of the House on
the status of implementation of the recommendations. The Minister of
Planning has made such a statement on the Floor of the House on the
17th May, 2006.
7. Action Taken Replies in respect of six recommendations were
accepted by the Committee. These recommendations mainly covered
the following aspects:
(i)  Need for budgetary exercise with objectivity at each stage.
(ii)  10th Five Year Plan- Need to ensure that the plan estimates
are fully provided for to achieve the targeted growth rate
of 8% per annum.
(iii) Y early targets as well as achievements of major rural poverty
alleviation programmes.
(iv) Better fund allocations for the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar
Yojana (SGRY) and the National Food for Work Programme.
8. In respect of the two recommendations/observations the
Committee did not wish to pursue the matter keeping in view the
Government’s replies. These recommendations pertained to
discrepancies in budgetary estimates under the head “Grants in Aid”
for establishing the Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR)
as well as on corrective fiscal measures to improve the overall fiscal
health. In so far as the remaining three recommendations/observations
pertaining to estimation of BPL families, borrowings by State
Governments and fiscal correction to avail of 12th Finance Commission
awards are concerned, the replies of Government were not accepted
by the Committee and thus, were again commented upon. Further
action taken by the Government on the same were also subsequently
received by the Committee.

4
CHAPTER II
GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS) AND
UTILITY MAPPING PROJECT
9. The Scheme of “Spatial Data Infrastructure for Multi-Layered
Geographical Information (GIS) for rural and urban Planning” has been
operational in the Planning Commission, which is a new Central Sector
Scheme (CS) sponsored by the Planning Commission and executed
with the support of NIC.
10. The objective of the GIS is to build necessary framework to
evolve self-sustaining system for continuous development of GIS
applications, in the area of resources and infrastructure planning,
disaster management and soil and water conservation. Another initiative
taken by the Ministry of Planning pertains to utility mapping for six
metros.
11. Digital mapping for Delhi has already been done. According
to them, a Computer-Aided Digital Mapping Project (CADM) is being
implemented in six metropolitan cities namely, Ahmedabad, Bangalore,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai. In these cities urban
migration and growth have put a tremendous pressure on the utility
network providing civic amenities. However, in most of the cities,
base maps on large scale are not available. Therefore, the need of the
hour is to correctly map and scientifically manage this network. The
Committee have been informed that once large-scale digital base maps
of cities on scale such as 1:1000 are available these could be very
useful for emergency services, better quality of utility services, land
use, disaster and traffic management etc.
12. During oral evidence of the representative of the Ministry of
Planning, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission further informed
the Committee on these projects as follows:
”We had introduced two new schemes two years back, relating to
Geographical Information System (GIS). This was particularly done
because GIS was a tool or a support system for location-specific
planning and it was something that was not being used adequately
in the planning process, and the Planning Commission must
improve this situation.

5
As we went into all that was available, we found that maps were
available. There was the Survey of India; there was the Geological
Survey of India (GIS); there was the Forest Survey of India (FSI);
there was the Hydro Geological Survey of India; there was the
Hydrological Survey of India; and the Soil Survey of India. All
these maps were there, but they were in analog format. They were
on different scales, and they would not even talk to each other.
Therefore, it was not possible to do location-specific planning. We
decided that we would have all of them digitized, as some of
them were digitized, and some were not digitized. We had a system
of multi-layering and now we have created a seamless GIS for the
entire country.”
13. The Member Secretary , Planning Commission added as follows:
“The other project is the GIS project sponsored by the Planning
Commission relating to the seven metros. One presentation that I
would like to make here today relates to these two initiatives on
which we have spent something like Rs. 48 crore last year, and a
substantial amount, that is, about Rs. 20 crore is going to be spent
this year also. This would give you an idea as to what has been
achieved by bringing this in. Eventually, the GIS-which relates to
the seven metropolitan cities- would be so detailed that you would
be able to pinpoint a manhole cover or do the alignment of a
sewer-line and a water-line also. Therefore, utility mapping will be
possible, and utility maintenance systems would improve on
account of this. A whole lot of other applications would also arrive
including vehicle-navigation system based on Global Positioning
System (GPS).”
14. While explaining the usefulness of this project, the Member
Secretary, Planning Commission submitted as follows:
“One of the common complaints in cities is that you always find
roads being dug up. They will lay down the power line today,
repair it, then dig it up again and lay down the telephone line,
and then again dig it up and do a water line. Now, with this, we
will know exactly what is the alignment and where are the various
lines………..All those will get identified and you will be able to
do maintenance job properly, and you would be able to organize
maintenance of different utilities. This provides the basic knowledge
input for that coordination also.”

6
15. When asked as to how the Government proposes to collate
the inputs after digital mapping, the Member Secretary, Planning
Commission stated during evidence:
“You have the digital map which comes from the aerial
photography and initial satellite pictures. On top of that the water
supply people will indicate their lines. Those lines are plotted.
They are marked out. Then, the lines of the Telephone Department
get marked out and the sewer lines get marked out. Then, you
have a management system which is a comprehensive management
system where you are sharing that between all stakeholders. So,
what is there, what is the alignment of the power line, is known
to the waterline people, the telephone line people; and the power
cables are known. You do not damage the power cables when you
are digging a trench for one or the other. You can also coordinate
with others, if you are going to dig a trench. You can check with
others to find out if they also need to use that and then you can
do it jointly so that you do not have to dig it up over and over
again.”
16. When asked about the depths of the satellite mapping, the
representatives of the Ministry of Planning inter-alia responded that
they will be as specific as one manhole cover and the accuracy of this
particular exercise is plus or minus 15 centimetres which means that
within 30 centimetres, it can be found and it can go upto a depth of
10 to 15 feet. When the Committee pointed out that some of these
sewage lines may exist much below the depth of 15 feet, a
representative of the Ministry of Planning stated as follows:
“It can go right up to that. Technology being used is sounding
equipment and Ferro Magnetic Detection Technology, which will
actually trace things.”
17. However, the Committee expressed a doubt regarding
dependency on agencies for requisite information as, in their opinion,
there was a possibility that the data supplied by them may not be
accurate. The Member Secretary, Planning Commission in this regard
submitted as follows during evidence:
“These agencies are doing the validation of something which is
scientifically arrived at. The data is coming actually from the
photography process and remote sensing. What is really happening
is, this data comes as new knowledge to many of these agencies
because they have lost all data.”

7
18. During evidence, the Committee suggested that instead of
Government depending on agencies concerned for information available
in their old records, it would be much better if the Ministry provides
them with the scientific information and asks them to update their
records, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission stated as under:
“Once this data is created and given to them, they are supposed
to do the labeling. Labeling in the sense what is the location, what
is the number and all that. So their own system in the process
will get completely transformed and they will have information
which they have not had so far.”
19. To a query as to how frequently the information would be
updated, a representative of the Ministry of Planning informed as
follows:
“The way it is proposed is once the base digital map is available
today, tomorrow any change which is taking place or any repair
which is taking place will first need to be located on the digital
map, updated on the digital map, and then only the actual process
is allowed to go on the field. So, the updation will be automatic.”
20. In this regard, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission
also stated as under during evidence:
“Unless the data capture is transaction specific, this could become
out of date in two or three years’ time. I must admit that there
are going to be problems in data capture in real time environment.
But we are working towards that. We are building it up.”
21. When asked by the Committee as to whether a new law is
being contemplated whereby any new addition will require clearance,
they were informed as under:
“If it is not a law, it will have to be an administrative direction.”
22. On the use of the information developed as such, the Member
Secretary, Planning Commission submitted as below during evidence:
“The idea of creating State-level atlases and District-level atlases is
that once these atlases are created, then the District-level planners
and State-level planners will use this at their level also. At
Government of India level, the first one is going to be used much
less. But at the District-level and State-level, the use would be
much more.”

8
23. On the matter of sending trained persons at District-level for
the purpose, the Committee were informed as under:
“………..All the NIC personnel in the Districts and States are
getting trained. NIC has a presence in every District. There is a
District outpost of NIC. They will be able to host it on their server.”
24. The Committee note that Geographical Information System
(GIS) for planning (Rural and Urban) as a tool or as a support
system for location-specific planning was not being used so far
adequately in the planning process resulting in poor and haphazard/
uncoordinated maintenance of different utilities such as water-lines,
power-lines, telephone lines etc. From the information furnished by
the Ministry, the Committee note that the Spatial Data Infrastructure
for Multi-Layered Geographical Information System (GIS) project
for planning has been undertaken by the Ministry with an aim to
build necessary framework for evolving a self-sustaining system for
continuous development of GIS applications, in the areas of resource
and Infrastructure planning, disaster management, soil and water
conservation etc. The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by
the Planning Commission in this direction, particularly creation of a
seamless GIS for the entire country, which, in view of the
phenomenal pressure on utility services in big cities, is the need of
the hour.
25. The Committee find that at present many agencies are
involved in preparation of maps e.g. Survey of India, Geographical
Survey of India, Forest Survey of India etc. However, these maps
are on analog format as well as different scales, and thus, are unable
to provide information for location-specific planning. Taking note of
GIS project sponsored by the Planning Commission relating to utility
mapping for seven metros like Delhi, Ahmedabad, Bangalore,
Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, and Mumbai, the Committee find that
Rs. 48 crore has been spent on it and around Rs. 20 crore is estimated
to be spent during the current year. They further note that the project,
once completed, will help civic agencies to pinpoint even a manhole
cover or do the alignment of a sewer-line/water-line etc. Thus, utility
mapping would be possible and its maintenance systems will
improve to a great extent including other applications such as vehicle
navigation system based on Global Positioning System (GPS). The
Committee appreciate the efforts of the Planning Commission and
hope that the project would be completed in time. In this connection,
the Committee would also expect that once the project is found to
be useful for its intended objectives, other metros/major cities may
also be considered for the same.

9
26. What the Committee apprehend in this regard is that the
Ministry may face problems in collecting the data/information from
the agencies concerned for the purpose of utility mapping since their
information is likely to be old/not up to date. The Committee also
feel that since many agencies/stakeholders will be involved in the
process, maintaining coordination between those may also become
problematic. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry may
explore the possibility of including a representative each from the
public utility service providers of the city concerned in the mapping
project. They further feel that once the project is completed,
instructions may be issued to the concerned utility agencies to take
clearance from the Government prior to any major maintenance work.
The Committee also desire that a mechanism should be put in place
for creation of a transaction specific data capture for automatic
updation thereof.

10
PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA (PMGSY)
27. For a country of India’s size, an efficient road network is
necessary both for national integration as well as for socio-economic
development. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, a 100% Centrally
Sponsored Schemes, aims at providing all-weather road connectivity
to all 500 plus unconnected habitations by the year 2007.
28.  With regard to launching of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana, the Ministry of Planning in a written reply stated as below:—
“Having recognized the importance of rural roads as institutional
multipliers the Government resolved to provide total Rural
Connectivity. It was indicated in the Address of the President of
India to the Joint Sitting of Parliament on 25th October 1999, when
a Programme of construction of All-weather roads in the rural
areas was announced. Subsequently, the Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana(PMGSY), was launched as a 100% Centrally
Sponsored Scheme, with the target of connecting, through good
All-weather roads, every habitation with a population of more than
1000 within the next three years and every habitation with a
population of more than 500 by the year 2007”.
29.  On a query regarding reduction/change in population criteria
under PMGSY, as earlier for Hill and North-Eastern States, Desert and
Tribal Areas, the population criteria was 250 plus, a representative
clarified as below during evidence:
“The issue here is that the funds were not available at that time
when we started for 250 and above. Only Rs. 2400 crore to
Rs. 2500 crore were available for a programme size of over
Rs. 1,17,000 crore. So, now we have said that first of all the villages
having population of 1000 and above habitations and 500
population in hilly and tribal areas, they will be taken up. For
that we have been able to identify the funds.”
30. On funding pattern the Ministry of Planning in post evidence
reply stated as follows:
“A sum of approximately Rs. 48,000 crore is proposed to be
invested to achieve this. Out of this, Rs. 16,000 crore is likely to
be received as share of Cess on High Speed Diesel for rural roads,
Rs. 9,000 crore from the World Bank and the Asian Development

11
Bank, leaving a gap of Rs. 23,000 crore. A separate window for
Bharat Nirman in NABARD has been proposed to raise funds to
meet this gap. In order to finalise the modalities and procedure
for creation of a separate Bharat Nirman Window in NABARD, a
Task Force under the Chairmanship of Principal Advisor (P),
Planning Commission was constituted.
The Task Force in its meeting held on 8th December, 2005, after
having an in-depth discussion on Funding, Borrowing and Routing
options for the NABARD Window, recommended to create a special
window under RIDF and permit the National Rural Roads
Development Agency, a Society under Ministry of Rural
Development, to borrow from this window to supplement Central
Government Grants under PMGSY. For repayment, the Task Force
has recommended that 75% of the cess accruals can be committed
for repayment and funding spread over 4 years (2006-07 to
2009-10) which would make available about Rs. 16,500 crore.
Besides, another amount of Rs. 2320 crore would be available from
cess in 2009-10 (after repayment of interest and Principal) thereby
leaving a gap of Rs. 4180 crore which could be met from budgetary
support. The actual modalities of utilizing the NABARD Window
is being worked out by the Ministry of Rural Development in
consultation with Ministry of Finance”
31. In this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Planning
elaborated further as follows during oral evidence :
“The Bharat Nirman (Rural Roads) is the sub-set of the PMGSY.
So, what has been done so far is that about 42,000 habitations
have already been connected just before launching of Bharat
Nirman. At that point of time, the total programme required over
Rs. 1,17,000 crore or so. But we have only Rs. 2000 crore to
Rs. 2500 crore for financing this programme. That is the reason
why we have upscale and the 50 paise cess was imposed. It gives
us more money for that. Then there was a multilateral funding.
Then we had introduced NABARD funding. For Bharat Nirman as
a whole we need about Rs. 48,000 crore that has now been almost
tied up by this programme which we are doing. Partly it will be
done from the cess money which is about Rs. 16,000 crore, about
Rs. 9,000 crore is from the multilateral funding and remaining
Rs. 23,000 crore with an increase of budgetary support cess of
over Rs.6000 crore or so, the balance will come from the NABARD
funding. So, this is how we are funding this. Now we have given
something like Rs. 9,000 crore for 2006-07 which will have to be
increased to Rs. 14,000 crore to Rs. 15,000 crore.”

12
32.  When asked to explain involvement of NABARD in rural
road reconstruction programme, the Member Secretary, Planning
Commission stated as under during evidence:
“The NABARD has been involved in rural road reconstruction
programme. We have asked NABARD to provide loan, which will
be given to the States. There is a cess through which we will
ensure a pay back through the Government of India in future.”
33. On the matter concerning distribution of funds among States,
the Ministry stated as under:—
“The allocation of funds to different States is made as per the
formula i.e. the allocation of the original Re. 1 per litre cess on
HSD (High Speed Diesel) to the States/Union Territories is based
on, inter-alia, a weightage of 75% for need (share of unconnected
habitations in the total unconnected habitations of the country)
and 25% on coverage (share of connected habitations in the total
connected habitations of the country). The allocation of additional
cess of Rs. 0.50 per litre is based upon proportion of road lengths
to be covered by each State under Bharat Nirman Programme”.
34. When asked to explain the manner of disbursement/distribution
of NABARD funds to other States like West Bengal,Andhra Pradesh
and Maharashtra, the following was stated during evidence by the
Member Secretary, Planning Commission:—
“The villages have all been listed out state-wise, district-wise. There
may be very few districts left in the Southern States and Western
States, but a large number of them would be left in States like
Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa etc. These villages are already
identified which are to be connected.”
35. When queried by the Committee further on the mechanism of
distribution of NABARD funds and who is going to do it, the Member
Secretary, Planning Commission submitted as follows during evidence:
“We have created an off budget mechanism by which Rs. 4,000
crore will come, in addition to Rs. 5,200 crore of budgetary support
which is going to the rural roads programme. So, the total
programme size is Rs. 9,000 crore.”
36. On a query regarding interest component on NABARD loan to
States, a representative submitted as under during oral evidence:—
“We have three sources of funding: Multilateral funding, Cess and
NABARD Window. We have a National Rural Road Development

13
Agency called NRRDA. NABARD will give loan to NRRDA which
in turn will give to all the States. Various States have been listed
here and it depends on the level of connectivity in each State
which decides the allocation.”
37. In this regard, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission
explained further as under:—
“In simpler terms, Rs. 4,000 crore of NABARD fund will be taken
into reckoning like what is coming from cess and what is coming
from the budgetary support and then all will get clubbed together.
Depending upon the number of villages which have to be
connected, and the distances which have to be connected, in that
ratio the programme will be determined.”
38. When the Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons for
introducing loan, while earlier it was all grant, the following was
stated during evidence:—
“As far as the loan part of it is concerned, it is not effectively a
loan which is going to be recovered from the budgetary resources
of the States. The loan is an accounting device by which we are
getting money off Budget from NABARD into the system and we
are imposing a cess. This cess is of the debt to the NABARD. So,
over a period of time NABARD will get back its money. There is
no additional burden on the States.”
39. The Ministry, in their post evidence replies, submitted the
following on the magnitude of the programme:—
“According to latest figure made available by the State
Governments under a detailed survey to identify Core Networks
as part of the PMGSY Programme, about 1.72 lakh unconnected
habitations (eligible habitations) need to be taken up under the
PMGSY, as follows:
Item Eligible under PMGSY
1000+ 500-999 250-499 Total
Rural Habitations 59,898 81,471 31,156 1,72,525
Length of rural roads 1,34,169 1,61,890 68,805 3,68,488
required (in kms)
Habitations being covered 22,345 11,996 3,788 38,129
upto 2004-05

14
It was further added:
“To achieve the targets of Bharat Nirman, 1,46,185 Kms. of road
length is proposed to be constructed by 2009. This will benefit
66,802 unconnected eligible habitations in the country. To ensure
full farm to market connectivity, it is also proposed to upgrade
1,94,132 kms. of the existing Associated Through Routes”.
40. Providing an overall picture of the progress of works under
PMGSY, the Committee were informed as under:
“So far the Ministry of Rural Development has cleared proposal
amounting to Rs. 25,7,59.25 crore and released an amount of
Rs. 16,2,51.70 till 15th March, 2006. As per the progress reports
received from the State Governments, 30394 road works, covering
85641 kms (57%), out of 150786 kms. approved, have been
completed benefiting 49017 habitations (26706 habitations of
1000+population, 17219 habitations with population 500-999 and
5092 habitations with population 250-499)”.
41. The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) was launched as a 100% centrally sponsored scheme
with the target of connecting, through good all-weather roads, every
habitations, having population of more than 500, by the year 2007.
From the information furnished to them, they find that Government
have now revised the criteria of population for road connectivity,
which was earlier 250 and above, owing to crunch of funds. The
new criteria provides for road connectivity of those habitations having
population of 1000 and above and 500 population in hilly, desert
and tribal areas. The Committee further note that about 49017
habitations have been connected (under the PMGSY) so far. The
programme (Bharat Nirman) as a whole, needs Rs. 48,000 crore which
could be managed partly from the cess money on HSD (Rs. 16,000 crore),
multilateral funding (Rs. 9,000 crore) and remaining Rs. 23,000 crore
with an increase of budgetary support/cess of over Rs. 6,000 crore or
so. A separate window in NABARD has been proposed to raise
funds to meet this gap. The NABARD will give loan to National
Rural Road Development Agency (NRRDA), which in turn will
provide it to all States. The Committee note that the actual modalities
of utilizing the NABARD window is currently being worked out by
the Ministry of Rural Development in consultation with the Ministry
of Finance. They expect the process to be completed early so that
the programme could be taken up for implementation without delay
at least on this account.

15
42. The Committee note that few districts are left in the Southern
and Western States under PMGSY, however, they are constrained to
observe that large number of Districts are left in some other States
despite being identified for providing connectivity. They note that
the pace of the receiving proposals from some of these States is
abysmally low. Therefore, they hope that, with coming into picture
of NABARD funding the programme, the pace may gain some
momentum henceforth. They also desire that Government should
make sincere efforts urgently to assess the progress of PMGSY in
all the States and take necessary corrective measures to put the
scheme on the right track.

16
SARV A SIKSHA ABHIYAN (SSA)
43. The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech inter-alia stated that
“Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA) has recorded remarkable progress in
2005-06 in terms of new schools, additional class rooms and additional
teachers. Two independent surveys show that 93 per cent of the
children in the age group 6-14 years are in school, and the number of
children not in school has come down to about one crore. Recognizing
good performance, the Finance Minister proposed to increase the outlay
for SSA from Rs. 7,156 crore to Rs. 10,041 crore in 2006-07. He also
announced that 50,000 additional class rooms would be constructed
and 1,50,000 more teachers would be appointed.”
44. As per the Ministry, the 10th Five Year Plan had set the target
of enrolling all children in the age group of 6-14 years in schools and
EGS/AIE centres by 2003. However, the Mid-term Appraisal of the
10th Plan reviewed the target year as 2005. When enquired by the
Committee on this, the Ministry of Planning, in their written reply,
informed as follows:
“The objectives of SSA are to enroll all children in schools, EGS/
AIE Centres by 2003 and it was targeted that all children would
complete five years’ of schooling by 2007. Both the target of
enrolling all children in schools by 2003 and giving five years of
schooling to all children by 2007 could not be achieved due to
delayed start of SSA as the States took time for preparation of
district perspective plans under SSA. The target for enrolment will
have to be extended to 2005-06 now.”
45. Explaining the focus areas under SSA this year during the oral
evidence, the Member Secretary , Planning Commission stated the
following:
“………The focus is on construction of school buildings, additional
class rooms, drinking water facilities in schools, construction of
toilets in schools, appointment of teachers, supply of textbooks, in-
service training of teachers…..We would like to have ideally
1 teacher for 40 students.”
46. When asked further on the issue of target set for the Tenth
Plan regarding universalisation of access to Elementary Education, the
Ministry of Planning, in their written reply submitted as under:
“At the time of formulation of the Tenth Plan about one lakh
habitations remained unserved by schooling facilities as per the

17
norms of one primary school within 1 km distance and children
were out of school. Universalisation of access to primary schooling
has been a high priority of SSA and DPEP . SSA covers the entire
country and addresses the needs of about 20 crore children in
about 11 lakh habitations. In difficult and unserved areas, which
do not qualify for regular schools, EGS/AIE centres have been set
up. With the expansion of schooling facilities by opening up of
new schools and establishment of EGS/AIE centres, almost all
habitations have been covered. The last review held in November,
2005 has revealed that at present 1.35 crore children are out of
school.”
47. On the issue of drop-out rates, the Member Secretary, Planning
Commission stated as below during evidence:
“In the SSA, we have a number of components. For the first time,
to begin with, let me mention that the focus on SSA emerges from
the fact that we had a very high dropout rate and we had a very
low enrolment rate. These are matters of concern. There were
absentees, not adequate teachers, and there were qualitative issues
about education”.
According to the Ministry, the following is the dropout rate among
children:
“Drop Out Rates(%) Among Primary Students:
Year Drop Out Rate (%)
1. 2001-02 39.03
2. 2002-03 34.89
3. 2003-04 31.36
Target: To Reduce drop out rates by 5% points per year”.
48. On the matter to reduce drop out rates it was informed, in a
written reply, as under:
“Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MDMS) has been universalised from 1st
September, 2004 to cover all the primary school children in
government, local body and government-aided schools including
EGS and AIE Centres. This is expected to reduce drop out rate by
5 percentage points per annum, and improve retention of 1.5
million children every year. Presently MDMS covers about 12 crore

18
children in primary classes. Mid-day meal is extended to drought
affected areas during summer vacation also. Besides giving
foodgrains free of cost to the States, Government of India also
provides cooking cost at the rate of Rs. 1.00 per child per day and
transportation subsidy for foodgrains. Studies show a positive
impact of MDMS on school enrolment and attendance. Planning
Commission have received the programme several times and have
urged the Department to ensure that proper management structures
and systems are established at State District and Block levels for
implementation of MDMS. The Department has been asked to
launch a Baseline Survey of MDMS, and PEO of Planning
Commission is undertaking an evaluation study of the Programme.”
49. In this regard, Member Secretary , Planning Commission stated
as follows during oral evidence:—
“It is an appendage to Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. Mid Day Meal
Scheme has had the added advantage of contributing to increasing
the enrolment rate”.
50. Regarding out of school children, the Ministry of Planning in
a post evidence reply informed as follows:
“Total number of Out of School Children
Year Out of School Children (million)
1. 2001-02 32.0
2. 2002-03 24.9
3. 2003-04 11.6
4. 2004-05 9.8*
*27 States and UTs.
Out of school children reduced from 32 million in 2001-02 to 9.8
million in 2004-05. An additional 22.2 million joined the education
system since the launch of SSA”.
51. In this connection, Ministry, in their written note, further
submitted as follows:
“There are about 48 districts with more than 50,000 out- of- school
children. Forty out of these 48 districts are in the States of Bihar,

19
Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal. The annual work Plan and Budget
of 2006-07 of these districts are being appraised in detail for
strategies for the out of school children”.
52. In this regard, it has also been stated that the Mid-Term
Appraisal of the Planning Commission recommended that all the out
of school children be enrolled in regular schools, EGS and AIE Centers
and plan for mainstreaming already enrolled children in the non-formal
education. Based on the review, it also recommended that high drop-
out rates and quality of education are the two main areas which should
be addressed through specific measures under SSA. As regards funding
pattern of SSA, it recommended the existing ratio of 75:25 should be
maintained till the SSA mission period.
53. While elaborating upon the Government’s strategy to enroll
out-of-school children, the Ministry, in their written note, stated as
under:
“(i) For ensuring universal access to primary and upper primary
schools 1.58 lakh schools have already been sanctioned under
SSA and out of this 1.30 lakh schools have been opened till
December 2005.
(ii) Eleven Capacity building workshops for strategies for
including out of school children – especially through bridge
courses – and for minority children have been held in the
States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab,
Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Jammu &
Kashmir.
(iii) States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh have
taken up significant programmes for extending general
education to minorities studying in Maktabs/Madarasas and
who were earlier receiving only religious education.
(iv) States/UTs have also been asked to implement diversified
strategies for the enrolment of out of school children
especially for the “hard to reach” groups like children who
migrate seasonally with their families, children working in
shops, dhabas and on the streets, domestic servants, bonded
child labourers.
(v) The SSA Annual Work Plan targets enrolment of all the out
of school children and close monitoring of the progress.”

20
54. The Ministry furnished to the Committee cumulative progress
under SSA upto December, 2005, as under:
Cumulative progress under SSA upto December 2005
Target Cumulative Percent
2005-06 performance
Approved Completed
& Progress
I. Infrastructure
New Schools 35306 157967 129893 82
Construction of school buildings 34262 120629 105951 88
Construction of additional class 141886 329690 298455 90
rooms
Drinking water facilities 40760 111147 90165 81
Construction of toilets 65771 156634 120710 77
II. Quality of education
Teacher appointment 191697 772345 492261 64
Supply of books (No. of 6.14 cr. 5.02 cr. 82
children in cr.)
Annual in-service training 32,52,785 21,79,356 67
for teachers
III. Total NPEGEL Blocks National: Blocks 2638
3024 covered
Blocks
IV . Out of school children 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
3.2 2.49 1.16 0.98
crores crores crores crores
(a) New School opened 1.30 lakhs
(b) School buildings 1.05 lakhs
(c) Additional class rooms 2.98 lakhs
(d) Drinking water facilities 0.90 lakhs
(e) Toilets 1.21 lakhs
(f) Appointment of teachers 4.92 lakhs
(g) Free supply of Books 5.02 crores
55. The Committee note that Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA) has
made some progress in 2005-06 in regard to starting up and providing
new schools additional class rooms/teachers. As a result, 93% of the
children between the age-group of 6-14 years are presently stated to

21
be in school and the number of children out of school has come
down to 0.98 crore in 2004-05. Keeping in view this reported progress
the budget outlay of the Abhiyan has been increased from Rs. 7,156
crore to Rs. 10,041 crore in 2006-07.
56. However, at the same time the Committee are constrained to
note that the objective of SSA, which was to enroll all children in
schools/EGS/AIE centres by 2003 and that all children would complete
five years’ of schooling by 2007, could not be achieved, the reason
being delayed start of SSA, as the States took time for preparation
of district perspective plans under SSA. From the information
furnished, they also find that the target to reduce the dropout rates
by 5% points every year is not-being met consistently as during the
year 2003-04, the reduction rate was merely 3.53%. The Committee
take note of the reviews with concern which indicated that about
50% of the total out-of-school children in the Country are in Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal. The Committee are of
the firm view that unless special efforts are made to increase
enrolment and participation of children in these States, the situation
is going to deteriorate further. As around 73 districts have already
been identified by the Department for special enrolment drives, the
Committee expect that action might have been initiated in these
districts. However, they desire that the Government must continue
in their efforts to counter teacher absenteeism and sensitize the rural
population, through appropriate folk publicity measures, about the
importance of education for their children so that the children do
not drop out of schools mid-way.
57. Though the Mid-Day Meal Scheme is stated to have
contributed, to some extent, to reduce drop out rates and increase in
school enrolment and attendance, the Committee express concern over
various media reports which state that due to supply of contaminated/
sub-standard food, school children fall sick resulting into addition
in drop out rates and attendance. Hence, the scheme requires setting
up of proper distribution and monitoring mechanism at the State,
District, Block and Panchayat levels. The Committee, therefore, feel
that the Department concerned may conduct a Baseline Survey of
MDMS and based on the results thereof, take suitable steps to
improve the quality of meals supplied to school children. At the
same time it is imperative to impress upon the State Governments
to conduct enquiries regarding supply of contaminated or sub-
standard food whenever it is reported, accountability fixed and
appropriate punishment awarded. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the specific disciplinary action taken in this regard.

22
RURAL TELEPHONE CONNECTIVITY
58. While presenting Budget for the Financial Year 2006-07, the
Finance Minister delved upon rural telephone connectivity as one of
the components of the “Bharat Nirman Project”.
59. The Committee in particular noted the following target spelled
out by the FM:
“More than 50 million rural connections will be rolled out in three
years and thereafter a connection will be available on
demand……….In order to extend financial support to infrastructure
for cellular telephony in rural areas, the Minister of Communication
will bring a Bill in the Budget Session to amend the Indian
Telegraph Act.”
60. During the oral evidence, the Committee invited attention
towards the fact that despite the Government’s promise in their Telecom
Policy in the year 2002 to connect every village by telephone, much
remains to be done in this direction. Responding to the concern
expressed by the Committee, the Member Secretary, Planning
commission stated inter alia the following:
“….we are not in a position to make available those funds within
a timeframe. That was because the task was stupendous but
progressively over the years, the achievement has happened and
the balance task has become smaller ….”
61. In a subsequent written note, the Ministry informed the
Committee that the Department of Telecom is confident of providing
connectivity to all uncovered villages by 2007. The Department of
Telecommunicaton (DOT) has estimated the cost of providing 66,822
Village Public Telephones (VPTs) Rs. 451 crores, which is provided
from Universal Service Obligation Fund, where adequate provision
exists.
62. Explaining the technology proposed to be used for VPTs as
well as the cost involved, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as
follows:
“Out of total 66,822 Village Public Telephones (VPTs) 14,183 would
be provided on satellite based medium. The remaining 52,639 VPTs

23
will be using any other technology. The Roll Out Plan has been
prescribed as three years from November, 2004 which will take
place in a phased manner of 20%, 40% & 40% of the targeted
VPTs.
Cost of providing VPTs on Satellite Medium
Capex—Rs. 1,00,000 (Front Loaded Payment)
Opex —Rs. 5,978 to 17,500 (Equated Annual Subsidy for 5 years)
Cost of providing VPTs using other technologies
Capex—Rs. 25,000 (Front Loaded Payment)
Opex—Rs. 1990 to 7,600 (Equated Annual Subsidy for 5 years)
After connection, the operation is funded (subsidized) through Opex
i.e. Equated Annual Subsidy for 5 years. As per the agreement
signed, the USP has to charge the tariffs for the service from the
customers/users as per the TRAI Tariff orders/regulations/
directions issued in this regard. No rental, fixed monthly charges
or any other charges are collected from the custodian”
63. The Committee are disturbed over the fact that though the
Government has been promising since the year 2002 to provide
telephone connectivity to all villages in the Country, a lot still
remains to be done. The Government has now expressed confidence
to provide connectivity to all uncovered villages so far by the year
2007 through 66,822 VPTs, for which adequate fund provision from
Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) is reportedly available.
However, going by the past record, the Committee are not very sure
if this extended target can be met. Besides, as the Government has
committed to complete the task in another one-and-a-half year, the
Committee feel that the increasing popularity of mobile phones, even
in semi-urban and rural areas, may adversely affect the actual utility
of landlines in the long run. Therefore, the Committee feel that
keeping this factor in mind, the Government should not only ensure
that the VPTs are provided in all villages at the earliest but should
also keep scope open for providing cellular mobile telephones in
select rural areas. In this connection the Committee note that in
order to extend financial support to infrastructure for cellular
telephony in rural areas, the Government is contemplating to bring
a Bill to amend the Indian Telegraph Act. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.

24
RAJIV GANDHI GRAMEEN VIDYUTIKARAN
YOJANA (RGGVY)
64. Improvement of rural electricity infrastructure is essential to
empower rural India and unleash its full growth potential. The
proposals, with regard to Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana,
include that 40,000 more villages will be electrified. The key to the
success of this programme has been stated to be the engagement of
franchisees and proper commercial and contractual arrangements for
distribution, billing and collection.
65. According to the Ministry, the Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) was introduced in April, 2005 for the
objective of providing access to electricity to all rural households over
a period of 5 years. Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) is the
nodal agency for the RGGVY. Under this yojana, projects can be
financed with 90% capital subsidy for provision of Rural Electricity
Distribution Backbone (REDB), creation of Village Electrification
Infrastructure (VEI) and Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG)
which would also cater to the requirement of agriculture and other
activities including irrigation pumpsets, small and medium industries,
Khadi and Village Industries, cold chains, healthcare, education and
IT. At present, only 44% of the rural households have access to
electricity. Under this scheme, un-electrified Below Poverty Line (BPL)
households will get electricity connection free of charge, as per the
norms of Kutir Jyoti Programme in all rural habitations.
66. In regard to funds allocation, physical achievements and hurdles
faced in RGGVY during the year 2005-06, the Ministry of Planning, in
their written reply, stated as follows:
Funds Physical Achievements Hurdles faced in RGGVY
allocated/released (as on 28.3.2006)
(in Rs. Crore)
2005-06 2005-06 In Phase I ( i.e. 10th Plan)
Target Achievement
12 34 5
(i) The number of villages
electrified is as reported
by Ministry of Power. It
is pointed out that the
revised definition for
village electrification
requires electrification of
10% of the total
households in that village
1100.00
(in Ministry
of Power’s
budget to
fund
Capital
subsidy for
RGGVY)
1550.63
(includes
loan
component
and
enabling
activities
charges of
REC)
10,000
villages
7741 villages
&
14,741 rural
households
(including
4547 BPL
households

25
12 3 4 5
to be recognized as
electrified, in addition to
electrification of all public
places like schools,
panchayat offices, health
centres, dispensaries,
community centres etc.
Clearly the claim relating
to the number of villages
electrified appears high
when compared to the
number of households
actually electrified. This
needs independent
verification to assess
ground realities.
(ii) The current objective
of the RGGVY does
not match the
National Common
Minimum Programme
(NCMP) objective viz.
electrification of all
households in five
years. The current
objective aims to
only provide electricity
access to all rural
households over a
period of 5 years and
electricity connections
only to BPL households.
Thus at the end of
5 years all households
will not be electrified as
envisaged by NCMP .
(iii) Government of India
approved RGGVY with
90% capital subsidy on
the condition that the
revenue sustainability of
the RE programme will

26
12 3 4 5
be established with this
level of capital subsidy .
However, it is
increasingly clear that
with the current load
profile of rural India
continuing State
Government subsidies
would be inevitable
unless the programme is
required to be
implemented differently
by a suitable Rural
Electrification policy.
67. Informing the Committee on the status of this Yojana, the
Ministry of Planning stated the following:
“As per census 2001, the status of Rural Electrification in India is
as follows:—
Total number of unelectrified villages = 1,18,828
Total number of un-electrified rural households = 7,62,20,035
RGGVY envisages electrification of all villages and provide
electricity access to all rural households over a period of 5 years
i.e. by 2009.”
68. When asked about the provision of State Governments in
implementing this scheme, keeping in view the implementation aspect
of the projects which is rested with the respective State Governments,
the Ministry of Planning in a written reply submitted as follows:—
“RGGVY provides the facility to the States for availing the services
of the CPSUs for:
(i) Project formulation, development and implementation
involving system planning, design, engineering and
procurement of goods and services and construct/
implement/commission the projects covered under the
scheme.
or

27
(ii) Formulation and preparation of reports, project approvals,
advisory support for procurement and project monitoring
and supervision of quality work.
or
(iii) Pr oject Monitoring and supervision of quality of work
during construction.
“The services of CPSUs as above are available to the States willing
to utilize their services for implementation of the programme. The
bulk of the unelectrified villages (around 80%) are mostly located
in the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The State utilities in these States
do not have the required manpower and technical expertise to
implement the rural electrification programme within the stipulated
time frame as envisaged under the RGGVY. Therefore, these States
and some other States like Assam, J&K, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh
and Tripura have entered into an agreement with the CPSUs under
the Ministry of Power for RGGVY implementation.”
69. The Committee note that Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana envisages electricity access to all rural households over a
period of Five years and electricity connections only to BPL
households. But from the information furnished to them, they find
that at the end of fifth year, all households would not be electrified
as envisaged in the Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) because
the current objective aims only to provide electricity access to all
rural households over a period of 5 years and electricity connection
only to BPL households. They, therefore, desire that unless every
household is electrified, the NCMP objective may prove a mismatch.
70. The Committee further note that the revised definition for
village electrification requires electrification of 10% of the total
households in that village to be recognized as electrified, in addition
to electrification of public places such as schools, Panchayat Offices,
Community/Health Centres etc. Hence, the claim relating to the
number of villages electrified appears high when compared to the
number of households actually electrified. They, therefore, desire
that an independent verification may be carried out to assess the
ground realities in this regard.
71. The Committee are unhappy to note that around 80% un-
electrified villages are mostly located in the States of Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, the
reasons being that the State utilities pertaining to these States do
not have the requisite manpower and technical expertise to

28
implement the rural electrification programme within the stipulated
time frame as envisaged under the RGGVY. The Committee learn
that for implementation of the RGGVY, some States like Assam,
J&K, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Tripura have entered into an
agreement with the CPSUs under the Ministry of Power. In this
backdrop, the Committee feel the States which do not have requisite
manpower or technical expertise may be persuaded to enter into an
agreement with CPSUs for the implementation of the project. In
addition, a special component may be created under RGGVY in order
to give a boost to rural electrification in the backward States in the
form of assistance to appoint/depute required technical experts.

29
LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
72. Estimates of labour force, employment and unemployment in
the country are an integral part of the exercise for preparation of
employment perspective for planning. These estimates are based on
the results of NSSO sample surveys and the demographic census. On
the basis of these estimates, employment projections are made.
Estimates of labour force, employment and unemployment are prepared
by the Planning Commission, besides the examination of the educational
profile of the work force, employment and unemployment among youth
(age between 15-29 years), employment and unemployment among
poor and many other issues relating to employment.
73. On the status of estimation of Labour Force, Work Force and
unemployment rate by Usual Principal & Subsidiary Status from 58th
round onwards, the Committee were, inter-alia, informed as under:—
58th Round 59th Round 60th Round
(July-Dec., 2002) (Jan-Dec., 2003) (Jan.-June, 2004)
Labour Force 430126 448942 457473
(‘000)
Work Force 420962 440250 446889
(‘000)
Unemployed Persons 9164 8693 10584
(‘000)
Unemployment Rate(%) 2.13 1.94 2.31
74. On the reasons for wide gap between the number of jobs
created and increase in the number of job aspirants vis-a-vis
Governments steps to accommodate the latter, the Planning Commission
informed as under:—
“It may be seen that number of registrants in employment
exchanges have not come down. Job placement that takes place
outside the purview of employment exchanges is substantial. And
all those registered are job seekers but not necessarily unemployed.
Hence, the Employment Exchange data may not be taken as a
true indicator of employment-unemployment situation. As a matter
of fact names of registrants do not get struck off from the live
register even after getting employment.”

30
75. When asked to furnish the major findings/results of 61st round
of Sample Survey of NSSO held in July, 2004-June, 2005 regarding
employment scenario, the Ministry of Planning responded as
under:—
“The results of 61st round of Sample Survey of NSSO conducted
during July, 2004, June, 2005 are not yet available.”
76. Asked by the Committee to furnish the reasons for decline in
the growth rate of employment between the period 1983-1994 form
2.7% per annum to 1.07% per annum during 1994-2000, the Planning
Commission, in a written reply, informed:—
“As per the Planning Commission, the growth rate of employment
and the labour force derived from the National Sample Survey
(NSS) data shows that the rate of growth of employment declined
sharply from 2.70% per year in the period 1983 to 1993-94 to only
1.07% per year in the period 1993-94 to 1999-2000. However, it is
important to recognize that the absolute level of employment in
1999-2000 is estimated by applying the percentage of employed
workers to the total number of workers in the labour force observed
in the survey to an estimate of the labour force in that year. The
estimate of labour force in turn is obtained by applying the Labour
Force Participation Rates (LFPR) in the survey to the total
population derived from census data. An important feature of the
1999-2000 survey is that labour force participation rates have
declined sharply compared with position in 1993-94 and this is
reflected in sharp deceleration in the growth of labour force from
2.43% in the period 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.31% in the period
1993-94 to 1999-2000. The observed deceleration in employment
therefore, can not be dissociated from the sharp decline in the
growth of the labour force and indeed is derived from it.”
77. Further, when asked to comment upon the declining trend in
employment opportunities in the organized sector—both public and
private as well as the strategy of the Government to tackle the problem,
the Ministry, in their written replies informed as under:—
“National Sample Survey Reports on Employment and
Unemployment revealed that the regular salaried workers on Usual
Principal Status basis (UPS) increased from 503.5 lakh during
1993-94 to 579.4 lakh in 1999-2000. This is based on survey of
households.”

31
78. Another approach is the survey of establishments as reported
by the Employment Market Information (EMI) system. Under the EMI
programme, the data/information on the level of employment is
however, collected only in respect of the organized sector of economy,
which comprises of all establishments in the public sector and non-
agricultural establishments employing 10 or more persons in the private
sector. Under this programme, all the establishments are required at
quarterly intervals, to supply details about the number of persons
they are employing, vacancies occurred and the type of persons who
are found in short supply. It is worth noting that whereas data from
all the establishments in the public sector and those non-agricultural
establishments in the private sector employing 25 or more persons are
obtained statutorily under the provisions of the Employment Exchanges
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, the data from non –
agricultural establishments engaging 10 to 24 persons in the private
sector are collected on a voluntary basis.”
79. On the matter of steps to be taken to increase employment
opportunities in organized sector, the Ministry of Planning elaborated
as follows:—
“…….The decline in private organized sector employment has been
marginal. And decline in public organized sector employment has
been observed higher. The decline in public organized sector
employment may be result of restructuring of Government
departments and ban on recruitments. Similarly, decline in private
organized sector employment may be result of reprioritizing means
of production in the process of liberalization. The decline in private
sector is not so sharp and it may remain so during the transitional
period. Employment in private organized sector is likely to increase
much faster after economy adjusts completely to the
liberalization………….”
80. It was further added:—
“…….Employment is a concurrent subject and therefore, State
Governments also take initiatives and implement various schemes
to increase employment opportunities in their respective States.
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Urban Development
and Poverty Alleviation also implement various schemes to increase
employment opportunities in rural and urban areas respectively.”
81. The Planning Commission referred to the following
amendments in Labour Laws, as suggested in the Mid-Term Appraisal

32
of 10th Five Year Plan, to promote the growth of organized
employment:—
“Changes have been proposed in the Acts relating to Payment of
Wages Act, 1936, the Labour Laws (Exemptions from Furnishing
Returns and Maintaining Registers by Certain Establishments) Act,
1988 and the Factories Act, 1948.”
82. The hiring of contract labour in the newly-emerging sectors
was to be made more liberal by amending the Contract Labour
(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970. Amendments to the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, were envisaged to ensure a higher compensation
for retrenched workers as well as raising the threshold on number of
employees for closure of establishments without state government
permission.
83. Labour laws make it difficult for employer to respond flexibly
to changes in demand when necessary and have the net effect of
discouraging the growth of strong labour absorbing sectors. A simplified
regime of labour laws was envisaged in Tenth Plan in order to promote
the growth of organized employment. To evolve a workable consensus,
on recommendations of 2nd NCL, amongst the employers, the trade
unions, and the State Governments, the union Ministry of Labour has
organized consultations in the Indian Labour Conference, and at other
fora.
84. MTA has also suggested that on the request of State
Governments, selective exemption from the applicability of the labour
laws could be considered for Special Economic Zones (SEZs) and Export
Oriented Units (EOUs) and even in the larger Special Economic Regions
(SERs).
85. The Committee find that NSSO Sample Surveys and the
demographic census form the basis for estimation of labour force,
employment and unemployment. They find that growth rate of
employment/labour force declined from 2.70% per annum during the
period 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.07% per year during 1993-94 to
1999-2000. As per the Survey conducted in 1999-2000, labour force
participation rates also declined sharply in comparison to 1993-94
resulting into sharp deceleration in the growth of labour force from
2.43% during 1983 to 1993-94 to only 1.31% in 1993-94 to 1999-2000.
What the Committee wanted to know from the Government was the
latest result of the sample survey conducted by the NSSO during
July, 2004—June, 2005 which the Government could not furnish by
saying that the same was not available with them. The Committee

33
are surprised that even after a lapse of almost one year, the results
of the Survey are not available with the Government. The Committee
take a serious view in the matter and expect the Government to
come out with the result early, which is so crucial for employment
planning.
86. The Committee are further disturbed to note that number of
registrants of job seekers in employment exchanges have not come
down despite Government’s claim that job placement taking place
outside the purview of employment exchanges is substantial. From
the information furnished, the Committee find that Government is
promoting labour intensive sectors for creation of employment
potential and 10th Plan has also taken initiative in this regard.
Despite all these, employment in organized sector—both in public
and private – has declined, which the Committee feel, is a very
discouraging scenario keeping in view the ever-increasing number
of job seekers. It may be pertinent to mention that one of the prime
factors contributing towards rise in crimes and terrorist activities is
lack of direction as well as appropriate employment opportunities
for the Country’s youth. The Committee, therefore, desire that
Government should come out with suitable measures to provide
employment to youth. The Committee would also like the
Government to be more cautious in restructuring the Government
Departments, as a result of which employment has further declined
in public organized sector. Keeping in view the present scenario of
high growth rate of unemployment, the Committee recommend that
the National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme, which
reportedly has been implemented only in some 200 Districts, be
extended to other districts also for facilitating jobs to unemployed
youth. The Committee also feel that the suggestions made in the
Mid-Term Appraisal of the 10th Five Year Plan document to amend
existing Labour Laws, be examined expeditiously to promote the
growth of organized employment. Further, in order to give a boost
to self-employment, the Committee urge the Government to
encourage credit-linked entrepreneurship too.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 May, 2006 Chairman,
29 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

34
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
IN THE THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Sl.No. Para No. Conclusion/Recommendation
12 3
1. 24, 25 & 26 The Committee note that Geographical
Information System (GIS) for planning (Rural
and Urban) as a tool or as a support system
for location-specific planning was not being
used so far adequately in the planning process
resulting in poor and haphazard/uncoordinated
maintenance of different utilities such as water-
lines, power-lines, telephone lines etc. From the
information furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee note that the Spatial Data
Infrastructure for Multi-Layered Geographical
Information System (GIS) project for planning
has been undertaken by the Ministry with an
aim to build necessary framework for evolving
a self-sustaining system for continuous
development of GIS applications, in the areas
of resource and Infrastructure planning, disaster
management, soil and water conservation etc.
The Committee appreciate the initiative taken
by the Planning Commission in this direction,
particularly creation of a seamless GIS for the
entire country , which, in view of the
phenomenal pressure on utility services in big
cities, is the need of the hour.
The Committee find that at present many
agencies are involved in preparation of maps
e.g. Survey of India, Geographical Survey of
India, Forest Survey of India etc. However,
these maps are on analog format as well as
different scales, and thus, are unable to provide
information for location-specific planning.
Taking note of GIS project sponsored by the

35
12 3
Planning Commission relating to utility
mapping for seven metros like Delhi,
Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad,
Kolkata, and Mumbai, the Committee find that
Rs. 48 crore has been spent on it and around
Rs. 20 crore is estimated to be spent during
the current year. They further note that the
project, once completed, will help civic agencies
to pinpoint even a manhole cover or do the
alignment of a sewer-line/water-line etc. Thus,
utility mapping would be possible and its
maintenance systems will improve to a great
extent including other applications such as
vehicle navigation system based on Global
Positioning System (GPS). The Committee
appreciate the efforts of the Planning
Commission and hope that the project would
be completed in time. In this connection, the
Committee would also expect that once the
project is found to be useful for its intended
objectives, other metros/major cities may also
be considered for the same.
What the Committee apprehend in this regard
is that the Ministry may face problems in
collecting the data/information from the
agencies concerned for the purpose of utility
mapping since their information is likely to be
old/not up to date. The Committee also feel
that since many agencies/stakeholders will be
involved in the process, maintaining
coordination between those may also become
problematic. Therefore, the Committee desire
that the Ministry may explore the possibility
of including a representative each from the
public utility service providers of the city
concerned in the mapping project. They further
feel that once the project is completed,
instructions may be issued to the concerned
utility agencies to take clearance from the
Government prior to any major maintenance

36
12 3
work. The Committee also desire that a
mechanism should be put in place for creation
of a transaction specific data capture for
automatic updation thereof.
2. 41 & 42 The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched as
a 100% centrally sponsored scheme with the
target of connecting, through good all-weather
roads, every habitation, having population of
more than 500, by the year 2007. From the
information furnished to them, they find that
Government have now revised the criteria of
population for road connectivity, which was
earlier 250 and above, owing to crunch of
funds. The new criteria provides for road
connectivity of those habitations having
population of 1000 and above and 500
population in hilly, desert and tribal areas. The
Committee further note that about 49017
habitations have been connected (under the
PMGSY) so far. The programme (Bharat
Nirman) as a whole, needs Rs. 48,000 crore
which could be managed partly from the cess
money on HSD (Rs. 16,000 crore), multilateral
funding (Rs. 9,000 crore) and remaining
Rs. 23,000 crore with an increase of budgetary
support/cess of over Rs. 6000 crore or so. A
separate window in NABARD has been
proposed to raise funds to meet this gap. The
NABARD will give loan to National Rural Road
Development Agency (NRRDA), which in turn
will provide it to all States. The Committee note
that the actual modalities of utilizing the
NABARD window is currently being worked
out by the Ministry of Rural Development in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance. They
expect the process to be completed early so
that the programme could be taken up for
implementation without delay at least on this
account.

37
12 3
The Committee note that few districts are left
in the Southern and Western States under
PMGSY, however, they are constrained to
observe that large number of Districts are left
in some other States despite being identified
for providing connectivity. They note that the
pace of the receiving proposals from some of
these States is abysmally low. Therefore, they
hope that, with coming into picture of
NABARD funding the programme, the pace
may gain some momentum henceforth. They
also desire that Government should make
sincere efforts urgently to assess the progress
of PMGSY in all the States and take necessary
corrective measures to put the scheme on the
right track.
3. 55, 56 & 57 The Committee note that Sarva Siksha Abhiyan
(SSA) has made some progress in 2005-06 in
regard to starting up and providing new
schools additional class rooms/teachers. As a
result, 93% of the children between the age-
group of 6-14 years are presently stated to be
in school and the number of children out of
school has come down to 0.98 crore in 2004-05.
Keeping in view this reported progress the
budget outlay of the Abhiyan has been
increased from Rs. 7,156 crore to Rs. 10,041
crore in 2006-07.
However, at the same time the Committee are
constrained to note that the objective of SSA,
which was to enroll all children in schools/
EGS/AIE centres by 2003 and that all children
would complete five years’ of schooling by
2007, could not be achieved, the reason being
delayed start of SSA, as the States took time
for preparation of district perspective plans
under SSA. From the information furnished,
they also find that the target to reduce the
dropout rates by 5% points every year is not-

38
12 3
being met consistently as during the year
2003-04, the reduction rate was merely 3.53%.
The Committee take note of the reviews with
concern which indicated that about 50% of the
total out-of-school children in the Country are
in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West
Bengal. The Committee are of the firm view
that unless special efforts are made to increase
enrolment and participation of children in these
States, the situation is going to deteriorate
further. As around 73 districts have already
been identified by the Department for special
enrolment drives, the Committee expect that
action might have been initiated in these
districts. However, they desire that the
Government must continue in their efforts to
counter teacher absenteeism and sensitize the
rural population, through appropriate folk
publicity measures, about the importance of
education for their children so that the children
do not drop out of schools mid-way.
Though the Mid-Day Meal Scheme is stated to
have contributed, to some extent, to reduce
drop out rates and increase in school enrolment
and attendance, the Committee express concern
over various media reports which state that due
to supply of contaminated/sub-standard food,
school children fall sick resulting into addition
in drop out rates and attendance. Hence, the
scheme requires setting up of proper
distribution and monitoring mechanism at the
State, District, Block and Panchayat levels. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the Department
concerned may conduct a Baseline Survey of
MDMS and based on the results thereof, take
suitable steps to improve the quality of meals
supplied to school children. At the same time
it is imperative to impress upon the State
Governments to conduct enquiries regarding
supply of contaminated or sub-standard food

39
12 3
whenever it is reported, accountability fixed
and appropriate punishment awarded. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the
specific disciplinary action taken in this regard.
4. 63 The Committee are disturbed over the fact that
though the Government has been promising
since the year 2002 to provide telephone
connectivity to all villages in the Country, a lot
still remains to be done. The Government has
now expressed confidence to provide
connectivity to all uncovered villages so far by
the year 2007 through 66,822 VPTs, for which
adequate fund provision from Universal Service
Obligation Fund (USOF) is reportedly available.
However, going by the past record, the
Committee are not very sure if this extended
target can be met. Besides, as the Government
has committed to complete the task in another
one-and-a-half year, the Committee feel that the
increasing popularity of mobile phones, even
in semi-urban and rural areas, may adversely
affect the actual utility of landlines in the long
run. Therefore, the Committee feel that keeping
this factor in mind, the Government should not
only ensure that the VPTs are provided in all
villages at the earliest but should also keep
scope open for providing cellular mobile
telephones in select rural areas. In this
connection the Committee note that in order to
extend financial support to infrastructure for
cellular telephony in rural areas, the
Government is contemplating to bring a Bill to
amend the Indian Telegraph Act. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
5. 69, 70 & 71 The Committee note that Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana envisages
electricity access to all rural households over a
period of five years and electricity connections

40
12 3
only to BPL households. But from the
information furnished to them, they find that
at the end of fifth year, all households would
not be electrified as envisaged in the Common
Minimum Programme (NCMP) because the
current objective aims only to provide electricity
access to all rural households over a period of
5 years and electricity connection only to BPL
households. They, therefore, desire that unless
every household is electrified, the NCMP
objective may prove a mismatch.
The Committee further note that the revised
definition for village electrification requires
electrification of 10% of the total households in
that village to be recognized as electrified, in
addition to electrification of public places such
as schools, Panchayat Offices, Community/
Health Centres etc. Hence, the claim relating
to the number of villages electrified appears
high when compared to the number of
households actually electrified. They, therefore,
desire that an independent verification may be
carried out to assess the ground realities in this
regard.
The Committee are unhappy to note that
around 80% unelectrified villages are mostly
located in the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal, the reasons being that the State utilities
pertaining to these States do not have the
requisite manpower and technical expertise to
implement the rural electrification programme
within the stipulated time frame as envisaged
under the RGGVY. The Committee learn that
for implementation of the RGGVY, some States
like Assam, J&K, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and
Tripura have entered into an agreement with
the CPSUs under the Ministry of Power. In this
backdrop, the Committee feel the States which

41
12 3
do not have requisite manpower or technical
expertise may be persuaded to enter into an
agreement with CPSUs for the implementation
of the project. In addition, a special component
may be created under RGGVY in order to give
a boost to rural electrification in the backward
States in the form of assistance to appoint/
depute required technical experts.
6. 85 & 86 The Committee find that NSSO Sample Surveys
and the demographic census form the basis for
estimation of labour force, employment and
unemployment. They find that growth rate of
employment/labour force declined from 2.70%
per annum during the period 1983 to 1993-94
to only 1.07% per year during 1993-94 to
1999-2000. As per the Survey conducted in
1999-2000, labour force participation rates also
declined sharply in comparison to 1993-94
resulting into sharp deceleration in the growth
of labour force from 2.43% during 1983 to
1993-94 to only 1.31% in 1993-94 to 1999-2000.
What the Committee wanted to know from the
Government was the latest result of the sample
survey conducted by the NSSO during July,
2004- June, 2005 which the Government could
not furnish by saying that the same was not
available with them. The Committee are
surprised that even after a lapse of almost one
year, the results of the Survey are not available
with the Government. The Committee take a
serious view in the matter and expect the
Government to come out with the result early,
which is so crucial for employment planning.
The Committee are further disturbed to note
that number of registrants of job seekers in
employment exchanges have not come down
despite Government’s claim that job placement
taking place outside the purview of
employment exchanges is substantial. From the

42
12 3
information furnished, the Committee find that
Government is promoting labour intensive
sectors for creation of employment potential
and 10th Plan has also taken initiative in this
regard. Despite all these, employment in
organized sector- both in public and private –
has declined, which the Committee feel, is a
very discouraging scenario keeping in view the
ever-increasing number of job seekers. It may
be pertinent to mention that one of the prime
factors contributing towards rise in crimes and
terrorist activities is lack of direction as well as
appropriate employment opportunities for the
Country’s youth. The Committee, therefore,
desire that Government should come out with
suitable measures to provide employment to
youth. The Committee would also like the
Government to be more cautious in
restructuring the Government Departments, as
a result of which employment has further
declined in public organized sector. Keeping in
view the present scenario of high growth rate
of unemployment, the Committee recommend
that the National Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme, which reportedly has been
implemented only in some 200 Districts, be
extended to other districts also for facilitating
jobs to unemployed youth. The Committee also
feel that the suggestions made in the Mid-Term
Appraisal of the 10th Five Year Plan document
to amend existing Labour Laws, be examined
expeditiously to promote the growth of
organized employment. Further, in order to give
a boost to self-employment, the Committee urge
the Government to encourage credit-linked
entrepreneurship too.

43
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19th April, 2006 from 1030 to
1315 hrs. and 1430 to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
6. Shri M.A. kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Part-I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **

44
Part-II
(1200 to 1315 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
Part-III
(1430 to 1630 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Planning
1. Shri Rajeeva Ratna Shah, Member Secretary
2. Smt. Adarsh Misra, Pr. Adviser
3. Dr. Pronab Sen, Pr. Adviser
4. Dr. Arvind Virmani, Pr. Adviser
5. Shri Jainder Singh, Pr. Adviser
6. Shri H.N. Gupta, Pr. Adviser
7. Shri B.S. Baswan, Sr. Consultant
8. Shri Chandra Pal, Adviser (MLP/SCP/TSP)
9. Smt. Manjulika Gautam, Adviser (VAC/WCD)
10. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay, Adviser (RD)
11. Shri Gajendra Haldea, Adviser (Infrastructure)
12. Shri Shailendra Sharma, Adviser (LEM)
13. Shri G.B. Panda, Adviser (SJ)
14. Dr. S.P . Pal, Adviser (Evaluation)
15. Prof. N.K. Sethi, Adviser (Health)
16. Shri A. Sekhar, Adviser (WR)
17. Shri B.N. Puri, Adviser (Tpt.)
18. Dr. V .V . Sadamate, Adviser (Agriculture)
19. Shri R.C. Jhamtani, Adviser (Industry/VSE)
20. Shri L.P . Sonkar, Adviser (Mienrals & TRP)
21. Shri K.L. Dutta, Adviser (Education)
22. Shri V .K. Bhatia, Adviser (PAMD)
23. Shri P .K. Biswas, Adviser (S&T)
24. Dr. (Mrs.) Rita Sharma, AS & FA
25. Shri R. Sridharan, Joint Secretary (SP & Admn./FR)
26. Ms. Gurjot Kaur, Adviser (PC/Tourism)
27. Dr. C. Muralikrishna Kumar, Adviser (ICT)
28. Shri A.S. Ahluwalia, Adviser (SER)

45
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Planning to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of representatives of the
Ministry of Planning on issues arising out of Budget Proposals (2006-
07) of the Ministry of Planning and other related matters.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry
of Planning to furnish notes on certain points raised by the Members
to which replies were not readily available with them during the
discussion.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

46
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 May, 2006 from 0930 to 1030
hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

47
3. ** ** **
4. The Committee then took for consideration Draft Reports on
the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the following Ministries/
Departments and adopted the same subject to the modification as
shown in Annexure-I in respect of the draft  Report at Sl. No. (v):
(i) ** ** **
(ii) ** ** **
(iii) Ministry of Planning
(iv) ** ** **
(v) ** ** **
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of modification as also to make verbal and other
consequential changes arising out of the factual verification and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.