CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Forty-first Report on the subject “Introduction of
New Income Tax Return Forms” which was presented to Lok Sabha/
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 November, 2006.
2. Observations/recommendations of the Committee were in paras
from 29 to 38 of the report. It is observed from the action taken
replies received from the Government that all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been accepted by the
Government.
3. The Committee are glad to note that, as recommended by the
Committee, the requirement of furnishing cash-flow statement in
the Income Tax returns has been dispensed with and the old forms
have been substituted with new return forms for the assessment
year 2007-08. In the new return forms, the tax-payer has only to
indicate information relating to details of certain specified high value
transactions entered into during the relevant financial year. The
Committee hope that the spirit of the Committee’s recommendation
will be kept in view in future to ensure that filling up of
ITR forms is unexacting and there is ease of compliance.

2
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation Nos. 29, 30 & 31
Income Tax return forms are assessment year specific and are,
therefore, required to be notified each year by the Central Board of
Direct Taxes, Ministry of Finance. Accordingly, the Committee note
that the Government had notified new forms of tax returns, namely
form 2F and 3B, apart from notifying Form-1, Form-2, Form-2D,
Form-3, Form-3A, and Form-16AA for the Assessment Year 2006-07
for enabling tax-payers to file their return of income and fringe benefits.
From the deposition of the Ministry, they further note that the main
reason for the changes made in the return forms is to make them
electronically compatible and to do away with the requirement to attach
any annexures. In this context, the Committee observe that one of the
prominent features that the Government have introduced this year in
the Forms 2F and 3 is that of attaching a ‘Cash Flow Statement’. They
have been given to understand that this statement would help in
avoiding implicit scrutiny of tax-payers on account of information
received through Annual Information Returns (AIR). Furnishing of the
Statement, according to the Government, would enable the Department
to undertake verification of the AIR information and identify only
such cases for intensive investigation where the probability of detection
extremely high. The Statement requires aggregate of cash or bank
balance at the beginning of the year and, the incomings during the
year must always match with aggregate of the outgoings and the cash
or bank balance at the end of the year. Further, to break-up of the
total outgoings is to be furnished in three categories, namely, investment
or expenditure in respect of which deduction is claimed under Chapter
VIA; other investments like immovable property, vehicles, bonds
jewellery, shares, units and other financial instruments; and other
outgoings including household expenses. However, the Committee note
that the Government made it optional for the tax-payers filing return
in Form No. 2, 3 or 2F for the assessment year 2006-07 to fill out the
Cash Flow Statement.
Since the introduction of the new Form 2F attracted considerable
public interest leading to adverse media reports and is considered to
be the Form in which the salaried tax-payer is expected to file his

3
tax return, the Committee considered it a matter requiring further
attention. Accordingly, they examined this issue in detail.
The Form 2F is a four page form seeking information from the
tax-payers on his income, tax liability, payment of taxes and his annual
cash flow statement about the incomings and outgoings. In this regard,
the Committee note that certain difficulties with regard to the earlier
Form 2E (Naya Saral) had necessitated certain changes therein and
therefore the Department decided to notify the new Form 2F. The said
difficulties have been explained by the Department in the earlier Form
as lack of sufficient space, requirement of attachment of annexures,
inadequate explanatory instructions, difficulty in matching information
being collected by the Department from third parties through the
Annual Information Return (AIR) and unsuitability for electronic
transmission. The new Form 2F, according to the Government has
been designed to overcome the above difficulties.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been taken into
account while designing the new income-tax return forms. The details
of the new forms are given against paragraph 32 and 33.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl. dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation Nos. 32 & 33
The Committee are aware that the concern of the public focused
on the inclusion of ‘Cash Flow Statement’ in the new forms, particularly
2F. The Government’s justification for the introduction of the Cash
Flow Statement is that huge volume of information is gathered through
the Annual Information  Report (AIR) necessitating verifications of
this information. To avoid issuing of large number of letters to such
tax-payers whose expenditure have come to be known though the AIR
and thus imposing additional compliance burden on all persons
receiving the verification letters, the Government have introduced the
provision of the ‘Cash Flow Statement’ in the Returns. The Department
have also taken the stand that is “Risk Management Strategy” in the
form of obtaining the information through the Cash Flow Statement
would enable them to first undertake a preliminary verification of the
AIR information and take up only such cases for intensive investigation
where the probability of detection is extremely high. However, the
Committee note that at the same time the Government have also
admitted that the salaried class are the most honest tax-payers and
that only 2% of the total returns filed in this category are taken up for
scrutiny by the Department.

4
Committee observe that though the Government have sought to
allay the apprehensions expressed by them by taking the stand that
furnishing of the Statement would protect the salaried tax-payers from
any kind of intrusive investigation, the assessee need not furnish
detailed information regarding the expenditure and to maintain any
kind of accounts in this regard, it still does not sound convincing.
However, the Committee are of the opinion that the details called for
in the statement would surely require the assessee to maintain some
kind of accounts.
Reply by the Government
Vide notification No. 762(E) dated 14th May, 2007, the Central Board
of Direct Taxes have substituted the old Forms, including Form 2F, by
the following eight new return forms for the Assessment Year 2007-08,
under a new series:
(i) ITR-1—return of income for individuals having salary/
pension/family pension and interest income and no other
income.
(ii) ITR-2—return of income for Individuals and Hindu
Undivided Families (HUFs) having income from any source
except from business or profession.
(iii) ITR-3—return of income for Individuals and HUFs being
partners in firms and not having proprietory business or
profession.
(iv) ITR-4—return of income for individual and HUFs having
proprietory business or profession.
(v) ITR-5—combined form for return of income and fringe
benefits for Firms/Association of Persons/Body of
Individuals.
(vi) ITR-6—combined form for return of income and fringe
benefits for Companies.
(vii) ITR-7—combined form for return of income and fringe
benefits for Charitable/religious trusts, political parties and
other non-profit organizations.
(viii) ITR-8—stand alone form for return of fringe benefits for
persons who are not liable to file return of income but are
liable to file return of fringe benefits.
All the above returns forms, with the exception of ITR-7, have
been made annexure-less. The tax-payer does not have to furnish

5
documents, statements, receipts, certificates, reports of audit along with
the return of income. Further, e-filing of returns for all companies and
also for firms liable to audit under section 44AB has been made
mandatory. The requirement of furnishing cash-flow statement has also
been dispensed with in the new forms.
In these new series of returns, the taxpayer has only to indicate
information relating to details of certain ( i.e. eight) specified ‘high-
value’ transactions entered into during the relevant financial year. The
details of the transactions, which are to be furnished by the tax-payers,
correspond to the information received by the Department from
designated third parties by way of ‘Annual Information Returns’. The
relevant schedule  i.e., Schedule-AIR has been incorporated in forms-
ITR-1, ITR-2, ITR-3 and ITR-4, applicable to individuals and HUFs.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation No. 34
While the Committee appreciate the efforts of the Government to
continuously improve the format of the return forms on the basis of
feedback received as well as difficulties faced both by the taxpayers
and the Department, they are of the view that producing a Cash Flow
Statement has, in general, created confusion and apprehension among
the assessees, thus requiring a re-look at the same. This requirement
has also created doubts in the minds of assessees about the records
that are needed to be maintained without which the account of the
cash transactions will not be easy to tally. This can prove to be difficult
an individual may incur expenditure on several items at different places
and keeping track-record of all such transactions can be quite
cumbersome and tough. Besides it has created apprehensions in the
minds of taxpayers that once the requisite information is furnished,
more intrusive investigation will follow and more problems will accrue.
Further, the Committee are not convinced by the argument put forth
by the Department that internal instructions, proposed to be issued to
the field formations, that notices to the taxpayers seeking explanation
for any mismatch can be issued only with the prior approval of the
CIT, are enough to allay the fears in the mind of taxpayers as in the
opinion of the Committee, these are ultimately going to be treated as
routine instructions. Moreover, in the light of the fact that only
2 percent of the returns filed are subject to scrutiny assessment and
the Department is supposed to accept the disclosures made by the
taxpayers in balance 98 percent of the returns, the Committee find it
absolutely unnecessary to include Cash Flow Statement in the

6
Return Forms. Last, but not least, the Committee are of the opinion
that once the income is taxed, utilization of taxed income by the
assessee should not be the concern of the Income Tax Department.
Therefore they recommend that the Government must do away with
the provision of Cash Flow Statement in Form Nos. 2F and 3 altogether.
Reply by the Government
As stated above, the Form No. 2F, Form no. 2 and Form No. 3
have been substituted by the New Forms notified for assessment year
2007-08. The new Forms do not seek information on the cash-flow of
the tax payer.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation No. 35
In so far as filing of returns by salaried persons having agricultural
income is concerned, the Committee note that such persons are required
to file their tax returns either in form 2 or in Form 2D. In the
connection, they note that the requirement of the Cash Flow Statement
has been specified in Form 2 for Assessment Year 2006-07 while Form
2D does not require the assessee to fill up Cash Flow Statement, which
will lead to more confusion in the minds of those persons with
agricultural income. The Committee are of the opinion that prior to
introduction of Form 2F, all categories of salaried taxpayers were used
to filing their returns in Form No. 2D. However as of now, this category
has been split into two as salaried persons not having profits and
gains from business, Capital gains and agricultural income and more
than one house property, are now required to file their returns in
Form 2F and persons having agricultural income are required to use
Form 2 or 2D. The Department have further complicated the situation
by stating that person not having income under the head ‘profits and
gains of business and profession’ can also use Form 3. The Committee
find this very confusing and feel that the system which hitherto existed
required all salaried assessees to fill up Form 2D or 2E, and was quite
convenient, which should not have been disturbed.
Reply of the Government
In view of the recommendations of the hon’ble Committee, new
series of return forms have been notified, depending upon the source
of income of the tax payer. For individuals and HUFs, four return
forms namely ITR-1 to ITR-4 have been notified. The return Form
ITR-1 is meant for individuals deriving income from salary/pension/

7
family pension and interest income and no other income. Two versions
of ITR-1 are available—a two-page ITR-1 and a three-page ITR-1; the
latter providing for expanded space in various columns to enable the
tax payers fill up the required details.
Similarly, the return Form ITR-2 is meant for—Individuals and
Hindu Undivided Families (HUFs) having income from any source
except from business or profession.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation No. 36
The Committee have been given to understand that one of the
main reasons for replacing Form No. 2E with Form No. 2F was that
there was insufficient space given in various columns thereof, which
made it difficult for the taxpayers to fill in the details required. The
Committee are of the opinion that this particular aspect can be taken
care of with just expanding, space-wise, the existing format of Form
2E.
Reply by the Government
In view of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, new
series of Income-tax return forms have been designed providing for
adequate space to fill up the necessary details.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation No. 37
The Committee with particular reference to the new Form 2F are
also of the view that the new Form 2F seems to be quite cumbersome
and lengthy, fit enough to be called ‘kathin’ instead of an improved
version of the erstwhile ‘Naya Saral’ Form. Besides, the Committee
are also convinced that all the taxpayers in the country are not yet
suitably equipped to file their returns online. In addition, keeping in
view the fact that the computerisation project of the Department is
not yet complete, the Committee are doubtful as to whether the
Department itself is fully equipped to scrutinise the returns filed online
by the taxpayers. Overall the Committee remain unconvinced about
the reason and justification for introducing the new Form 2F,
particularly the need for a Cash Flow Statement. Therefore, they
recommend that in light of the apprehensions expressed, the Ministry
should make efforts to update the earlier Form 2E by providing more
columns/space in it, instead of introducing another Form, as well as
do away with the provision of a Cash Flow Statement in the Return
Forms 2, 2F and 3 in order to serve the taxpayers in a befitting manner.

8
Reply of the Government
The new forms have been notified keeping in view the
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee. Further, electronic filing
of tax returns has been made mandatory only in the case of companies
and firms liable to audit under section 44AB. Similarly, in the case of
Charitable Trusts and Institutions it is mandatory to file paper return.
In all other cases, tax payers have a menu of choice in the manner in
which the return is filed. In such cases, electronic filing is only one of
the many options.
[F.No. H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]
Recommendation No. 38
The Committee upon examining the various return forms, are of
the view that the option for certain categories of assessees to file their
tax returns in more than one form, may lead to confusion among the
public which is neither in the interest of better tax compliance nor
public at large. The Committee, therefore, emphasize on the need for
reducing and rationalizing the number of return forms with a view to
arrive at minimum and specific returns forms applicable for different
categories of tax assessees.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, the
Government have designed the new Forms so as to correspond to the
sources of income of a tax payer.
[F.No H-11013/12/2006-Parl., dt. 11.7.2007]

9
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE
IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS REPLIES
—Nil—

10
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
—Nil—

11
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

12
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:
(i) Draft Action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 51st Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

13
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)
above with modifications as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

14
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTY-FIRST
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘INTRODUCTION OF
NEW INCOME TAX RETURN FORMS’
Total      % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 1
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 1 100%
have been accepted by the Government
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 1
(para 29-38)]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Nil 00.00%
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil]
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect Nil 00.00%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil]
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect Nil 00.00%
of which final replies of the Government
is still awaited
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil]

SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Introduction of New Income T ax Return Forms]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


COF No. 64
Price : Rs. 25.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 2
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 9
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 10
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 11
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 28th November, 2007......................................... 12
II. Analysis of the Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Forty-first report ....................................................... 14

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Archana Srivastava — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixty-fourth Report on action taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Introduction of New Income
Tax Return Forms”.
2. The Forty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 28th November, 2006. Replies indicating action taken
on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished
by the Government on 11 September, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

64
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Forty-First Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Introduction of New Income Tax Return Forms]
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
