6 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
 
           FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Second  Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005)of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)] 
 
 
 
 
SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of Department of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22  December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22  December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETRIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER I       Report 
 
CHAPTER II      Recommendations/observations which have been  
                          accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III     Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
                          do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
                          replies  
 
CHAPTER IV     Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
                           replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                           by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V      Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
                          final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
      Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 20 December, 2004         
  
    
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by government on the recommendations  
contained in the Second  Report of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the  
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar  - Under Secretary 
      5.  Shri M.L.K. Raja  -  Committee Officer 
(iii) 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairm an, Standing Comm ittee on Finance, having been authorised by the 
Committee to subm it the Report on their behalf present this Sixth Report on action taken by 
Government on the recomm endations contai ned in the Second Report of the Committee 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on De mands for Grants  (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Revenue). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 
August, 2004.  The governm ent furnished the replies indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations on 9 Nove mber and 2 Dece mber, 2004.  The Draft Action Taken Report 
was considered and adopted by the Standing Comm ittee on Finance at their sitting held on 20 
December, 2004. 
 
3. An analysis of action taken by Govern ment on recomm endations contained in 
the Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observation s/recommendations of the Comm ittee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                                                           MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI  
20 December, 2004                                                                              CHAIRMAN,                           
29 Agrahayana 1926 (SAKA)                        STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
 
 
  
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This report of the Standing Co mmittee on Finance deals with action 
taken by G overnment on the rec ommendations contained in their Second 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  on De mands for Grants (2004-2005) of 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Re venue) which was presented to Lok  
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes hav e been rec eived from the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations contained in the Report. 
These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. No.   1 (para nos. 14 &  16), 2 (para no. 24 & 25), 3 (para 40),  
6 (para 79), 7 (para 84) and 9 (para 93) 
  (Chapter II- Total 8 ) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Sl. No.  1 (para no. 15), 4 (par a 62), 5 (para nos. 70, 71,72 & 73) 
and 8 (para 89) 
(Chapter III-Total 7) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. No. 1 (para  13 & 17), 3  (para 41) & 4 (Para 63) 
           (Chapter IV-Total 4) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observations in respect of which  final rep lies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
Para. No.  Nil 
(Chapter V-Total Nil) 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the 
recommendations contained in Chapter  I and the final re plies in 
respect of the reco mmendations c ontained in Chapter V f or w hich 
only interim replies have been  gi ven b y the Government sh ould be 
furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with t he action taken by t he 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
  

Widening of tax Base 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 13) 
 
5.  The Committee observed that the extent of coverage of t he 
population under the tax umbrella deno ted the equity in contribution of  the 
total population, involved vari ous kinds of livelihood acti vities, towards the  
tax revenue. They further observed th at going by any par ameters on the 
penetration of the reach of the tax administration, the extent of the reach in 
our country was dismal. The Committee noted with the gr eatest concern 
that at the time of  the tabli ng of the Report a v ery meagre number of 
individuals and corporates, as well as  only a few servic es were touched 
upon by the fiscal  policy and admi nistration. The target fixed to be 
achieved by  the end of 2004-2005, so  far as the number  of income tax 
assessees were concerned, was 5 crores. The progress made till then was 
not upt o the mark whi ch was the result of poor  planni ng and 
implementation. The Committee ex pected t he gover nment to tread t he 
path more efficiently and effectively. 
 
6.  The Ministry of Finance (Depar tment of Revenue) i n their action 
taken reply stated as under : 
 
“Projection of incre asing the tax b ase to 5 cror e assessees by 
31-3-2005 was made in the expect ation that by  then c omprehensive 
computerisation of t he Income Tax Department would be compl eted 
and measures like filing of Annual In formation Return disclosing high 
value transac tions w ould become operati onal. Matching of the 
information contained in the Annual Information Returns with the data 
already available with the departme nt was  expec ted to result in 
sharply increasing the tax base. Computerisation of the department is 
at an advanced stage. Section 28 5BA was insert ed in the Income 
Tax Act in 2003 enablin g the government to prescribe the filing of 
information regardi ng high val ue transactions.  Ho wever, se ction 
285BA introduced in 2003 could not be made operational as the rules 
could not  be notif ied (possibly because there was  rethink ing 
regarding the wordi ng of sect ion 285BA). In the Fi nance Act 2004, 
  

section 285BA has been  substituted by a new amended section 
285BA. Furnishing of Annual Inform ation Returns in respect of high 
value transacti ons ent ered in  FY 2004- 05 onwar ds (made 
compulsory by the new Section 285BA) would enable the Department 
to colle ct, collate a nd a nalyze su ch in formation in resp ect of the  
persons who have entered int o th ese tr ansactions. It woul d enabl e 
the Department to identify potential taxpayers and bring them into the 
tax net. T his is  ex pected to result in subs tantial increase in the 
number of assessees. 
 
The Department has also taken various other steps for widening 
the tax base which are: 
 
I  One-by-Six Scheme 
 
 To bring potential taxpayer s in the tax system, t he O ne by Si x 
Scheme was introduced.  Under this  scheme, persons are obliged to 
file their returns of income if they  fulfill any one of the six specified 
criteria.   
 
II Compulsory Quoting of Permanent Account Number 
 
 There is a stat utory obligation u/s 139A of the I ncome Tax Act 
and Rule 114B of  the Income Tax Rules requiring compulsory 
quoting of PAN in certain high value transactions.  
 
III Tax Information Network (TIN) 
 
 The Tax Information Network (TIN ) has been recently set  up in 
order to act as a Tax related info rmation base whic h can be utilized 
by the Department for the purpose of widening and deepening the tax 
base of the country.   
 
IV Publicity and Awareness Campaign  
 
In order to educate the taxpayers as to their responsibilities fo r 
payment of direct  tax, the De partment has  launched v arious 
advertisement campaigns  which wo uld enable inc reased v oluntary 
compliance of tax.   
 
V Central Information Branch (CIB) 
 
 The Cent ral Information Br anch of the Depar tment col lects 
information from thir d part y sources regarding certai n hi gh val ue 
  

transactions.  This informatio n is collated and analyzed and 
subsequently disseminated for the purpose of widening the tax base. 
 
VI Other Measures 
 
(a) Extending the applicability of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) and 
Tax Collection at Source (TCS) provisions to cover various 
financial activities. 
(b) Compulsory filing of return by companies w.e.f. 1/4/2001.” 
 
7.  The C ommittee take note of the various measures taken by 
the Government to widen the tax base in the Country.  They are of the 
considered opini on that these m easures would not be sufficient to 
achieve the ambitious target of bringing 5 crores assessees in to the 
tax net unl ess com prehensive comp uterisation of the Income-ta x 
Department has been completed.  Th ey have been inf ormed that the 
projection o f in creasing the tax base to  5 cro res assessees by 31 st 
March, 2005 was made in the expectation that by then comprehensive 
computerization of  the I ncome-tax Department would be compl eted 
and measures like filing of Annual Information Return (AIR) disclosing 
high val ue transactions would become operational.  They are, 
however, distressed to not e that littl e has been done i n this regar d.  
Neither th e co mprehensive co mputerisation o f th e In come tax 
Department seems to  h ave been  completed nor filing of A nnual 
Information Retur n has been made operationa l within time.  The 
Committee view the lapse seriously as the delay in the implementation 
of the above would directly affect the Government’s ability to tap more 
revenue and hence loss of potential revenue to the exch equer. They 
want that  Gov ernment s hould ma ke concerted effort s in the area of  
computerisation of the Department at the earlie st, only then real fruits 
of the various measures taken by the Government could be achieved. 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 1,  Para No. 16) 
 
 8.   The Committee noticed that on ly a few thousand tax payers filed 
their return with income over Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 25 lakhs, though it was 
a frequent phenomenon that lakhs and some times crores of rupees were 
spent lavishly on social occasions like marriage etc. They further observed 
that more revenue could be  realised if only more attention and steps were 
initiated to tap such sources. 
 
9.   The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) in their action taken 
reply have stated as under : 
 
 “Instructions have been issued to  all Directors General of Income 
Tax (Investigati on) to carr y out enquiries in appropriate c ases 
involving expenditure on social occasions like marriages, etc.” 
 
10. The Committee are not satisfied w ith the reply furnished by 
the Government w ith regard to th eir specific observation as to w hy 
there were only a few thousand tax payers who filed their return with 
income over Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 25 lakhs though it w as frequent  
phenomenon that lakhs and some times crores of rupees w ere spent 
lavishly o n social occasions like marriage etc.  The Government’s 
reply is silent on the issue as to w hy there are less number of 
assessees, showing their income more than Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs.  25 
lakhs, w hen there is a general tendency of rising ostentatious 
expenditure.  They w ant the Government to take effective measures 
to unearth hidden incomes and desire  that a copy  of t he 
instructions that have been issu ed to the Direct ors General of 
Income tax, as we ll as the action taken over such  instructions 
and the result thereof, should be furnished to the Committee as 
early as possible. 
  

 
 
Recommendation ( Sl. No. 1, Para No. 17) 
 
 
11.  The Committ ee r ecommended that the efforts taken by the 
Government to bring in more tran sactions under the Tax  Deduc ted at  
Source (TDS) shoul d be ext ended to cover maxi mum transactions which 
involve major cash transactions. The Committ ee furt her desired the 
Government to apprise t hem periodically about t he status of the ext ent of 
coverage. Th e Co mmittee a lso de sired the G overnment to expedit e the 
process of covering all the ser vices, except a very few basic and essential 
services, under the tax net. 
  12.   The Ministr y of Finance (Department of Re venue) in their 
action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Prior to the amendment made by the F inance (No.2) Ac t, 
2004, tax was required to be deducted at source at the time of 
payment of the following incomes: - 
 
1. Salar y 
2. Interest on securities 
3. Other interest 
4. Winnings from crossword puzzle/games 
5. Winnings from horse race 
6. Payments made to contractors and sub-contractors 
7. Insur ance commission 
8. Sums paid to Non-resident sports person 
9. Payment in respect of deposits under NSS 
10. Payments on accounts of repurchase of units by Mutual 
Funds/UTI 
11. Commission on sale of lottery 
12. Commi ssion/brokerage 
13. Rent 
14. Professi onal/Technical service 
15. Sums paid to non-residents 
16. Income from units to offshore funds 
17. Income from foreign currency bonds or shares of India 
Company  
18. Income of FIIS from securities. 
  

 
The Finance (No.2) Act, 2004 has amended the Income-
tax Act, 1961, to provid e for deduction of ta x at source at t he 
rate o f 1 0% i n c ase o f p ayment of compensation, in cases 
where the payment exceeds Rs. 1 lakh on acquisition of certain 
immovable property (other than agricultural land).”   
 
13.  The Committee expressed  their serious con cern when they 
observed that very few number of individuals, corporates and services 
were touched upon  b y the fiscal policy and ad ministration.  The y 
expressed their app rehension that  the progress w hich w as not upt o  
the mark might be due to poor pl anning and its implementation.  They 
therefore desired the Government to  tread the path efficientl y and  
effectively and expedite the process of covering all the services except 
a fe w ba sic essen tial under the tax net and also to bring more 
transactions involving large amount of cash un der tax deducted at 
source.  The Com mittee are not sat isfied w ith the repl y of the 
Government w hich is silent about the steps/measures taken b y th e 
Government in respect of extendi ng the coverage of services under  
the tax net and bri ng transactions  involving major cash under tax 
deducted at source.   The y reiterate their earlier recommend ation and 
would like to be app rised of the specific steps/measures taken b y the 
Government in this regard from time to time. 
  

 
Appeals/Arrears of Revenue 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 41) 
 
14.     The Committee were informed that 78 per cent of the tax revenue 
locked up as arrears were from ju st 400 cases , which indicated t he 
concentration of disputes with a few and wh ich, if were to be taken up in a 
focused manner, would result in fruitful realization of such arrears.   The 
Committee conveyed that it would be ap preciative if the Government took  
particular interest in pursuing those persons who had taken refuge under VDIS 
Scheme introduced in 1997 to m ake their black money into white and did not 
file returns thereafter.  The Committ ee desired to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
 
15.   The reply of the Government on the above is as under : 
 
“The recommendati on of th e Standing Committee is  being 
considered by the Central Board of Direct Taxes and the action 
taken shall be intimated to the Committee shortly.” 
 
16.     The Committee w hile appreciating the fact that the 
Committee’s recommendation is under consi deration of the 
CBDT, are concerned about the delay in finalising the action to be 
taken in this regard .  The Co mmittee expect the CBDT  to take u p 
the issue more seriousl y and finalise the proposed action 
expeditiously. 
 
Efficiency Parameters 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 63) 
 
17.     The Committee obser ved lapses under the indirect taxes 
regarding handling of the Cour t cases and the Customs vigil ance cases and 
also the abnormal delays at  all the level s, in representing t he government’s 
  

cases in the Courts, resulting in losing of many cases, thus causing crores of 
revenue loss.  They took note of th e fact that the action taken by the 
government on these lapses was  almo st absent, thus making one wonder  
whether any accountability existed at a ll.  It was further observed that the 
pendency in t he custo ms vi gilance cases had gone up.  T he Committee 
therefore desired th e gover nment to take not e of those obser vations and 
comply with these in letter and spirit. 
 
18.   The Mini stry of Finance (Department of Re venue) in their action 
taken reply have stated as under : 
“The cas es of dis missal bec ause of delay  was  a c ause for  
concern f or the Departm ent and had been criti cised by the former 
Attorney General.  
Enquiries conduct ed revealed that  in l arge number of cases 
delay had oc curred on ac count of time t aken by the panel c ounsels 
for re-filing matters afte r curing defects pointe d out by the Supreme 
Court Registry. The normal ti me permitted for curing such defects is 
28 days as per t he Supreme Co urt Proc edure. Howev er, the 
advocates, who have been engaged to undertake such assignments, 
did not adhere to the limitat ion. In se veral in stances, th e a ction 
initiated by this Offi ce with the Law Minis try has  res ulted in  
termination of the servi ces of erring advocates from the panel. In a 
recent case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court took a very serious view and 
directed t he Department to initiate  s erious ac tion agains t the panel 
counsel for misconduct. Accordingly, a complaint was filed before the 
Bar Council of Punjab & Haryana where the counsel is registered. 
 
 As r egards d elay in  pro cessing th e ca se file d b y th e D epartment, 
there has been consi derable improv ement and efforts  are on to 
achieve max imum effic iency by  reduc ing certain inter-mediate level 
operations, such as  seeking the advice of th e counsels or the local 
branch Secretariat etc. since appeal s are required to be filed on t he 
advice of Law Officer at Delhi.  Such procedures  will prov ide 
maximum efficiency on this count. However, delay s on account of 
drafting by the panel advocat es a nd preparation of paper books at  
the time of filing needs monitori ng. Adequate mechanism is being 
worked out in c onsultation with the Central Agency Section through 
the officers of t he Directorate of  legal Affairs to monitor abov e 
process.” 
 
  

19.  The Committee note w ith satisf action that the point is 
well tak en by  the Gove rnment with regard to the concern 
expressed by the Committee over the dismissals of cases because 
of delay  in representing the cas es in time.  How ever, th e 
Government’s approach towards handling the issue of laxity on the 
part of the counsels in repr esenting th e cases is n ot co nvincing.  
The Committee take note of the f act that adequate m echanism for 
monitoring the process of drafti ng and preparation of paper books 
is bei ng worke d out in cons ultation wit h the C entral Age ncy 
Section through the officers of the Directorate of legal affairs. 
20. The Committee th erefore desire the G overnment to 
finalise t he monit oring m echanism ex peditiously to monitor t he 
drafting by the panel advocates and preparation of pape r books at 
the time of filing of cases, so th at the delay  in pr ocess could be  
eliminated.  In addition, the Gove rnment may think of bl ack listing 
those panel advocates who are resp onsible for delay s resulting in 
dismissal of De partment’s ca ses, a nd em panel ot her com petent 
advocates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 14) 
 
 One of the many st eps taken by the Government, to  bring in more 
number of  per sons and se rvices under  the t ax co verage, is compulsory 
filing of Annual Information Return (AI R), whi ch mandat es furni shing of  
information regar ding high spending. There have been public concerns 
about the procedures and the expenses that are to be accounted for, while 
complying with the return. It is understood that here is a necessity to clarify 
many of the doubts and f ears, one am ong them bei ng t he definiti on of  
“person/assessees”. The Committee desire that the Government come out 
as early as possible, with clear-cut clarifications. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 With a vie w to e nsure clarity, ne cessary changes rela ting to Annual 
Information Return have been made in the proposed Section 285BA of the 
Income Tax Act, 1 961, while carrying out Government amendments to the 
Finance (No. 2) Bill, 2004.  The Sect ion, as now incorporated, through the 
Finance (No.2) Act, 2004, provides that  such Returns are t o be file d only 
by assessees or certain Government  agenci es who ar e responsibl e for 
registering or maint aining the book s o f acco unts or oth er do cuments 
containing a record of any specified financial transaction under any law for 
the time being in force.  
 The Annual Information Return is required to be furnished in respect 
of such specified financial transactions as are registered or recorded by an 
assessee or certai n G overnment agenci es on or after 1 st April 2004.   
CBDT i s in the pr ocess of pre scribing R ules regarding the specif ied 
financial transactions in respect of wh ich Annual Informat ion Return is to 
be filed. The differ ent monetary values for these transactions in respect of 
different persons would al so be presc ribed under the Rules t o be fr amed 
by CBDT.  
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 16) 
 
 It is noticed by the Committee that  only a few thousand tax payers 
file their return with income over Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 25 lakhs, though it is 
a frequent phenomenon that lakhs an d some times crores of rupees are 
spent lavishly on social occasions like marriage etc. More revenue could 
be realised if only more attention an d steps ar e initiated to tap such 
sources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Instructions have been issued to all Directors General of Income Tax 
(Investigation) to carry out enquiri es in appropriate cases involving 
expenditure on social occasions like marriages, etc. 
     (H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 24 & 25) 
 
  The Committee note with grave co ncern that Tax-GDP ratio in    
India continues to be ve ry low when compared no t only  with developed 
countries but many develo ping countr ies as well. They feel that  this 
distortion, which is largely due to the fact  that large number of prospective 
taxpayers are yet t o be tapped a nd br ought under the tax net, coul d be 
rightly aligned with more  commitment on the part  of the government to 
spread their tax net. 
 
 The Committee under stand that the ongoing ta x reform as well as 
the count ry’s commitments to variou s international ag reements have 
resulted in reducing, sometimes complete removal of taxes,  thus resulting  
in loss of revenue to t he exchequer. The Government ’s efforts till now, to 
augment the tax resources through various measures have not resulted in 
substantially increasing the revenue, which paints a pessimistic picture on 
the Tax GDP ratio. The recent report of that task force on i mplementation 
of the Fiscal Responsi bility and Budget Manage ment Act, 2003, also 
indicates that a country like Brazil, which is on par with our country in most 
aspects, actually has double the ta x GDP ratio. The Committee reit erate 
  

that the government should make earnest efforts in order to achieve higher 
Tax-GDP Ratio. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Direct Taxes  
 
 While it is true that I ndia has one of the lowest levels of the tax TDP 
ratio in the worl d, there has been a significant increase in direct tax  
revenue. The Direct Tax-GDP ratio ha s st eadily increased fr om 1.9. in 
1990-91 to 3.8 i n 2003-2004. This improvement in the r atio over a period 
of a decade has been possibl e on account of various tax reforms aimed at  
widening the tax base, simp lification of tax structur e, lessening of the tax 
burden leading to increased compliance and improving the efficiency of tax 
administration. 
 
In the Budget of 2004, measures have been taken to widen the area 
of tax deduction at sour ce by providing for tax  deduc tion from 
compensation paid in ac quisition of immovabl e pr operty (ot her than 
agricultural land) and coll ection of ta x at source in respect of par king 
auctions, toll auctions, mini ng and qu arrying lease. In addition, certain 
other provisions in t he said Budget aim at plugging revenue leakages and 
rationlization of exi sting provisions . All these steps, put together, will 
augment collection of revenue and thereby will bring about further 
improvement in the Direct Tax-GDP ratio. 
 
Indirect Taxes 
 
It has been the general poli cy of the Government to widen the tax 
base and to improve the Tax-G DP ratio as far as possi ble. The 
recommendations of  the Committee co ntained in the above paragraphs  
are accepted by the Government in prin ciple and the same will be kept in 
mind duri ng the formulatio n of the G overnment’s poli cy in respect of  
customs, central excise and service tax levies. 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 40) 
 
The Committee observe that the amount l ocked up in tax 
disputes have increased ov er the last year.  It is highly disturbing to 
note that there are about 4868 cases where arrear demand in each 
case is Rs. 1 crore and above, amounting in all to Rs. 68,4777 crores 
as on 31.12.2003.  This in spit e of the repeated observati ons and 
recommendations by the committe e, and promises made by the 
government to the contrary.  The casual approach of the Government 
in revealing the fact that lakhs of  cases are pending as on date and 
that out of the stated 88,000 cases under the Direct Taxes, arrears 
amounting to Rs. 17000 crore are undisputed and a target of Rs. 
7,000 crores has been fixed, shows the enormity of the situation.  The 
reasons given for such pili ng up of pendancy in cases and hence 
accumulation of such huge tax arrear s, are on account of shortage in 
number as well as strengths of the Benches of Appell ate Tribunals, 
stay orders, delay in clearance of cases by Committee on Disputes 
and delayed liquidation process.  It i s noted that the vacancies in the 
number of the Appellate Tri bunals have almost been fi lled up.  The 
way in which the Chief Commissioners of income Tax have com e out 
themselves, i n fi xing the target of  R s. 7,000 crores by the way of 
realization of tax arrears, indi cates the real capacity of the 
Government machinery to do much better than what they are doi ng 
now.  The committee feel that there should be no difficul ty in realizing 
the amount of Rs. 17000 crores appr oximately which in undisputed.  
The committee expect the government to involve the field officers 
upto the level of lowest supervisory offi cers, in arri ving at all the 
targets.  The Government shoul d replicate the endeavor tow ards 
customer friendliness, i n making the employees more motivated to 
execute their responsibi lities.  It is once again reiterated that the 
government should gear up and see t hat there is no slackness found 
on the part of the Government in  their deali ng with the Appel late 
Authority and Courts, so that th e cases are pursued  with renewed 
vigour.  The committee hope that the multi-pronged approach that the 
  

Government propose to use, would help in realizing the pending tax 
arrears as well as in speeding up the pending cases. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Direct Taxes 
The Government would like to assure  the Committee that all efforts 
would be made to recover maxi mum possible amount from the arrears  of 
direct taxes.  A  Task Force on Arre ars Recovery has been constituted by 
the G overnment wi th the mandate to evolve and i mplement a multi-
pronged strategy for  recovery of arre ars.  The Task For ce would ensure 
that the Departmental representation before courts and Tribunals is proper 
and that there are no delays on account of adjournments.  
 
Indirect Taxes 
A target of Rs. 750 crores of a rrears of cust oms revenue has been 
fixed for recovery during the current  financi al year.  The Board has 
prescribed a detailed acti on plan t o be followed to  achi eve thi s t arget 
through a slew of measures such as  pur suing early di sposal of ar rears 
covered by court cases, recovery of arrears free from restraints, activation  
of Recovery Cells in the filed form ations, finalisation of provi sional 
assessments, spot payment s during internal audit, enforcement of bonds 
etc, to be monit ored closely by the Chief Co mmissioners.  In additi on, a 
Task Force under a Chief Commissioner dedicated to effecting recovery of 
arrears has been constitut ed. The Ta sk For ce is to d evise effe ctive 
strategies and develop innovative approaches to collection of tax arrears. 
The Boar d is const antly revi ewing and monit oring the pr ogress in 
recovery of arrears. Cases in wh ich the T ribunal has  pass ed orders  
favourable to the Department have been identified so that the filed 
formations may  purs ue them for earl y recovery of ou tstanding dues .  
Senior off icers of the Depar tment have al so been advised to meet 
assesses to try and resolve t ax di sputes before they go into litigation.  
Cases of high val ue have been i dentified for  earl y adjudication and 
Commissioner of  Adjudi cation ar e bei ng appointed f or th is pur pose.  All  
these measures are expected to significantly reduce arrears of revenue.                               
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 79) 
 
        The Committee observe that the reply with reference to the major 
expenses under thi s particular head ar e not comple te in as much as the 
Government have not mentioned anything on the major expenses, namely, 
petrol, paper and telephones as  stated in their earlier reply  and expec t a 
precise reply in t his regard.  The Co mmittee desire t hat the Government 
explore the possibility of se nding the notices digitally,  instead of sending it 
on the paper at least to t he publication agencies so t hat the cost can be  
reduced.  The Committee ob serve with satisfaction  that almost all the 
vacancies of Members hav e been filled up and expe ct that the rate of 
disposal of cases henceforth would increase. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The details of expenditur e in curred on petr ol, paper  and 
telephones during the last 3 years by the office of CESTAT may kindly be 
seen in Annexure. 
As regards the Committee’s reco mmendations to explore the 
possibility of sending notices digitally instead of sending it on the paper at 
least to t he publi cation agenci es so th at the cost  can be r educed.  It  is  
stated that the Higher Courts  such as Supreme Court make it mandat ory 
for the appellant to furnish certified copies of judgments  pronounc ed by  
CESTAT and it i s, theref ore, necessar y for  CESTAT  t o su pply certified  
copies of the judgments so that these can be appealed against before the 
Supreme Court.  The computerisation programme of CESTAT is presently 
being evaluated by NIC and after implementation of computerisation 
programme, it will be po ssible for CESTAT to make available their 
judgments on CESTAT website f or t he use of publication agenci es.  
However, till such time the CESTAT  would continue to supply such 
certified copies to all concerned, as these are mandatory for filing of 
appeals in the Higher Courts.  
 
ANNEXURE  
            Details of Expenditure for the Last Three Years  
  

 
S.No
. 
Items Period Delhi Kolkata Mumbai Chennai Bangalore Total 
1 Petrol-Rs. 
Ltrs. 
2001-02 559948 
17789 
86441 
1040 
109833 
3400 
31972 
1265 
56391 
1788 
844585 
25282 
 Rs. 
Ltrs. 
2002-03 508974 
15949 
36812 
560 
202828 
5814 
22533 
690 
66218 
1905 
837365 
24918 
 Rs. 
Ltrs 
2003-04 512819 
14328 
36872 
235 
 
312328 
8400 
32045 
879 
111007 
2855 
1005071 
26697 
2 Photocopy 
paper 
2001-02 310950 21480 145725 46980 56203 581338 
  2002-03 299031 22165 191000 40536 74507 627239 
  2003-04 321965 25380 114700 40910 86557 589512 
3 Postage & 
Franking 
2001-02 588896 56000 695016 225375 126000 1691287 
  2002-03 499952 100375 900379 213417 150000 1864123 
  2003-04 637720 152224 1085646 24000 200000 2099590 
4 Telephone 2001-02 653865 78840 245614 118482 62239 1159040 
  2002-03 469346 40235 244232 98724  45657 898194 
  2003-04 517329 39089 328197 120435  71949 1076999 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 84) 
The Committee note that the actual expenditures have been much less 
than the Budgetary Estimates for the year 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, but 
the provision for the current year is still on the higher side.  The  
Committee desire that the provisions  should be based on the actual  
expenditure so that the budgetary exercise becomes more meaningful.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     The Budget Estimates for the ensuing financial year is finalised 
by January/Februar y of  the year wher eas the actual expenditure are 
made availabl e  after cl osure of the financi al year.  The Budget  
Estimates for the year 2003-04 were finalised in January, 2003 whereas 
the actual expenditure for the year 2002-03 was made available after the 
end of financial year.  Similarly, the actual expenditure for 2003-04 was 
not available when the Budget Estimates 2004-05 was finalised. 
  However, the Heads of the Budg etary Units are being advised that 
the provisions in the above head s s hould be bas ed on the ac tual 
expenditure for the earlier year  so that the budgetary exercise becomes 
  

more meaningf ul.  They are al so be ing advised to follow the austerit y 
measures to contain the expenditure in the above head. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 93) 
 
The Committee not e with ser ious co ncern the wide fluc tuations in 
BE, RE and Act uals in 2003- 04.  They  are equall y concerned to note that 
against a lower actuals  in 2003-04,  the Gov ernment has  enhanced its  
projections at BE stage i n 2004-05 quite subs tantially.  T hey are not 
convinced by the reas ons adduced by  the Gov ernment in this regard.  
They expect that Govern ment will take all nece ssary approvals before 
making any provision in the Budget Es timates. They want the Government 
to project realistic estimates in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 It has already been explai ned to  the Committee that the Budget 
Provisions were made in BE 2003-04,  based on the expectation that  the 
proposals under consideration in the Ministry and also by the Committee of 
Secretaries towards procurement of Marine Fleet and Container Scanners 
for Anti-Smuggling purposes  will be finalized duri ng the year and the  
procurement could be made.  The pr ovisions were re duced in the RE 
2003-04 when it became cl ear that procurement of only two Scanners and 
no Vessels during 2003-04 were sanctioned.  As the proposals for Vessels 
and mor e Scanners are expected to be f inalized during 2004-05, 
necessary provision has b een made in BE 2004-05.   This will be very  
closely scrutinized at RE stage. 
 The Controlling Authorit ies have been advise d to ensure that any 
budgetary projection should be made with the approval of the competent  
authority and such estimates shall be, as far as possible, realistic. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMI TTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 15) 
 
 It is seen that the government is, as far as their tactics regarding 
bettering of tax complianc e are concerned, are caug ht in a dilemma over 
the approach in their tax administration efforts. On the on e hand they feel 
that they shoul d shed their authoritat ive, interferi ng attitude and on the 
other, they feel t hat reliance on volu ntary tax compliance has not yi elded 
the much desired r esults. Perhaps, with the focu s on non-intrus ive but 
penetrating met hods of collecting data on the inc omes, through the 
instruments like Annual Information Returns (AIR ) and Tax Information 
Network, the government woul d be ab le to widen the tax  base and better  
compliance. The Committee advise that while all out efforts are to be taken 
by the government to be assessee – friendly, the tax evasion and 
perpetrators of tax ev asion s hould be dealt  with strictly. Whil e the 
Committee desire that every effort should be made towards mobi lizing 
additional revenues but at the same  time it should be ens ured that a 
genuine taxpayer i s not harassed in any  manner by  the income tax 
authorities. The recent pr oposals made with r egard to t he f alsification of  
books of  account  or document s and obligation to furnish annual 
information return need to  be suitably amended/revisited in this context as  
the Committee feel t hat this can caus e undue harassmen t/anguish to the 
honest and good intentioned persons. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The field formations have been instructed to ensure that tax evasion 
and per petrators of tax evasi on are deal t with strictly while at the same 
time ensuring that genui ne t axpayers are not  ha rassed by income tax 
authorities.  As regards the concer n of the Committee regar ding the 
amendments made by th e F inance (No. 2) Ac t, 2004 with respec t to 
falsification of books of account or document and ob ligation to file Annual 
Information Return, the comments are as under:   
  

 
Prosecution for falsification of books of account or document (Sec.277A)  
 
Provisions of the new s ection 277A proposed to be ins erted in the 
Income Tax Act by the Fi nance (No. 2) Bill, 20 04 have been amended.  
The provisions as now introduced by the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004 makes 
it clear that the int ent to enable an y other person to evade t ax has to be 
proved in a char ge under the section.  The pr ovision aim to prosecute a 
person who willfully and wi th intent to enable an y other person to evade 
any tax or  interest or penalt y chargeable or impossible under the Income-
tax Act, 1961, makes or c auses to be made any ent ry or statement whi ch 
is false in any books of accounts or other documents.  Thus, there will be a 
heavy onus on the Income-tax Department to establish in a court that false 
entries in books of acco unts or other document were made by  a pers on 
willfully, knowingly and with  intent to enable anothe r person to evade tax, 
interest or  penalty chargeable or impossible under th e Income-tax Act, 
1961. 
 
Obligation to furnish Annual Information Return  
 
Section 285BA of the Income Tax Act cast s an obligation on 
assessees and certain Government agencies to furnish annual information 
return about third party high v alue trans actions.  By way of Government 
amendments, the provisions of the section were suitably amended so as to 
provide that the transactions whi ch are to be reported in such return and 
the value thereof ar e to be  prescribed by t he Board.  T he return is to be 
furnished by onl y such persons who ar e responsible for r egistering, or 
maintaining a record in  t he books of accoun t, of t he prescribed 
transactions. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 62) 
 
The committee ar e constrained to no te that the perfor mance of the 
revenue collection agencies are not up to the mar k and le ave much t o be 
desired upon.  The committee consi dered a few parameters while gauging 
  

the performance of the depart ment vis-à-vis the targets and the minimum 
obligatory expectations.  Under the Direct Taxes it is noted that mandatory 
inspections that are to be  carried upon have not be en fulfilled by the field 
formations.  While 15 of the CCIT charges have not c onducted even a  
single assessment inspection during the year 2003-2004, it is  inescapable 
to note that 3 of t hem did not conduct any of the pr escribed inspections.  
The performance on the assessment wor k also denotes that earnes t 
efforts are needed to perform better. The committee also take serious note 
of the fact that scrut iny assessments have gone do wn by 25%.  S teps for 
increasing scrutiny assessments need to be taken in the right earnest.  As 
far as  the work  of Internal audit is  concerned it is  noticed that while the 
number of pendency cases have increased manifold during the year 2003-
2004, the number of cases settled during the same period have gone down 
substantially. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The position of inspection reports has since been reviewed and the 
position as on 15. 9.2004 is t hat as sessment inspection r eports from 25 
more CCIT Charges have been recei ved.  Follow-up action is being taken 
to obtain reports from the remaining CC IT Charges. As f ar as t he work of  
Internal Audit is concerned it is noticed that while the number of pendency  
cases have increased manifold during the year 20 03-2004, the number of 
cases settled during the same period have gone down substantially. 
 
The position of the assessments is as under: - 
 
Year Officers 
Deployed 
Scrutiny 
Assessment 
Summary Total Number 
of cases  
selected for 
scrutiny 
2001-2002 4383 168010 19958558 20126568 83129 
2002-2003 4436 172410 33792795 33965205 844885 
Percentag
e Increase/ 
Decrease 
+1.2 +2.62 +69.31 +68.76  
 
 With regard to observation of the Committee that scrutiny 
assessments have gone do wn by  25% (in financ ial year 2001-2002), it 
may please be seen from t he date that scruti ny assessment s have 
  

increased by 2.62% in the year 2002- 2003. In the y ear 2001-2002, a very  
small number of cases, i.e.,  83129 were sele cted for scr utiny ( due to 
restructuring of t he Income Tax Depa rtment) where as in the year 2002-
2003, a large number of 844885 cases were selected for scrutiny, thereby 
increasing the scr utiny basket manifold Although, there was onl y a small  
increase of 1.2%  in t he number of o fficers deployed on ass essment duty, 
yet during the year 2002- 03 t he number of su mmary a ssessment 
increased by  69.3% and the dispos al of scruti ny ca ses also sh owed a 
growth of 2.62%. This was possible only due to serious and sincere efforts 
on the part of work force deployed in this area.  The di sposal of cases 
selected for scrutiny du ring 2002-03 will be du ly reflected in the 
subsequent years. 
  
To reduce the pendenc y and to expedit e the settlement of pending 
objections following Steps/Action have been taken: 
 An Action Plan for t he F.Y. 2004 -05 for Chain Audit wor k (Internal 
Audit) has been formul ated and circulated to all the Chief  
commissioners/Directors Ge neral vid e letter No. DIT (Au dit)/Action 
Plan/04-05 dated 16.9.2004. 
As per the above Action Plan entire pendency of Auditable Cases as 
on 1. 4.2004 has to be liqui dated by 31 .10.2004. Similarly all the Audit  
objections pending as on 1.4.2004 have to be settled by 31.10.2004. 
As regards the audit work for current year, th e auditable cases have 
to be audited within the quarter following the quarter in which they become 
auditable.  Simil arly the audit object ions r aised during t he Current year  
have t o be settled within a period of  90 days of rece ipt of the Audit 
objections 
Chief Co mmissioners/Director G enerals hav e been as ked to 
personally ensure effective monitoring of the Audit Work in their respective 
jurisdiction and r eport the pr ogress to  their Zonal Member with c opy to 
DGIT (Admn.).  The progress of Internal Audit work is also being monitored 
by the Directorate of Income-Tax (Audit). 
With the above steps, it is expect ed that there will be considerable 
improvement in disposal of Auditable cases as well as in their settlement.   
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.)                       
 
  

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 Para Nos. 70,71, 72 & 73) 
 
 The Committee not e that the Go vernment plan to introduce an 
uniform VAT rat e throughout the coun try.  They are however gi ven to 
understand that some stat es hav e ex pressed res ervations.  T he 
Committee desire that these concerns section should be addressed to at 
the earliest. 
 
The State of Har yana can be take n as an ex ample to show that 
the implementation of VAT can very well lead to increase in revenue. 
 
The Committee expect that the VAT implementation would be 
done in right earnest and in time, to reap the intended benefits. 
 
The Committee would appr eciate if the Government takes all 
possible efforts to co nvince and cooperat e with the States in 
implementing VAT by 1 st April 2005, as fi xed by  the Empowered 
Committee, and apprise thi s Committee from time to time, about the 
extent of VAT implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India is playing a co ordinating and facilitating role.  
In a meeting of the Em powered Committee of St ate F inance Minis ters 
held on 18 th June, 2004, t here was broad consensus to implement VAT 
w.e.f. 1.4.2005.  In view of lack  of preparedness , Uttar Pradesh 
expressed reservations about implementation of VAT from that date.  The 
Empowered Committee is addressing the issue suitably. 
 
The observations of the Hon’ ble Standing Committee on Fi nance 
have been communicated t o Secretary, Empowered Committee of State 
Finance Ministers. 
 
The Empowered Committee has alr eady arrived at a consensus to 
implement VAT w.e.f. 1.04.05 and all necessary administrative steps are 
being taken to ensure that VAT is introduced in right earnest and in time. 
  

The Centr al Gover nment is extending all possi ble support  to States in 
this regard. 
Central Government is ac ting as a facilitator in  implementation of VAT 
by States/UTs and i s also ext ending al l possible support to States in this 
regard. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para No. 89) 
 
The Committee observes that the whole process of budget estimates 
on this head are done in a lackluster manner.  It is surprising to note that in 
an era where precision scientific evaluation and estimation tec hniques are 
available, the G overnment has st ated that the clear pict ure emerges only 
at the stage of Revised Estimates.  The Committee expect the government 
to be mor e serious in making budget ary prov isions so that the amount 
does not result into savings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concern expressed by t he Standing Committee is noted and all 
efforts will be made to ensure full utilization of funds under the head, 
“Acquisition of Ready Built Office Accommodation”. 
 
With a view to ensure full utilization of funds, Central Board of Direct 
Taxes has recently set up a Directorate of Infrastructure which is entrusted 
with the task of centrall y examining,  scrutini zing, finali zation of  all 
proposals for acquisition/construc tion of offic e accommodation and 
implementation and monitoring of all such  projects.  This step is expected 
to result in proper utilization of funds. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.)
  

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 13) 
 
 The ex tent of cov erage of the population under the tax umbrell a 
denotes the equity in cont ribution of the total popu lation, involved various 
kinds of livelihood acti vities, towa rds the tax revenue. Going by any 
parameters on the penetration of the re ach of the tax administration, the 
extent of t he reach in our country i s dismal. The Committe e note with the 
greatest concern that at present a very  meagre number of indi viduals and 
corporates, as well as only a few serv ices are touched upon by the fiscal 
policy and admi nistration. The target fi xed to be achieved by the end of 
2004-2005, so far as the number of income tax assessees are concerned, 
is 5 c rores. The progres s made thus  far is not upto the mark  which is the 
result of poor planning and implem entation. The Committee expect the 
government to tread the path more efficiently and effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Projection of increasing the t ax base to 5 crore assessees by 31-
3-2005 was made in th e expectation that by  then comprehens ive 
computerisation of the Income Tax Department would be completed and 
measures like filing of Annual Informat ion Return disclosing high value  
transactions woul d become oper ational. Mat ching of the infor mation 
contained in the Annual Informat ion Returns with the data already 
available with the depa rtment was expect ed t o result in sharpl y 
increasing the tax base. Computerisat ion of the department is at an 
advanced stage. Se ction 285BA was inserted in t he Income Tax Act  in 
2003 enabling the governme nt to prescribe the filing of information 
regarding high value transactions.  However, section 285BA introduced 
in 2003 could not be made operational as the rules could not be notified 
(possibly because there was rethinking regarding the wording of section 
  

285BA). In the Fi nance Act 2004, se ction 285BA has be en substituted 
by a new amended sec tion 285BA.  Furnishing of  Annual Information 
Returns in respect of hi gh val ue tran sactions entered in FY 2004-05 
onwards ( made compulsory  by t he new Secti on 285BA) would enable 
the Department to collect, collate and analyze such inf ormation in 
respect of  the persons who have entered into these trans actions. It  
would enable the Department  to identif y potenti al taxpayer s and bri ng 
them into the tax net. This is expected to result in substantial increase in 
the number of assessees. 
 
The Department has also taken various other steps for widening the tax  
base which are: 
 
I  One-by-Six Scheme 
 
 To bring potential t axpayers in  the tax system, the One by Six 
Scheme was introduced.  Under this scheme, pers ons are obliged to file 
their returns of income if they fulfill any one of the six specified criteria.   
 
II Compulsory Quoting of Permanent Account Number 
 
 There is a statutor y obligation u/s 139A of the Income Tax Act and 
Rule 114B of the Income  Tax Rules requiring comp ulsory quoting of  PAN 
in certain high value transactions.  
 
III Tax Information Network (TIN) 
 
 The Tax Information Network (TIN) has been recently set up in order 
to act as a Tax related informatio n base which can be  utilized by the 
Department for the purpose of widening and deepening the tax base of the 
country.   
 
IV Publicity and Awareness Campaign  
 
In order to educate the taxpayers as to their resp onsibilities for 
payment of direct tax, the Department has launched various advertisement 
campaigns which would enable increased voluntary compliance of tax.   
 
  

V Central Information Branch (CIB) 
 
 The Central Information Branch  of  the Department  collect s 
information from third part y sour ces regardi ng certai n high value 
transactions.  Thi s information is collated and analyz ed and subs equently 
disseminated for the purpose of widening the tax base. 
 
VI Other Measures 
 
(a) Extending the applicability of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) 
and Tax Collection at Sour ce (TCS) provi sions to cover 
various financial activities. 
(b) Compulsory filing of return by companies w.e.f. 1/4/2001.  
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 Para No. 17) 
 
 The present efforts of the Gover nment to bring in more transactions 
under the Tax Deducted at Source (T DS) shoul d be ext ended t o cover 
maximum transacti ons whi ch involv e major cash transactions. The  
Committee would appreciate if the Government apprises them peri odically 
about the status of t he extent of coverage. The Co mmittee desire that the  
Government shoul d expedit e the proc ess of co vering all  the servi ces, 
except a very few basic and essential services, under the tax net. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prior to the amendment made by  the Finance (No.2)  Act, 2004, tax 
was requi red t o be deducted at source  at the time of pay ment of the 
following incomes: - 
 
1. Salar y 
2. Interest on securities 
3. Other interest 
4. Winnings from crossword puzzle/games 
5. Winnings from horse race 
6. Payments made to contractors and sub-contractors 
  

7. Insur ance commission 
8. Sums paid to Non-resident sportsperson 
9. Payment in respect of deposits under NSS 
10. Payments on accounts of repurchase of units by Mutual Funds/UTI 
11. Commission on sale of lottery 
12. Commi ssion/brokerage 
13. Rent 
14. Professi onal/Technical service 
15. Sums paid to non-residents 
16. Income from units to offshore funds 
17. Income from foreign currency bonds or shares of India Company  
18. Income of FIIS from securities. 
 
The Fi nance (No.2) Act, 2004 has  amended the Inc ome-tax Ac t, 
1961, to provide for deduction of tax at source at the rate of 10% in case of 
payment of compensation, in cases where the payment exceeds Rs. 1 lakh 
on acquisition of certain immovable property (other than agricultural land).   
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para No. 41) 
 
The Committee were informed that  78 per c ent of the tax  revenue 
locked up as arrears are f rom j ust 40 0 ca ses, w hich indicate s th e 
concentration of di sputes with a f ew and which, if  taken up in a foc used 
manner, would result in fruitful realization of such arrears.   The Committee 
would appreciate if  the G overnment ta kes p articular inter est in p ursuing 
those  per sons who had taken refuge under VDIS Scheme introduced in 
1997 to  make  their black money into  white and did not file them.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken  in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee is being considered 
by the Central Board of Di rect Ta xes and the acti on taken shall be 
intimated to the Committee shortly. 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
  

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 63) 
 
The lapses found under the indirect taxes are concerning the handling of 
the Court cases and t he Customs vigilan ce cases.   There have been 
abnormal delays at all the levels, i n representing the gover nment’s cases in 
the Courts, resulting in losing of many cases, thus causing crores of revenue 
loss.  The action taken by the government on these lapses is  almost absent, 
thus making one won der whether any accountability exists at all.  It is  
observed that p endency in the customs vigilance cases have gone up.  The 
Committee want the gov ernment to ta ke note of these obs ervations and 
comply with these in letter and spirit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The cases of di smissal because of del ay was a cause for concern 
for the Department and had been criticized by the former Attorney General.  
 
Enquiries conduct ed revealed that in lar ge number of cases delay 
had occurred on account of time take n by the panel counsels for re-filing  
matters af ter curi ng defect s pointed out by t he Supreme Court Regi stry. 
The normal time permitted for  curing such defects is 2 8 days as per the 
Supreme Court Proc edure. Howeve r, the adv ocates, who hav e been 
engaged to undertake such  assignments, did not ad here to the limit ation. 
In several instances, the action initiated by this Office with the Law Ministry 
has resulted i n t ermination of the ser vices of  erring advocates from the 
panel. In a recent case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court took a very ser ious 
view and direct ed t he Depart ment to i nitiate s erious ac tion agains t the 
panel c ounsel for misc onduct. Ac cordingly, a complaint was filed before 
the Bar Council of Punjab & Haryana where the counsel is registered. 
 
 As r egards d elay in  pro cessing th e ca se file d b y th e D epartment, 
there has been considerabl e i mprovement and efforts ar e on to achieve 
maximum efficie ncy by red ucing certa in inter- mediate level oper ations, 
such as seeking the advi ce of the counsels or t he local branch Secretariat 
etc. since appeals are required to be filed on the advice of Law Officer at 
Delhi. Such procedures will provi de maximum efficien cy on this count. 
However, del ays on account  of dr afting by  the panel adv ocates and 
  

preparation of paper books at the time of filing needs monitoring. Adequate 
mechanism is bei ng wor ked out in co nsultation with the Central Agency 
Section t hrough the officer s of the Di rectorate of  legal Affairs to monitor 
above process. 
 
(H-11012/6/2004-Parl.) 
 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATiON/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                                  MAJ. GEN (RETD.) B. C. KHANDURI  
20 December, 2004                                                                CHAIRMAN,                
29 Agrahayana 1926 (SAKA)            STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
  

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 20 December, 2004 from 1530 to 1600 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta 
3. Shri Shyama Charam Gupt 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri K. S. Rao 
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary  -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
3. The Committee first too k up fo r consideration th e draft a ction taken report o n the 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). The Committee then 
adopted the same with changes suggested by some of the Members as shown in Annexure I.  
4. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
5. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
6. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
7. XX   XX   XX   XX.    
8. The Committee then a uthorised the Chairman to finalise the Report s in the  light of  
amendments sug gested as al so to m ake ve rbal and othe r con sequential changes a nd p resent the  
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

                                                                                               Annexure 
 
Amendments/modifications in the draft Action taken Report on Sixth Report 
 
 
Page Para Line Amendment/modification 
 
7 10 4    For          “ The Committee have taken note of the 
Government’s re sponse to  the ir 
recommendation to follow up lavish 
expenditures on so cial occasions like 
marriage etc., to tap such resources 
for realisi ng more  revenue.  T he 
Committee” 
 
Substitute    “The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reply furnished by the Government with 
regard to their specific observation as to 
why there were only a few thousand tax 
payers who filed their return with income 
over Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 25 lakhs  
though it was frequent  phenomenon that 
lakhs and some times crores of rupees 
were spent lavishly on social oc casions 
like marriage etc.  The Government’s 
reply is s ilent on the  issue as to why  
there are less number of assessees, 
showing their income more than Rs. 10 
lakhs and Rs.  25 lak hs, when there is  a 
general tendency of risi ng ost entatious 
expenditure.  They want the Government 
to take effective measures to uneart h 
hidden incomes and desire” 
 
  

  
APPENDIX 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
  
                      Total       % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations                    19    
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which                                     8                               42% 
have been accepted by the Government     
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, (para no. 14 & 16), 
2 (para no. 24 & 25), 7 (para no. 84) and 9 (para no. 93)] 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the      
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view          7                                37% 
 of the Government’s replies  [ Vide Recommendations at  
Sl. Nos. 1 (para no. 15), 4 (para no. 62),  
5 (para nos. 70,71,72 & 73) and 8 (para no. 89)]  
      
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect         4                                 21% 
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 (para nos. 13 & 17), 
3 (para no. 41) and 4 (para no. 63)] 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect      
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited [Nil]         Nil 
 