116
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
4343434343
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
FORTY-THIRD REPORTFORTY-THIRD REPORTFORTY-THIRD REPORTFORTY-THIRD REPORTFORTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs
EFFICACY OF REFORM PROCESS IN THE
CAPITAL MARKET – RECENT IPO SCAM

109
FORTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 November, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 November, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs
EFFICACY OF REFORM PROCESS IN THE
CAPITAL MARKET – RECENT IPO SCAM

C.O.F. No. 9C.O.F. No. 9C.O.F. No. 9C.O.F. No. 9C.O.F. No. 9
Price : Rs. 116.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
6
12
19
24
31
46
55
73
74
87
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
REPORT
Introductory............................................................................................................
Modus Operandi of the Scam.......................................................................
Extent of Scam and Benefits to “Scamsters”..........................................
Major Findings of SEBI....................................................................................
Role of Karvy Group of Companies in the IPO SCAM....................
Findings of RBI regarding Involvement of Banks in the IPO SCAM..
Role of Depositories...........................................................................................
Corrective Action Taken by Ministry of Finance, SEBI and
Depositories and Suggestions for Improvement.....................................
A
NNEXURE-I...............................................................................................................
ANNEXURE-II.............................................................................................................
APPENDIX
Minutes of the sittings held on 7 March, 4, 5 & 20 April, 1, 12 &
13 June and 6 November, 2006....................................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
* 12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
(iii)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
29. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
30. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
31. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present
this Forty-third Report on the subject ‘Efficacy of Reform Process in the
Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam’.
2. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
briefed the Committee on the subject “Efficacy of Reform Process in the
Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam” on 7 March, 2006. Then, at their
sitting held on 4 April, 2006 the Committee took oral evidence of the
representatives of Investors’ Grievances Forum. The Committee at their
sitting held on 5 April, 2006 took oral evidence of representatives of SEBI
and RBI. On 20 April, 2006 the Committee took oral evidence of Indian
Overseas Bank, Vijaya Bank, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank and Bharat
Overseas Bank. At their sitting held on 1 June, 2006, they took oral
evidence of the representatives of the National Stock Exchange, Bombay
Stock Exchange, National Securities Depository Ltd., and Central
Depository Service Ltd. Thereafter, the Committee at their sitting held on
12th June, 2006 again took oral evidence of National Stock Exchange and
Bombay Stock Exchang on the subject. The Committee took final oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance on 13 June,
2006.
3. The Committee, during their study tour from 3 to 7 July, 2006,
also took up the subject for informal discussions. On 3 July, 2006 the
Committee discussed the subject “Working of Capital Market and
Efficacy of the Reform Process” with the representatives of the All Gujarat
Investors’ Protection Trust in Ahmedabad. They also discussed the
subject “Volatility in the Capital Market and IPO Scam” with the
representatives of RBI and SEBI, separately at Mumbai on 4 July, 2006.
The Committee at their sitting on 6 November, 2006, considered and
adopted the draft Report.
4. Written replies, views/memoranda were received from Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) RBI, SEBI, Indian Overseas

Bank, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank, Vijaya Bank, Bharat Overseas Bank, ING
Vysya Bank, Citi Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, IDBI Ltd., NSE, BSE,
NSDL, CDSL, Investors’ Grievances Forum and all Gujarat Investor
Protection Trust.
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential
changes arising out of factual verification and finalise the Report.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) various organizations/
Investors’ fora, banks, SEBI and RBI for the cooperation extended in
placing before them their considered views and perceptions on the subject
and for furnishing written notes and information that the Committee had
desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
7. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
(vi)
 N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
16 November , 2006 Chairman,
25 Kartik , 1928  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

REPORT
Historically, India’s Capital Market was dormant till the mid-1980s.
Three important legislations, namely Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947,
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; and Companies Act, 1956
were enacted to provide a suitable legal framework for the development
of capital market in India. The long-term financing needs of the corporate
sector were, by and large, met by the Development Financial Institutions
(DFIs) such as IDBI, ICFI, ICICI as well as by other investment
institutions like LIC, UTI, GIC etc. This was supplemented by working
capital finance provided by the commercial banks through an elaborate
network of bank branches spread over the country. The pricing of
primary issues was decided by the Office of the Controller of Capital
Issues. A few stock exchanges, dominated by Bombay Stock Exchange
(BSE) provided the trading platforms for the secondary market
transactions under an open outcry system. The Capital Issues (Control)
Act, 1947 was repealed in May 1992 and the office of the Controller of
Capital Issues was abolished in the same year. The Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) was set up in 1988 and acquired statutory
status in 1992 with a definite mandate: (a) to protect the interests of
investors in securities; (b) to promote the development of securities
market; and (c) to regulate the securities market. In order to achieve these
objectives, SEBI has been exercising power under: (a) Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; (b) Securities Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956; (c) Depositories Act, 1996; and delegated powers under the
Companies Act, 1956.
2. The securities markets in India witnessed several policy
initiatives since the year 2000, which further refined the market micro-
structure, modernized operations and broadened investment choices for
the investors. The irregularities in the securities transactions witnessed
in the previous years hastened the introduction and implementation of
several reforms. A Joint Parliamentary Committee was constituted in
27.4.2001 to go into the irregularities and manipulations in all their

2
ramifications in all transactions relating to securities. They submitted
their Report on 19.12.2002 and decisions were taken to usher in certain
reforms.
3. Reports in newspapers appearing in December, 2005 regarding
irregularities in Initial Public Offerings, which adversely impact small
investors, were noticed by the Committee and accordingly information
was sought from the Ministry of Finance and SEBI for examination. At
the initial stages of their examination, the Committee based their queries
on the newspaper reportage as well as concerns expressed by the
Investor’s Fora. However, several new findings were revealed during the
course of examination as the Committee continued to follow the pace of
investigation by the regulators namely, SEBI, RBI and CBDT.
4. With the reconstitution of the Committee on 5.8.2006, the
Committee, selected the subject “Efficacy of Reform Processes in the
Capital Market” for detailed examination. They wanted to look into the
reasons as to what could be done to prevent malpractices in the
functioning of Capital Markets. In the course of this study, the serious
issue relating to IPO scam was again brought to their attention. Realizing
the importance of this issue, the Committee decided to examine it in all
its dimensions.
5. Before proceeding to the IPO scam, the Committee considered
it worthwhile to know certain facts about the reforms in the Capital
Market in India, which is as follows:
The development of Primary Market
“Reforms in the primary market.
As per the Ministry of Finance, the following are the major reforms
undertaken in the primary market:
* Merit based regime to disclosure based regime.
* Disclosure and Investor Protection (DIP) Guidelines issued.
* Pricing of public issues determined by the market.
* A system of proportional allotment of share introduced.

3
* Banks, FIs and PSUs were allowed to raise funds from the
primary market.
* Accounting Standards are close to International Standard.
* Corporate Governance Guidelines issued.
* Discretionary allotment system to QIBs have been withdrawn.
* FIIs have been allowed to invest in primary issues within the
sectoral limits.
* Mutual Funds are encouraged both in public and private
sectors and have been permitted to investment overseas.
* Guidelines were issued for private placements of debt.
* SEBI promotes Self Regulatory Organisation (SROs).”
6. According to the Ministry, comprehensive guidelines on
disclosures and investor protection were issued and were amended by
SEBI from time to time. The companies accessing the capital market
through public issues have to comply with adequate disclosure norms
on initial as well as continuous basis.
7. In a deregulated regime, the pricing of the public issues is being
determined by the market, i.e. either by the issuer through fixed price
or by the investors through book-building process. A system of
proportionate allotment of shares has been put in place where the share
of retail investors in the allotment of book-built issues is 35 percent.
Discretionary allotment to the Qualified Institutional Buyers (QIBs) has
been withdrawn.
8. Various intermediaries, associated with primary as well as
secondary markets such as merchant bankers, registrars to issues,
portfolio managers, underwriters, bankers to issues, stock exchange,
brokers and sub-brokers, share transfer agents, depositories, FIIs,
custodians, credit rating agencies etc., are required to register with SEBI
and operate within the guidelines issued. SEBI also promotes self-
regulatory organisations. As per the information furnished by the
Ministry of the Committee on August 31, 2005, there were 22 stock

4
exchanges, 9133 stock brokers (cash segment) and 15,223 sub-brokers,
over 9000 listed companies, 2 depositories, 492 depository participants,
128 merchant bankers, 59 underwriters and 4 credit rating agencies in
the country.
9. Though there have been a host of reforms in the securities
market towards a disclosure-based regime, the functioning of the stock
market is nonetheless affected by several scams including the IPO scam
of 2005. In view of the media reports as well as issues raised by various
investors’ fora, the Committee decided to take up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The present report primarily seeks to examine
the recent IPO scam in all its ramifications.
The IPO Scam of 2005
10. The IPO scam of 2005 involving irregularities in the shares of
Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. occurred during a bull phase in the stock
market. The initial public offer of Yes Bank Ltd. (YBL) opened on
June 15, 2005 and its shares were listed on the Stock Exchanges namely,
Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange on July 12, 2005.
IDFC Ltd. came out with an IPO during July 2005. The shares of IDFC
Ltd. were credited to the allottees on August 5-6, 2005. The shares of IDFC
were listed on August 12, 2005. SEBI, in its Interim Orders dated
15.12.2005 and 12.01.2006 (in the context of examination of irregularities
in the IPOs of Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. respectively) noted that certain
entities namely Roopalben Panchal, Sugandh Estates and Investments
Pvt. Ltd., Purshottam Budhwani and Manojdev Seksaria had cornered
IPO shares reserved for retail applicants by making applications in the
retail categories through the medium of thousands of fictitious/benami
IPO applicants with each of the application being for small value so as
to be eligible for allotment under the retail citatory. It was alleged by
several investors fora that several fake demat accounts giving a common
address were opened on a single day, with the connivance of certain
individuals, brokers, bankers and the Depository Participants (DPs). This
scheme was mastermined to target several IPOs and to siphon off shares
meant for small investors thereby making a huge amount of illicit gains.
The initial reports stated that the banks involved in the scam continued
to finance the IPO applications to a single person, namely Roopalben

5
Panchal, and here accomplices, in the name of thousands of fictitious
applicants. The DP involved i.e. Karvy Group of Companies, too
processed these applications and in many cases, allotted shares without
even receiving applications. This was considered to be a clear abuse of
the very process of IPO that intends to encourage the participation of
Retail Individual Investors (RIIs).
11. Subsequently SEBI undertook detailed examination of
105 IPOs made during the period 2003-2005 to ascertain whether the
same irregularities as in the case of Yes Bank and IDFC IPOs have been
committed in these IPOs also, and found 21 IPOs where manipulations
had taken place with the connivance of DPs, banks and certain
unscrupulous individuals.

6
MODUS OPERANDI OF THE SCAM
12. The IPO scam included the role of certain unscrupulous
individuals, banks, DPs and financiers. The impression gathered by the
Committee was that the modus operandi of this scam was different from
the previous scams as it targeted the primary market instead of secondary
market. Asked by the Committee to detail the modus operandi of the IPO
scam, the Ministry of Finance informed as below:—
“The SEBI ( Disclosure and Investor Protection ) Guidelines
govern public issue of securities. These Guidelines reserve a
35% (25% earlier) of the issue size for Retail Individual investors
(RIIs). It defines a RII as an investor who applies or bids for
securities of or for a value of not more than Rs. 1,00,000 (Rs. 50,000
earlier). The irregularity noticed in a few IPOs made recently
emanates from the abuse of this provision relating to allocation to
RIIs.
Since there is a reservation for RIIs, but there is a limitation
on the number of shares a RII can apply, an investor generally
applies for the highest possible number of shares in the retail
category in order to increase his probability of allotment. He may
adopt unfair means (apply from multiple/benami accounts) to get
more allotment in the retail category.
It appears that a few entities such as Ms. Roopalben Panchal,
M/s. Sugandh Estates & Investments P. Ltd. etc. opened thousands
of demat accounts with Depository Participants (DPs) and bank
accounts with Banks in the names of fictitious/benami individuals.
The Banks and DPs opened demat accounts and banks accounts
without adherence to prescribed procedure. It also appears that
forged documents relating to identity and address were used to open
the accounts. Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandh Estates &
Pvt. Ltd. etc., with the finance from their associates and also
bank finance, applied for shares in IPOs from these benami/
fictitious accounts in sizes permissible for RIIs. Subsequent to the
allotment but before listing, these fictitious/benami allottes
6

7
transferred shares to Ms. Roopalben Panchal,  M/s. Sugandh Estates
& Pvt. Ltd. etc., who, in turn, transferred the shares to the financiers.
The financiers in turn sold most of these shares on the first day
of listing thereby realizing the difference between IPO price and
the listing price.
Thus Ms. Panchal etc. cornered the shares meant for RIIs. They,
along with the financiers, made money on selling these shares. As
a result, the genuine RIIs failed to get allotment or got allotment
of fewer shares than they would have otherwise got.”
13. During the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance on the subject, the Secretary, informed the Committee that to
facilitate the opening of these accounts, Ms. Roopalben Panchal and her
associates advertised in the newspapers a scheme for the people to get
their photographs free of cost and used those photographs to append
them to the application forms and open a large number of demat
accounts as well as bank accounts.
14(a). SEBI, in its Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 had further
explained the modus operandi inter-alia as under:—
“...It was found that almost all the dematerialized accounts that
were in the names of fictitious/benami entities were held through
the depository participant Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. (Karvy-DP).
Inspection of Karvy-DP by NSDL and CDSL has revealed that the
DP has obtained letters from the concerned banks towards Proof
Of Identity (POI) and Proof Of Address (POA) for the purpose of
opening dematerialized accounts. In terms of SEBI circular dated
August 24, 2004, an identity card/document issued by Scheduled
Commercial Banks containing the applicant’s photo/address
may be accepted as POI and POA. The circular further clarified that
‘the aforesaid documents are the minimum requirement for
opening a BO
1 Account. The Depository Participants (DPs) must
verify the copy of the document with the original before accepting
the same as valid. While opening a BO Account, the DPs are
required to exercise due diligence while establishing the identity of
the person to ensure the safety and integrity of the depository
system’.
1Beneficiary Owners Account.

8
Thus, it appeared that first the bank accounts were opened in
the names of fictitious/benami entities (using the photographs
collected by Ms. Roopalben Panchal & Co. from the general public)
and this facilitated the fictitious/benami bank account holders to
open dematerialized accounts.
The entire modus operandi led to the suspicion that thousands
of entities, in each of whose names separate dematerialized
accounts and bank accounts had been opened and IPO applications
made, were merely name-lenders or non-existent. SEBI had
earlier made reference to Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in this
regard and the findings of RBI also confirm that these thousands
of name-lenders were fictitious. Even the key persons (master
account holders) who had executed the game plan were merely
intermediaries acting on behalf of financiers. These key persons
and their financiers are not investors but mere rank opportunists
who seek to make a killing by disposing the IPO shares
cornered by them on the date of listing. The banks have also played
their part by opening bank accounts and providing loan to these
fictitious entities with the objective of earning interest and other
charges.”
14(b). The modus operandi adopted for cornering of retail portion
of IPO shares is pictorially represented below:—
* ”Afferent Accounts” (benami/fictitious accounts) would refer to countless demat
accounts in benami and fictitious names, the credits from where found its
confluence in the master accounts.
Afferent A/c*
(IPO applicant)
Afferent A/c*
(IPO applicant)
Afferent A/c*
(IPO applicant)
Key
Operators
Financier
Financier
Financier
Market
Sale
Market
Sale
Market
Sale
→
→
→
→ →
→
→
→ →

9
15. Asked as to whether the financiers have been identified, it was
replied by the Ministry of Finance that SEBI ultimately found around
85 financiers, who received shares from immediate 24 master account
holders in respect of 21 IPO during examination of IPOs during
2003-2005.
In so far as Involvement of Agents/Chartered Accountants is
concerned, the Committee observed that while taking note of the
multiple account opening by Karvy’s Stock Broking Ltd., as a DP,
SEBI in its interim order dated 27.4.2006 while describing the results
of the system audit of NSDL, pointing to the flaws in the account
opening by Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. (DP), has inter-alia stated as
under:–
(a) Agents of Karvy opened most depository accounts having same
addresses. These agents had no legal sanction. In fact SEBI
(DIP) regulations as well as the agreement, which NSDL signs
with DPs (Depository Participants), prohibits such work
without prior permission.
(b) This was never checked or reported either by the internal
auditors (Haribhakti & Co.) of Karvy or by external inspection
teams of NSDL.
(c) These agents had ready-made stamps of addresses, which were
affixed on the application forms. This too has never been
reflected either in the internal audit reports or the Inspections
by NSDL.
16. The  Ministry of Finance have informed the Committee in a
written reply that SEBI has already forwarded a copy of their Interim
Order dated 27.4.2006 to the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
for necessary action.
17.17.17.17.17. The Indian Capital Market has come a long way owingThe Indian Capital Market has come a long way owingThe Indian Capital Market has come a long way owingThe Indian Capital Market has come a long way owingThe Indian Capital Market has come a long way owing
to several reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosureto several reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosureto several reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosureto several reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosureto several reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosure
norms and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate thenorms and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate thenorms and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate thenorms and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate thenorms and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate the
market. Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capitalmarket. Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capitalmarket. Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capitalmarket. Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capitalmarket. Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capital
market has been witnessing one scam after the other. The recentmarket has been witnessing one scam after the other. The recentmarket has been witnessing one scam after the other. The recentmarket has been witnessing one scam after the other. The recentmarket has been witnessing one scam after the other. The recent
IPO scam has once again highlighted the fact that in the presentIPO scam has once again highlighted the fact that in the presentIPO scam has once again highlighted the fact that in the presentIPO scam has once again highlighted the fact that in the presentIPO scam has once again highlighted the fact that in the present
scenario, unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom.scenario, unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom.scenario, unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom.scenario, unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom.scenario, unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom.

10
Unless the authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keepUnless the authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keepUnless the authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keepUnless the authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keepUnless the authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keep
their vigil whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continuetheir vigil whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continuetheir vigil whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continuetheir vigil whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continuetheir vigil whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continue
to operate without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence isto operate without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence isto operate without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence isto operate without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence isto operate without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence is
available to show that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehtaavailable to show that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehtaavailable to show that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehtaavailable to show that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehtaavailable to show that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehta
Scam’ and the ‘Ketan Parekh Scam’ had accompanied the boom inScam’ and the ‘Ketan Parekh Scam’ had accompanied the boom inScam’ and the ‘Ketan Parekh Scam’ had accompanied the boom inScam’ and the ‘Ketan Parekh Scam’ had accompanied the boom inScam’ and the ‘Ketan Parekh Scam’ had accompanied the boom in
the capital market. Therefore, the need of the hour is to remainthe capital market. Therefore, the need of the hour is to remainthe capital market. Therefore, the need of the hour is to remainthe capital market. Therefore, the need of the hour is to remainthe capital market. Therefore, the need of the hour is to remain
alert and increase vigil, every time there is a bull-run.alert and increase vigil, every time there is a bull-run.alert and increase vigil, every time there is a bull-run.alert and increase vigil, every time there is a bull-run.alert and increase vigil, every time there is a bull-run.
18.18.18.18.18. The Committee note that the present scam has witnessedThe Committee note that the present scam has witnessedThe Committee note that the present scam has witnessedThe Committee note that the present scam has witnessedThe Committee note that the present scam has witnessed
a different modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to thea different modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to thea different modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to thea different modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to thea different modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to the
previous scams, in the sense that this time it has struck the primaryprevious scams, in the sense that this time it has struck the primaryprevious scams, in the sense that this time it has struck the primaryprevious scams, in the sense that this time it has struck the primaryprevious scams, in the sense that this time it has struck the primary
market instead of the secondary market. The Committee also notemarket instead of the secondary market. The Committee also notemarket instead of the secondary market. The Committee also notemarket instead of the secondary market. The Committee also notemarket instead of the secondary market. The Committee also note
that the ‘scamsters’ this time acted in the garb of investors. Almostthat the ‘scamsters’ this time acted in the garb of investors. Almostthat the ‘scamsters’ this time acted in the garb of investors. Almostthat the ‘scamsters’ this time acted in the garb of investors. Almostthat the ‘scamsters’ this time acted in the garb of investors. Almost
all the policies and directions of SEBI are basically directed atall the policies and directions of SEBI are basically directed atall the policies and directions of SEBI are basically directed atall the policies and directions of SEBI are basically directed atall the policies and directions of SEBI are basically directed at
protecting the interests of the investors. The Committee are,protecting the interests of the investors. The Committee are,protecting the interests of the investors. The Committee are,protecting the interests of the investors. The Committee are,protecting the interests of the investors. The Committee are,
however, at a loss to find that despite all the safeguards andhowever, at a loss to find that despite all the safeguards andhowever, at a loss to find that despite all the safeguards andhowever, at a loss to find that despite all the safeguards andhowever, at a loss to find that despite all the safeguards and
regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate into the system and,regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate into the system and,regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate into the system and,regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate into the system and,regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate into the system and,
with the connivance of key operators or intermediaries, DPs andwith the connivance of key operators or intermediaries, DPs andwith the connivance of key operators or intermediaries, DPs andwith the connivance of key operators or intermediaries, DPs andwith the connivance of key operators or intermediaries, DPs and
banks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant for Retail Individualbanks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant for Retail Individualbanks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant for Retail Individualbanks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant for Retail Individualbanks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant for Retail Individual
Investors (RIIs).Investors (RIIs).Investors (RIIs).Investors (RIIs).Investors (RIIs).
19.19.19.19.19. According to the information furnished to the CommitteeAccording to the information furnished to the CommitteeAccording to the information furnished to the CommitteeAccording to the information furnished to the CommitteeAccording to the information furnished to the Committee
by the Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came outby the Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came outby the Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came outby the Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came outby the Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came out
with their IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committeewith their IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committeewith their IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committeewith their IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committeewith their IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committee
have been informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had corneredhave been informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had corneredhave been informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had corneredhave been informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had corneredhave been informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had cornered
IPO shares of these two companies reserved for retail applicants,IPO shares of these two companies reserved for retail applicants,IPO shares of these two companies reserved for retail applicants,IPO shares of these two companies reserved for retail applicants,IPO shares of these two companies reserved for retail applicants,
by making applications in retail category through thousands ofby making applications in retail category through thousands ofby making applications in retail category through thousands ofby making applications in retail category through thousands ofby making applications in retail category through thousands of
fictitious/benami IPO applicants.fictitious/benami IPO applicants.fictitious/benami IPO applicants.fictitious/benami IPO applicants.fictitious/benami IPO applicants.
20.20.20.20.20. The Committee also note that during the bull-run thereThe Committee also note that during the bull-run thereThe Committee also note that during the bull-run thereThe Committee also note that during the bull-run thereThe Committee also note that during the bull-run there
is an incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on ais an incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on ais an incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on ais an incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on ais an incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on a
price higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ wasprice higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ wasprice higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ wasprice higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ wasprice higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ was
to illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwiseto illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwiseto illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwiseto illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwiseto illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwise
gone to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam wasgone to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam wasgone to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam wasgone to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam wasgone to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam was
meticulously pre-planned. It started with an innocent lookingmeticulously pre-planned. It started with an innocent lookingmeticulously pre-planned. It started with an innocent lookingmeticulously pre-planned. It started with an innocent lookingmeticulously pre-planned. It started with an innocent looking
advertisement in newspapers to the public by certain entities offeringadvertisement in newspapers to the public by certain entities offeringadvertisement in newspapers to the public by certain entities offeringadvertisement in newspapers to the public by certain entities offeringadvertisement in newspapers to the public by certain entities offering
them photographs free of cost, which were later used to open severalthem photographs free of cost, which were later used to open severalthem photographs free of cost, which were later used to open severalthem photographs free of cost, which were later used to open severalthem photographs free of cost, which were later used to open several
benami/fake bank/demat accounts.benami/fake bank/demat accounts.benami/fake bank/demat accounts.benami/fake bank/demat accounts.benami/fake bank/demat accounts.
21.21.21.21.21. The Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelinesThe Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelinesThe Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelinesThe Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelinesThe Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelines
on IPO allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs,on IPO allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs,on IPO allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs,on IPO allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs,on IPO allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs,
who can apply for securities of not more than Rs.1,00,000. In viewwho can apply for securities of not more than Rs.1,00,000. In viewwho can apply for securities of not more than Rs.1,00,000. In viewwho can apply for securities of not more than Rs.1,00,000. In viewwho can apply for securities of not more than Rs.1,00,000. In view

11
of the limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, theof the limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, theof the limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, theof the limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, theof the limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, the
‘scamsters’ applied for the maximum possible number of shares per‘scamsters’ applied for the maximum possible number of shares per‘scamsters’ applied for the maximum possible number of shares per‘scamsters’ applied for the maximum possible number of shares per‘scamsters’ applied for the maximum possible number of shares per
applicant by making thousands of fake/benami applications, andapplicant by making thousands of fake/benami applications, andapplicant by making thousands of fake/benami applications, andapplicant by making thousands of fake/benami applications, andapplicant by making thousands of fake/benami applications, and
managed to get shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs.managed to get shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs.managed to get shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs.managed to get shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs.managed to get shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs.
The Committee further note that applications of these fictitious/The Committee further note that applications of these fictitious/The Committee further note that applications of these fictitious/The Committee further note that applications of these fictitious/The Committee further note that applications of these fictitious/
benami ‘persons’, after allotment, had also been transferred as sharesbenami ‘persons’, after allotment, had also been transferred as sharesbenami ‘persons’, after allotment, had also been transferred as sharesbenami ‘persons’, after allotment, had also been transferred as sharesbenami ‘persons’, after allotment, had also been transferred as shares
to their principals namely Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandhto their principals namely Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandhto their principals namely Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandhto their principals namely Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandhto their principals namely Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s. Sugandh
Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd. etc. and their associates who, in turn,Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd. etc. and their associates who, in turn,Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd. etc. and their associates who, in turn,Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd. etc. and their associates who, in turn,Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd. etc. and their associates who, in turn,
transferred these shares to the ‘financiers’ who had originally madetransferred these shares to the ‘financiers’ who had originally madetransferred these shares to the ‘financiers’ who had originally madetransferred these shares to the ‘financiers’ who had originally madetransferred these shares to the ‘financiers’ who had originally made
available the funds. The financiers sold most of these shares on theavailable the funds. The financiers sold most of these shares on theavailable the funds. The financiers sold most of these shares on theavailable the funds. The financiers sold most of these shares on theavailable the funds. The financiers sold most of these shares on the
first day of listing at a price higher than the offer price. Therebyfirst day of listing at a price higher than the offer price. Therebyfirst day of listing at a price higher than the offer price. Therebyfirst day of listing at a price higher than the offer price. Therebyfirst day of listing at a price higher than the offer price. Thereby
earning huge amount as profit. Thus, the modus operandi of theearning huge amount as profit. Thus, the modus operandi of theearning huge amount as profit. Thus, the modus operandi of theearning huge amount as profit. Thus, the modus operandi of theearning huge amount as profit. Thus, the modus operandi of the
‘scamsters’ shows that there were some “master-minds”, behind‘scamsters’ shows that there were some “master-minds”, behind‘scamsters’ shows that there were some “master-minds”, behind‘scamsters’ shows that there were some “master-minds”, behind‘scamsters’ shows that there were some “master-minds”, behind
Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and Investments Pvt. Ltd.Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and Investments Pvt. Ltd.Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and Investments Pvt. Ltd.Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and Investments Pvt. Ltd.Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and Investments Pvt. Ltd.
etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the “key operators”.etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the “key operators”.etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the “key operators”.etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the “key operators”.etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the “key operators”.
These master minds were quite possibly the ‘financiers’.These master minds were quite possibly the ‘financiers’.These master minds were quite possibly the ‘financiers’.These master minds were quite possibly the ‘financiers’.These master minds were quite possibly the ‘financiers’.
22.22.22.22.22. From the submission made by SEBI, the Committee findFrom the submission made by SEBI, the Committee findFrom the submission made by SEBI, the Committee findFrom the submission made by SEBI, the Committee findFrom the submission made by SEBI, the Committee find
that the Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts and bankthat the Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts and bankthat the Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts and bankthat the Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts and bankthat the Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts and bank
accounts without adherence to prescribed procedure accounts without adherence to prescribed procedure accounts without adherence to prescribed procedure accounts without adherence to prescribed procedure accounts without adherence to prescribed procedure e.g.e.g.e.g.e.g.e.g.     KYCKYCKYCKYCKYC.....
Besides forged documents were used as proofs of identity andBesides forged documents were used as proofs of identity andBesides forged documents were used as proofs of identity andBesides forged documents were used as proofs of identity andBesides forged documents were used as proofs of identity and
address to open these accounts. They, therefore, strongly believe thataddress to open these accounts. They, therefore, strongly believe thataddress to open these accounts. They, therefore, strongly believe thataddress to open these accounts. They, therefore, strongly believe thataddress to open these accounts. They, therefore, strongly believe that
there was an active collusion of some officials from banks and thethere was an active collusion of some officials from banks and thethere was an active collusion of some officials from banks and thethere was an active collusion of some officials from banks and thethere was an active collusion of some officials from banks and the
Depository Participants (DPs) coupled with the fact that Depositories,Depository Participants (DPs) coupled with the fact that Depositories,Depository Participants (DPs) coupled with the fact that Depositories,Depository Participants (DPs) coupled with the fact that Depositories,Depository Participants (DPs) coupled with the fact that Depositories,
DPs, and Banks failed to exercise due diligence in observing theDPs, and Banks failed to exercise due diligence in observing theDPs, and Banks failed to exercise due diligence in observing theDPs, and Banks failed to exercise due diligence in observing theDPs, and Banks failed to exercise due diligence in observing the
KYC norms and other guidelines. The Committee recommend thatKYC norms and other guidelines. The Committee recommend thatKYC norms and other guidelines. The Committee recommend thatKYC norms and other guidelines. The Committee recommend thatKYC norms and other guidelines. The Committee recommend that
the role of such entities (intermediaries, financiers etc.,) should bethe role of such entities (intermediaries, financiers etc.,) should bethe role of such entities (intermediaries, financiers etc.,) should bethe role of such entities (intermediaries, financiers etc.,) should bethe role of such entities (intermediaries, financiers etc.,) should be
investigated thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befittinginvestigated thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befittinginvestigated thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befittinginvestigated thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befittinginvestigated thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befitting
the irregularities committed.the irregularities committed.the irregularities committed.the irregularities committed.the irregularities committed.
23.23.23.23.23. The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI,The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI,The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI,The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI,The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI,
contained in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti &contained in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti &contained in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti &contained in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti &contained in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti &
Co., the internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report theCo., the internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report theCo., the internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report theCo., the internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report theCo., the internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report the
multiple account opening by the DP, Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. Theymultiple account opening by the DP, Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. Theymultiple account opening by the DP, Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. Theymultiple account opening by the DP, Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. Theymultiple account opening by the DP, Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. They
note that findings of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministrynote that findings of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministrynote that findings of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministrynote that findings of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministrynote that findings of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministry
of Finance to ICAI for further necessary action. In this context, theof Finance to ICAI for further necessary action. In this context, theof Finance to ICAI for further necessary action. In this context, theof Finance to ICAI for further necessary action. In this context, theof Finance to ICAI for further necessary action. In this context, the
Committee desire that ICAI must take up the matter seriously andCommittee desire that ICAI must take up the matter seriously andCommittee desire that ICAI must take up the matter seriously andCommittee desire that ICAI must take up the matter seriously andCommittee desire that ICAI must take up the matter seriously and
take stringent action against the internal auditor.take stringent action against the internal auditor.take stringent action against the internal auditor.take stringent action against the internal auditor.take stringent action against the internal auditor.

12
EXTENT OF SCAM AND BENEFITS TO “SCAMSTERS”
24. The extent of the scam, its intensity and the benefits cornered
by the main players involved have been examined by the Committee. In
this regard, the Committee were informed by the Ministry of Finance in
a written reply to their query, as under:-
“SEBI has informed that it has identified the entities involved
in opening multiple demat accounts in benami/fictitious names.
Since some of these entities have opened demat accounts since 2003,
SEBI is investigating the various IPOs that came out during the
years 2003, 2004 and 2005 to ascertain whether the same
irregularities as in the cases of Yes Bank and IDFC IPOs have been
committed in these IPOs also. Investigations are in progress.”
25. Responding to a query of the Committee regarding discovery
of the IPO scam, the Secretary, Ministry of Finance, submitted before the
Committee during the briefing meeting as under:-
“These irregularities were discovered by the SEBI during the
course of its surveillance operation. SEBI has taken a number of
steps to prevent recurrence of such a phenomenon again.”
He has inter-alia also stated as under:–
“As regards the query about when the whole thing started,
investigations by SEBI, and investigations by the Income Tax
Department ‘seem’ to indicate that to a limited extent this started
in 1999. At the moment I am using the word ‘seem ‘ advisorily
because we still have to get the final reports. In 1999, it was in a
very small measure, but it picked up momentum by 2003. As per
information that we have since 2003, very large numbers of IPOs
have been tampered with in this fashion. Therefore it is indeed a
very widespread thing, and it is not something that started last year.
It has been there for sometime now.”
This matter was unearthed around October 2005. Thereafter,
investigation was done by the Income Tax department and
12

13
investigation was done by SEBI. This is how we came to know that
this matter was actually started. In fact, as I said, it apparently
started in 1999 in a limited way, but gathered steam, Thereafter,
by 2003, there were quite a few IPOs involved starting from 2003,
2004 to the year 2005.”
In this connection, SEBI has in its interim Order explained as
under:-
“...Further, it is seen that in NSDL and CDSL taken together
in respect of 21 IPOs, 24 dematerinlized account-holders (herein-
after referred to as ‘master account holders’) have received shares
in off-market transactions from 500 or more demat transferors
during the pre-listing period.”
26. Asked as to what efforts were being made to investigate the
other IPOs, the Ministry have inter-alia in their written reply responded
as under:–
“According to CBDT, the Income Tax Department carried out a
search and seizure operation in October, 2005 under section 132(1)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 on Shri Purushottam G. Budhwani,
Mumbai, whereupon it was found that the assessee was engaged
in maintaining more than 11.000 demat accounts in the names of
various benami entitites. These demat accounts were utilized for
making multiple applications in various IPOs over several years as
follows:–
Year No. of IPO
1999-2000 11
2000-2001 4
2002-2003 2
2003-2004 8
2004-2005 8
2005-2006 14

14
27. Asked as to when and how the irregularities surfaced, the
Secretary, Ministry of Finance, inter-alia in reply before the Committee
stated as under:–
“Another issue was raised about how the irregularities
surfaced. Our information is that it surfaced in October last
year (2005) as a part of the surveillance activity of SEBI because
SEBI basically asked the Exchanges to look into the fact that there
were a very large number of off market transactions just prior to
listing of certain shares. That is how this whole matter got
investigated. Independently, of course, the Income Tax Department
in one particular case did search and seizure operation, and
during the course of that search and seizure operation they came
across a very large number of demat accounts held by that
particular individual and those demat accounts were dating back
to 1999...”
28. During the study visit of the Committee to Mumbai in July
2006, SEBI, in a written note had further informed as under:
“During the surveillance meetings held during April 2005 and
May 2005, the issue of trading in unlisted shares during the period
subsequent to the credit of shares to IPO allottees but prior to the
date of commencement of trading on the stock exchanges was
discussed with the stock exchanges. NSDL provides monthly report
on off-market transaction (raw data) above the threshold level to
be passed on to the stock exchanges for their use in their
investigation. The monthly report of NSDL for the relevant period
did not contain information regarding multiple demat accounts,
bogus demat accounts etc. Therefor, SEBI had advised BSE and NSE
to look into the dealings in the shares issued through Initial Public
Offerings (IPOs) before the shares are listed on the stock exchanges,
particularly with reference to off market transactions in the case of
YES Bank obtained from the depositories. In reply thereto BSE vide
a letter dated October 18, 2005, inter alia , stated that “it can be
observed...... that Ms. Roopalben Naresh Shah had transferred
9,31,600 shares in seven off-market transactions and if we assume
the consideration price as the issue price ( i.e. Rs.45/- the
consideration amount comes to Rs. 4.19 crores. In order to get

15
allotment of 9,31,600 shares she would have had to apply in crores
of shares involving hundreds of crores of Rupees in Application
money. Both Ms. Roopalben N. Shah and the seven receiving clients
who had received shares in off-market transactions are residing in
Ahmedabad and out of that 4 are having the same/similar address.
It is observed that Roopalben Naresh Shah’s name is not coming
in the list of top 100 public issue allotees.”
There were no inadequacies of surveillance on the part of SEBI.
The irregularities were detected and dealt with on account of
suo moto  investigations by SEBI.
It may be noticed that SEBI had commenced verification during
April – May 2005 while the income tax raids on Shri Purshottam
Budhwani were conducted in October 2005.”
29. Asked to clarify the difference in the versions of SEBI & CBDT
about the number of IPOs found involved in irregularities during
2003-05, the Ministry of Finance stated in their reply as under:–
“The difference is due to the difference in parameters in short
listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a set of criteria. SEBI has informed
that it has adopted the floor level of 500 or more for determining
the suspect multiple demat accounts in typical samples, as samples
with lesser numbers may not be truly representative of the “suspect”
character, especially having regard to the large incidence of multiple
accounts in any IPO with genuine combinations at lower levels.
Further it was felt that a sample of more than 500 multiple demat
account would impart the necessary focus and direction to the
whole exercise of tracking down the real culprit accounts in
cornering the IPO allotment and dealing with them effectively in
a demonstrative regulatory action. Also any group/cluster activity
involving 500 or more demat accounts in IPO allotment excites a
genuine suspicion in the context of off-market transfers from such
accounts to one account which would normally be possible, it only
such afferent accounts were dummies with unity of control resting
with the master account holders. This is however not to state that
where there are less than 500 afferent accounts, the same would
pass off as genuine.”

16
30. The Ministry have further in their replies inter-alia stated as
under:–
“...SEBI in regard to the initial unearthing of the scam have
stated that they had commenced verification during April-May
2005 while the income tax raids on Shri Purshottam Budhwani
were conducted in October 2005.”
31. Thus, out of 105 IPOs made during 2003-05, that SEBI
examined, 21 IPOs were found to be involved in irregularities. Asked
whether the rest of the IPOs were found to be prima facie not involved
in irregularities, the Ministry of Finance in their post evidence reply
submitted as under:–
“SEBI has informed that it has examined all the IPOs which
were made during the period of 2003-05. Out of 105 IPOs made
in 2003-05, SEBI detected irregularities in 21 IPOs based on certain
criteria. The focus of the SEBI investigations has been on entites
indulging in off-market transaction prior to listing and commence-
ment of trading on the stock exchanges.”
32. The Ministry of Finance was time and again asked to furnish
the information about IPOs since 1999 as well as those IPOs that were
found to be involved in irregularities. The Ministry of Finance had earlier
only provided a list of 105 IPOs that were found to be involved in
irregularities during 2003-05. Out of these, a total of 21 IPOs
2 were found
having irregularities. When asked specifically to furnish separate lists of
all IPOs and those IPOs having irregularities since 1999, the Ministry
of Finance merely furnished a list of 86 IPOs during January,
1999-December, 2002
3 without specifying the ones that had witnessed
manipulations/irregularities.
Benefits to “scamsters”Benefits to “scamsters”Benefits to “scamsters”Benefits to “scamsters”Benefits to “scamsters”
33. The moot question in the IPO scam was how much profit
might have been cornered by the ‘scamsters’. To this, the Ministry of
Finance have, in reply to a query of the Committee on the amount
involved in the scam, informed as under:—
“SEBI has informed that based on its findings of investigations
and taking into account the issue price of the shares and the number
of shares cornered, the value of shares cornered by the key operators
2Annexure 1.
3List of all IPOs during 1999 to 2005 is placed at Annexure II.

17
works out to Rs. 134.26 crore. It has worked out a preliminary
estimate of the profits made (real/notional) by the financiers of the
key operators in the IPOs identified by comparing the closing price
(on NSE) on the first day of listing in respect of each of the above
IPOs with the issue price of the respective IPOs. From these
calculations, the total gains of these financiers works out to roughly
Rs. 72.38 crores.”
34. Asked to furnish the break up of the gains that would have
gone to different entities ‘involved in the scam, SEBI has furnished as
under:–
“SEBI is not aware of the off-market price of a scrip and the
price negotiated between the buyers and the sellers in off-market
transactions....The estimated notional gains of the financiers worked
out subject to the foregoing assumptions was Rs. 72.38 crores. As
regards possible benefits that might have accrued to other entities
viz. banks and Depository Participants, It would appear that the
banks and Depository Participants in the process had augmented
their income on account of large number of bank and demat
accounts opened with them coupled with the transactions in those
accounts.”
35.35.35.35.35. As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance,As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance,As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance,As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance,As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance,
the Committee note that the profits to the financiers in thethe Committee note that the profits to the financiers in thethe Committee note that the profits to the financiers in thethe Committee note that the profits to the financiers in thethe Committee note that the profits to the financiers in the
manipulated IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have beenmanipulated IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have beenmanipulated IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have beenmanipulated IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have beenmanipulated IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have been
investigated, could be to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committeeinvestigated, could be to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committeeinvestigated, could be to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committeeinvestigated, could be to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committeeinvestigated, could be to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committee
feel that these profits should have actually gone to the RIIs, whosefeel that these profits should have actually gone to the RIIs, whosefeel that these profits should have actually gone to the RIIs, whosefeel that these profits should have actually gone to the RIIs, whosefeel that these profits should have actually gone to the RIIs, whose
quota of shares were illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, andquota of shares were illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, andquota of shares were illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, andquota of shares were illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, andquota of shares were illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, and
therefore, apprehend that genuine retail investors might lose faiththerefore, apprehend that genuine retail investors might lose faiththerefore, apprehend that genuine retail investors might lose faiththerefore, apprehend that genuine retail investors might lose faiththerefore, apprehend that genuine retail investors might lose faith
in the regulation of capital market ultimately, if they continue toin the regulation of capital market ultimately, if they continue toin the regulation of capital market ultimately, if they continue toin the regulation of capital market ultimately, if they continue toin the regulation of capital market ultimately, if they continue to
remain unprotected from the ‘scamsters’ who craftily design plansremain unprotected from the ‘scamsters’ who craftily design plansremain unprotected from the ‘scamsters’ who craftily design plansremain unprotected from the ‘scamsters’ who craftily design plansremain unprotected from the ‘scamsters’ who craftily design plans
to deprive them of their genuine profits.to deprive them of their genuine profits.to deprive them of their genuine profits.to deprive them of their genuine profits.to deprive them of their genuine profits.
36.36.36.36.36. As to how the scam was brought to light, the CommitteeAs to how the scam was brought to light, the CommitteeAs to how the scam was brought to light, the CommitteeAs to how the scam was brought to light, the CommitteeAs to how the scam was brought to light, the Committee
note SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillancenote SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillancenote SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillancenote SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillancenote SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillance
activity, they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtainedactivity, they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtainedactivity, they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtainedactivity, they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtainedactivity, they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtained
from depositories to the stock exchanges, which in their preliminaryfrom depositories to the stock exchanges, which in their preliminaryfrom depositories to the stock exchanges, which in their preliminaryfrom depositories to the stock exchanges, which in their preliminaryfrom depositories to the stock exchanges, which in their preliminary
observations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibilityobservations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibilityobservations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibilityobservations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibilityobservations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibility
of large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listingof large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listingof large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listingof large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listingof large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listing
on the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination,on the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination,
on the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination,on the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination,on the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination,  the the the the the

18
Surveillance Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scaleSurveillance Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scaleSurveillance Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scaleSurveillance Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scaleSurveillance Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scale
multiple demat accounts with common addresses by a few entities.multiple demat accounts with common addresses by a few entities.multiple demat accounts with common addresses by a few entities.multiple demat accounts with common addresses by a few entities.multiple demat accounts with common addresses by a few entities.
37.37.37.37.37. In this regard, the Committee also take note of theIn this regard, the Committee also take note of theIn this regard, the Committee also take note of theIn this regard, the Committee also take note of theIn this regard, the Committee also take note of the
submission made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005,submission made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005,submission made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005,submission made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005,submission made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005,
irregularities were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDTirregularities were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDTirregularities were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDTirregularities were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDTirregularities were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDT
had informed the Committee that during their search and seizurehad informed the Committee that during their search and seizurehad informed the Committee that during their search and seizurehad informed the Committee that during their search and seizurehad informed the Committee that during their search and seizure
operation in October, 2005 on Shri Purshottam Budhwani, (allegedoperation in October, 2005 on Shri Purshottam Budhwani, (allegedoperation in October, 2005 on Shri Purshottam Budhwani, (allegedoperation in October, 2005 on Shri Purshottam Budhwani, (allegedoperation in October, 2005 on Shri Purshottam Budhwani, (alleged
to be one of the ‘key operators’ involved in the scam), it was foundto be one of the ‘key operators’ involved in the scam), it was foundto be one of the ‘key operators’ involved in the scam), it was foundto be one of the ‘key operators’ involved in the scam), it was foundto be one of the ‘key operators’ involved in the scam), it was found
that he was maintaining more than 11,000 demat accounts in thethat he was maintaining more than 11,000 demat accounts in thethat he was maintaining more than 11,000 demat accounts in thethat he was maintaining more than 11,000 demat accounts in thethat he was maintaining more than 11,000 demat accounts in the
names of various benami entities, which were utilised for makingnames of various benami entities, which were utilised for makingnames of various benami entities, which were utilised for makingnames of various benami entities, which were utilised for makingnames of various benami entities, which were utilised for making
multiple applications in various IPOs since 1999. The Committeemultiple applications in various IPOs since 1999. The Committeemultiple applications in various IPOs since 1999. The Committeemultiple applications in various IPOs since 1999. The Committeemultiple applications in various IPOs since 1999. The Committee
further note that during the period 2003-05, as per CBDT,further note that during the period 2003-05, as per CBDT,further note that during the period 2003-05, as per CBDT,further note that during the period 2003-05, as per CBDT,further note that during the period 2003-05, as per CBDT,
Shri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami demat accounts toShri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami demat accounts toShri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami demat accounts toShri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami demat accounts toShri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami demat accounts to
make applications in around 30 IPOs.make applications in around 30 IPOs.make applications in around 30 IPOs.make applications in around 30 IPOs.make applications in around 30 IPOs.
38.38.38.38.38. This discrepancy in the number of IPOs that hadThis discrepancy in the number of IPOs that hadThis discrepancy in the number of IPOs that hadThis discrepancy in the number of IPOs that hadThis discrepancy in the number of IPOs that had
irregularities during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, wasirregularities during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, wasirregularities during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, wasirregularities during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, wasirregularities during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, was
clarified by the Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the differenceclarified by the Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the differenceclarified by the Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the differenceclarified by the Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the differenceclarified by the Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the difference
in parameteres in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a setin parameteres in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a setin parameteres in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a setin parameteres in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a setin parameteres in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a set
of criteria, of criteria, of criteria, of criteria, of criteria, i.e.i.e.i.e.i.e.i.e. by adopting the floor level of 500 or more by adopting the floor level of 500 or more by adopting the floor level of 500 or more by adopting the floor level of 500 or more by adopting the floor level of 500 or more
dematerialised account holders for determining the suspect multipledematerialised account holders for determining the suspect multipledematerialised account holders for determining the suspect multipledematerialised account holders for determining the suspect multipledematerialised account holders for determining the suspect multiple
demat accounts in typical samples.demat accounts in typical samples.demat accounts in typical samples.demat accounts in typical samples.demat accounts in typical samples.
39.39.39.39.39. The Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBIThe Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBIThe Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBIThe Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBIThe Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBI
irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,
yet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may haveyet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may haveyet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may haveyet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may haveyet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may have
been continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In thisbeen continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In thisbeen continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In thisbeen continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In thisbeen continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In this
connection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministryconnection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministryconnection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministryconnection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministryconnection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministry
of Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Taxof Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Taxof Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Taxof Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Taxof Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Tax
Department seem to indicate that to a limited extent this startedDepartment seem to indicate that to a limited extent this startedDepartment seem to indicate that to a limited extent this startedDepartment seem to indicate that to a limited extent this startedDepartment seem to indicate that to a limited extent this started
in 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly askedin 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly askedin 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly askedin 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly askedin 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly asked
to furnish information about IPOs where irregularities were noticedto furnish information about IPOs where irregularities were noticedto furnish information about IPOs where irregularities were noticedto furnish information about IPOs where irregularities were noticedto furnish information about IPOs where irregularities were noticed
since 1999, the Committee are disappointed that no such informationsince 1999, the Committee are disappointed that no such informationsince 1999, the Committee are disappointed that no such informationsince 1999, the Committee are disappointed that no such informationsince 1999, the Committee are disappointed that no such information
was furnished to them. They are of the view that there is enoughwas furnished to them. They are of the view that there is enoughwas furnished to them. They are of the view that there is enoughwas furnished to them. They are of the view that there is enoughwas furnished to them. They are of the view that there is enough
scope for further probe in the matter. They, therefore, recommendscope for further probe in the matter. They, therefore, recommendscope for further probe in the matter. They, therefore, recommendscope for further probe in the matter. They, therefore, recommendscope for further probe in the matter. They, therefore, recommend
that a complete investigation of all the IPOs floated since 1999 shouldthat a complete investigation of all the IPOs floated since 1999 shouldthat a complete investigation of all the IPOs floated since 1999 shouldthat a complete investigation of all the IPOs floated since 1999 shouldthat a complete investigation of all the IPOs floated since 1999 should
be carried out so that exact number and other details of the IPOsbe carried out so that exact number and other details of the IPOsbe carried out so that exact number and other details of the IPOsbe carried out so that exact number and other details of the IPOsbe carried out so that exact number and other details of the IPOs
where irregularities have taken place in the past, could come outwhere irregularities have taken place in the past, could come outwhere irregularities have taken place in the past, could come outwhere irregularities have taken place in the past, could come outwhere irregularities have taken place in the past, could come out
and appropriate action taken. The Committee further desire that theand appropriate action taken. The Committee further desire that theand appropriate action taken. The Committee further desire that theand appropriate action taken. The Committee further desire that theand appropriate action taken. The Committee further desire that the
outcome of such investigations and action taken thereon may beoutcome of such investigations and action taken thereon may beoutcome of such investigations and action taken thereon may beoutcome of such investigations and action taken thereon may beoutcome of such investigations and action taken thereon may be
intimated to them.intimated to them.intimated to them.intimated to them.intimated to them.

19
MAJOR FINDINGS OF SEBI
40. In order to deal with the situation arising out of the IPO
manipulation, SEBI issued an Interim Order on 27.4.2006. SEBI’s findings
on Yes Bank and IDFC’s IPO scam have been included in the said Order.
As already stated in this report, SEBI, while examining previous IPOs
for possible irregularities/manipulations for which data was provided
by CDSL and NSDL, has adopted the floor level of 500 or more multiple
demat accounts for determining the suspect multiple demat accounts in
typical samples. Their focus has been on entities indulging in off-market
transactions prior to listing and commencement of trading on the stock
exchanges.
41. Further, SEBI had inter-alia in its order stated that, in NSDL
and CDSL taken together in respect of 21 IPOs, 24 dematerialised
account-holders (‘master account holders’) have received shares in off-
market transactions from 500 or more demat transferors during the pre-
listing period.
42. Singling out Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. (Karvy DP), as an
active participant in the IPO scam, SEBI’s Interim Order states the
following:—
“Significantly as many as 14 out of the 24 master account holders
also had their respective demat accounts with Karvy-DP. Thus, it
appears that Karvy-DP was actively in league by opening demat
accounts for many of the master account holders and also for most
(about 84%) of the afferent accounts that served as conduits for the
master account holders. Also the numbers are too significant to be
dismissed as the normal incidence of business while the stunning
percentage in terms of concentration of suspect accounts cannot but
tar Karvy DP with the same brush.”
43. The Committee also noted that SEBI, in course of investigation,
has also observed linkage amongst the key operators and financiers as
follows:—
“From a perusal of NSDL and CDSL accounts of the key operators,
it is seen that, in CDSL, on October 20, 2005 Purshottam Budhwani
19

20
transferred 16,304 shares of Suzlon Energy to Manojdev Seksaria
and on the same day Manojdev Seksaria transferred back 18,624
shares to Purshottam Budhwani. These off-market transfers
between Purshottam Budhwani and Manojdev Seksaria done prior
to commencement of pay in/pay out on the stock exchanges clearly
bring out the linkages between them.”
44. The following excerpts from the Interim Report of SEBI, also
point out linkage amongst the key operator (Roopalben Panchal) and
financiers:—
“(i) Upon examination of Roopalben Panchal’s bank account
statement with BHOB Worli Branch, it is seen that Roopal Panchal
had brought in margin money for IPO finance to the tune of
Rs. 22.03 crores which correlates with the margin money for 4,663
applications. Upon examination of the source of funds of
Roopalben Panchal for the margin money brought in by her, the
following entities appear to have provided her finance for making
the above applications:—
Name of the entity Amount Date of Amount given as
 Transferred Transfe r margin money to
BHOB, Worli Branch
Seer Finlease Pvt. Ltd. 9,50,00,000 20.06.05
Tauraus Infosys Ltd. 3,30,00,000 20.06.05
Excell Multitech Ltd. 4,60,00,000 20.06.05
Zenet Software Ltd. 2,65,00,000 20.06.05
Total Amount 20,05,00,000
(ii) As per the client account opening forms of Zenet Software
Ltd., Excell Multitech Ltd. and Tauraus Infosys Ltd. it is seen that
these companies have the same set of directors viz. Saryuben Vora,
Rajesh Patel, Kirtiben Patel and Vishal Patel and have been
introduced to HDFC Bank by the same person namely, Shri Nimesh
G. Gandhi.”
Rs. 22,03,50,375
(which includes
Rs. 20,05,00.000)

21
45. Later, SEBI provided the status report on IPO scam investiga-
tions in a tabulated form on 4.7.2006, during the study tour of the
Committee in Mumbai, as under:—
Status Report on IPO Investigation as on 4.07.2006
Sr.No. Particulars Statistics
12 3
1. Number of IPOs examined 105
(2003-2005)
2. Number of IPOs where 21
irregularities were found
3. Number of key operators 24
4. Number of demat accounts 58,938
involved (84% of these accounts, i.e.
49,708 accounts are with
one particular DP)
5. Major DPs having afferent 8
accounts
6. Number of shares cornered 2,63,44,164
7. Number of financiers 82
(Notional Gains –
Rs. 72.38 crores)
8. Number of entities against which 123
interim 11B directions issued (24 key operators +
82 financiers + 14 DPs +
1 RTI + 2 Depositories
9. Number of entities against 5
which post decisional orders
issued
10. Number of entities against 14
which enquiry proceedings
initiated
11. Number of entities against 106
which adjudication proceedings (24 key operators +
initiated 82 financiers)

22
12 3
12. Number of entities against 16
which references were made
for prosecution
13. Number of entities who 10
approached courts Karvy – Hyderabad High Court
Ajay Gupta – Delhi High Court
Saumil Bhavnagari –
Gujarat High Cout
and 7 others
14. Number of entities who 2
approached SAT (NSDL Jhaveri Securities)
15. Number of shares cornered 2,63,44,144
Notional gain Rs. 72.38 crores
46. SEBI has in its Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 concluded that
the depositories have carried out the inspections of Depository
Participants registered with them in a casual, cursory and perfunctory
manner and has alleged contributory negligence on part of NSDL. SEBI
has noted that there is a recurrence of same errors relating to account
opening as noticed in inspection after inspection and NSDL has
commented on them in its reports year after year. However, the same error
has recurred. This has made non-compliance of KYC norms prescribed
by depositories at the time of opening of accounts by DPs, a regular
feature. The findings about depositories are detailed in subsequent part
of the report under the chapter ‘Role of Depositories’.
47. The Committee observe from the investigative findings of
SEBI’s interim Order that certain financiers and key operators
connived with some DPs and banks in opening demat accounts and
bank accounts in fictitious/benami names in utter disregard of KYC
norms. The Committee also note that the depositories have carried
out the inspections of DPs in a casual and perfunctory manner. From
the information made available to them, the Committee find that
SEBI has initiated enquiry/adjudication/prosecution proceedings
keeping in view the status of its findings against various entities,
such as financiers, key operators, DPs etc. who were found involved

23
in the IPO scam. The Committee recommend that concerted efforts
should be made by SEBI and Ministry of Finance to detect and bring
to light the real culprits, establish the personal and institutional inter-
linkages among the beneficiaries, key operators and financiers,
establish irrefutable evidence against them and bring them to book.
The Committee also feel that the irregularity should not be played
down by stating that it occurred mainly due to the failure of KYC
norms/guidelines. Since scores of benami multiple demat accounts
were opened and a linkage between key operators and financiers,
who had craftily planned this manipulation was evident, the
Committee strongly feel that this manipulation/irregularity is nothing
but a scam in the primary market.
48. In this connection, however, the Committee note that SEBI
during their course of investigation had found that 24 master account
holders or key operators had made off-market transfers to financiers,
which were stated to be 85 in number. The Committee further note
that SEBI had issued appropriate directions against these finaciers.
However, during the study tour of the Committee at Mumbai, the
Status Report on IPO investigtions by SEBI on 4th July, 2006 was
made available which stated that the number of financiers was 82.
Therefore, the Committee cannot but conclude that there is a
discrepancy in the number of financiers involved as per the records
of SEBI, which affects the credibility of its investigation and therefore
needs to be rectified immediately. They urge the Government to
resolve the matter and come out with a definite figure about the
number of financiers indicated.
49. The Committee also feel that a mechanism needs to be
devised at the level of SEBI, which could enable detection of any
irregularity taking place at the DP or Depository level at an early
stage. Although actions have been taken by the Ministry of Finance
and SEBI, the Committee are of the considered view that SEBI should
play more proactive and vigilant role in future in monitoring the
functioning of Depositories. Guidelines and ‘standing operating
procedure’ should be prepared and codified by SEBI to minimize
the ‘grey’ areas in the process of ‘monitoring’. The Committee,
therefore, desire that a time-frame not exceeding three months for
codifying these be fixed.

24
ROLE OF KARVY GROUP OF COMPANIES
IN THE IPO SCAM
50. Among all DPs indicted by SEBI, it was particularly noticed
by the Committee that Karvy, DP and its allied companies have been
insinuated to be involved in the scam in more than one respect. SEBI
has examined in detail the role, activities and demat account related
documents of Karvy-DP in the context of the IPO scam. Its Interim Order
stated the following:—
“In the cases of Yes bank and IDFC IPOs, it was found that there
were large numbers of off-market transfers from thousands of
demat accounts into a few accounts just before the listing of the
scrip and subsequently sold in the market at huge gain. The above
findings in the said two cases raised concern about the possibility
of existence of fictitious/benami demat accounts with Karvy-DP
which were being used only for the purpose of IPO on both the
depositories. In view of the above, the role of depository participant
and the compliance level of account opening formalities prescribed
by SEBI were examined through the scrutiny of documents relating
to the demat accounts opened with Karvy-DP, on a sample and test
check basis. Further, SEBI had inspected the operations, systems
and procedures of Karvy group at Hyderabad. Examinations of
refunds made by Karvy Registrar to the Issue (RTI) in Yes Bank
and IDFC IPOs, shows that in the IPO of Yes Bank, Karvy RTI
had issued a single refund order number 400002 favouring BHOB
for Rs. 53.89 crores in respect of 12,676 IPO applicants and in the
IPO of IDFC, Karvy RTI had issued single refund order No. 610003
for Rs. 27.35 crores favouring BHOB in respect of 6878 IPO
applicants.”
51. With regard to the arrangement between Karvy-DP and BHOB,
SEBI in its Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 stated the following:—
In order to enlarge client base, expand low cost deposit base, extend
self liquidating short term loans and augment revenue on the
24

25
personal banking area, BHOB, in June 2003, came up with a referral
with Karvy Investor Services Ltd. (Karvy) who were to direct to
BHOB their DP clients/other individuals who were interested in
participating in public offer of shares by Maruti Udyog Ltd., which
IPO opened on June 12, 2003. Karvy presented an idea paper and
a process flow. As per the process flow, the IPO applications would
be filled in by the investor and a cheque/DD in favour of the Bank
towards the margin amount shall be deposited. The investor would
need to open the demat account with Karvy who would place a lien
on the shares deposited into the investor’s account until the investor
clears the loan with the Bank. The client would deposit the payment
instrument and bid form with the bank along with the account
opening document and other documents for the loan. The Bank
would ensure that the Savings Bank (SB) account opened by the
Bank is mentioned in the relevant column in the bid form as the
Bank account to which the refund is to be sent. The Bank would
issue Pay order for the amount of the application by debiting loan
account and margin money of the respective applicants. If the
investor is not allotted shares against the IPO application, refunds
are made to investor by the registrar through the Bank and the
refund order credited to the account, after liquidating the loan. In
case of allotment, the investor is required to bring in the required
amount if there is shortfall and fulfil the obligation with the Bank
along with the interest after which the lien is released by the bank
and inform the DP for release of bank’s lien on the demat account.
Thus it appears that the idea presented by Karvy to BHOB started
as a practicable business proposition but contained potential
ingredients for future mischief, as it turned out in the final
denouement.”
52. SEBI thus observed :
“This comfort led to a blind trust on the part of the branches
in particular where IPO financing was allocated and they became
the dupe of a strange delusion. The branches also became
permissive and lax on account of Karvy’s presence in the entire
portfolio.”

26
53. Asked by the Committee as to why Karvy and the depositories
did not get alerted when thousands of demat accounts were being
opened on the same day with the same bank branch and being
introduced by the same bank, SEBI has replied that these should have
got alerted.
54. SEBI has also submitted before the Committee that the idea
paper and process flow presented by Karvy to Bharat Overseas Bank,
inter-alia, contained the ‘assurance clause’ that “applications received
from investors for an IPO offer are valid and there are no chances for
cases such as benami applications, multiple applications, fraudulent
investors, etc.” However, they have also stated that Karvy did not possess
any authority as an intermediary to prevail upon the bank. It would be
inappropriate for any intermediary to hold out any assurance that it
cannot take care of when it deals with others.
55. Some of the investors associations, who deposed before the
Committee have demanded that ‘integrated intermediaries’ like Karvy
Group of Companies which performed multiple functions as an
intermediary in the capital market should have a “Chinese Wall” built
around separate organizations to segregate their functions.
56. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance have in a written eply
stated as under:—
“The present legal framework does not prohibit the same entity or
different entities belonging to the same group from operating in
different capacities in the securities market. In some cases, certain
restrictions are imposed e.g., regulation 24 of the Mutual Funds
Regulations prohibits an AMC from taking up any business activity
except that of a portfolio manager and that too subject to certain
condition. In other cases, e.g. that of a DP, there is no such
restriction, on the other hand, there is an eligibility condition that
the entity could be a stock broker, Registrar to an Issue (RTI) etc.
It is also to be noted that the Insider Trading Regulations require
as part of Code of Conduct (though framed for achieving a different
objective) that intermediaries having multiple functions should

27
have ‘Chinese Walls’ separating the inside areas of the organization
from its public areas.”
57. The ad-interim order of SEBI contained the following prima
facie factual conclusions:
“.(i) ....It was prima facie found .....that Karvy group was the hub
of activity having control over the whole process from
generation of idea paper to the final execution through key
operators in conjunction with afferent accounts. The specific
prima facie findings were that Karvy opened demat accounts,
introduced bank accounts of the key operators and other
afferent accounts, arranged for finance from Bharat Overseas
Bank (BHOB) for such demat account holders, financed the key
operators through its sister concern, Karvy Consultants Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as KCL), received pay order from BHOB,
attached pay order to the application forms of various groups
and made IPO applications on their behalf, collected refund
orders for these 15 groups and put through off market
transfers. It appears to be an exercise of the Karvy group of
companies while the other players were IPO sub-brokers,
banks, financiers, key operators and a large number of
name lenders or fictitious entities as evidenced by afferent
accounts.
(2) It was also prima facie  found that the Karvy group had
linkages with the key operators such as Roopal Panchal,
Purushottam Budhwani, Dharmesh Mehta etc. They have
admitted in their written submissions that certain of them were
their IPO sub-brokers. It was prima facie found that KSBL had
introduced the bank accounts of these groups, and facilitated
the entire process starting from making IPO applications for
them after collecting pay orders from the bank, arranging
finance for them till collecting and distributing their refund
orders.
(3) KSBL not only arranged for finance for the key operators from
BHOB, Ahmedabad, Goregaon and Worli branches, but also

28
itself provided funds through its group concern, Karvy
Consultants Ltd. (KCL) which had financial transactions
with KSBL as well as various key operators (such as
Sugandh Estates, Puroshottam Budhwani, Manoj G. Seksaria,
etc.
(4) It was also prima facie found that Karvy group of companies
which were acting in various capacities in the IPOs joined
hands with other entities as mentioned supra facilitating
cornering of shares in IPO process. It was also prima facie
found that Karvy Computershare Pvt. Ltd. (KCPL) had issued
single consolidated refund order payable to BHOB and other
financiers in respect of thousands of applicants for the IPOs
in which it was the RTI.
(5) It is to be noted at this point that the SEBI investigations were
not directed exclusively at Karvy, as may be seen from the
initial parts of the ad-interim order. Karvy’s involvement at
various stages in the rev up to the IPO was pointed out prima
facie, by relying on factual data as recorded in the ad-interim
order, and therefore, subsequent investigations were more
focused on the Karvy group, besides others.”
58. SEBI in its Interim Order subsequently ordered Karvy Stock
Broking Ltd. (KSBL) not to buy, sell or deal in securities market including
in IPOs, directly or indirectly till further directions. It was inter-alia also
directed not to carry on activities as DP till completion of enquiry and
passing of final order.  Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, KSBL filed a
writ petition before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh
challenging SEBI’s order order dated 27.4.2006. The Hon’ble High Court
had passed the order inter-alia containing the following :—
‘However, the order dated 27.4.2006 and the first paragraph of the
clarification dated 28.4.2006 shall operate proprio vigore unhindered
by anything stated in this order.’
59. Karvy Group of Companies have appeared before SEBI on
2.5.2006 and submitted their position to them on the factual conclusions.

29
However, SEBI had vide their order dated 26.5.2006 claimed to rebut
seriatim all the objections of Karvy Group of Companies and reiterated
their earlier findings “(i) relating to the Karvy Group’s involvement in
the entire modus operandi, and (ii) relating to the emergent nature of the
situation which necessitates immediate action.”
60. The Committee take serious note of the fact that as per
the findings of SEBI an intermediary, namely, Karvy DP managed
to prevail upon a bank i.e. BhOB to such an extent that the bank
was lulled into complacence in utter disregard to the KYC norms.
In this context, the Committee were dismayed to note that in the
IPO of Yes Bank, Karvy Registrar to the issue (RTI) had issued
a single refund order No. 400002 favouring BhOB for Rs. 53.89 crores
in respect of 12,676 IPO applicants and in the IPO of IDFC, it had
issued single refund order No. 610003 for Rs. 27.35 crores favouring
BhOB in respect of 6878 IPO applicants. The fact that Karvy RTI
had made consolidated refund favouring BhoB in respect of
thousands of IPO applicants and that the Karvy Group was directing
the investment of funds in respect of IPO applications are real eye
openers. The Committee also note that Karvy had very conveniently
issued an idea paper to BHoB certifying that the applications received
for the IPO offer were valid, which shows the extent to which Karvy
could prevail upon the Bank. They feel that the discreet arrangement
for mutual benefit of BhoB and Karvy would have gone further ahead
had there been no unearthing of the IPO scam.
61. The Committee are convinced that the role of Karvy Group
of Companies in the IPO Scam was questionable right from the
beginning. They find that SEBI has indicated Karvy in the Directions
contained in their interim order dated 27.4.2006. Subsequent to that,
Karvy had submitted their position to SEBI which has been refuted
by SEBI in its another interim order dated 26.5.2005 wherein the
latter has analysed the role of Karvy Group of Companies. The
Committee, therefore, expect SEBI to conduct thorough investigation
in all areas of manipulation allegedly done by the Karvy Group and
take stringent action against them and also present a strong case
in the Court of Law.

30
62. At the same time, the Committee also feel that
Government should review the system of an “intergrated
Intermediary”. As a major part of the malfunctioning leading to the
scam could be attributed to the role of the intermediary, the Karvy
Group of Companies which performed multiple functions in all
directions, the Committee feel that the role of such intermediaries
should be examined minutely with a view to see that those operating
in multiple capacity are not able to manipulate the system. The
Committee feel that law should be examined with a view to
separating the various functions of the intermediaries so that not
only there is complete separation of functions, but the management
including the Board of Directors of different entities is also not
common. They feel that perhaps similar steps may also be initiated
in the case of intermediaries operating in the primary market, so
as to bring the desired impact and thus urge SEBI to actively
examined the possibility thereof.

31
FINDINGS OF RBI REGARDING INVOLVEMENT OF
BANKS IN THE IPO SCAM
63. Banks provided a significant source of funds for investing in
the IPOs. The Committee examined the role of some of the banks alleged
to have been involved in flouting the KYC norms and other irregularities
and the investigation carried out by the Reserve Bank of India that
regulates the Banking Sector.
64. To a query raised by the Committee as to how many banks
are actually involved in these irregularities, RBI has stated that so far,
10 banks have been found to have violated RBI directives, guidelines
and instructions relating to opening of accounts, KYC norms and AML
standards, IPO financing and sanctions of loans against shares
etc., which facilitated manipulation of the IPO process by certain
unscrupulous individuals/entities for cornering the retail portion of
shares. RBI has fined these banks to the tune of Rs. 5 to 30 lakh for
violation of Know Your Customer (KYC) norms and guidelines relating
to IPO financing. The names of these banks as well the details of each
bank fined is as below:—
(1) HDFC Bank (Rs. 30 lakh)
(2) ING Vysya Bank (Rs. 30 lakh)
(3) Bharat Overseas Bank Ltd (Rs. 20 lakh)
(4) Vijaya Bank (Rs. 10 lakh)
(5) Indian Overseas Bank (Rs. 15 lakh)
(6) ICICI Bank (Rs. 5 lakh)
(7) Citibank (Rs. 5 lakh)
(8) Standard Chartered Bank (Rs. 5 lakh)
(9) IDBI Ltd. (Rs. 5 lakh)
(10) Centurian Bank of Punjab (Rs. 15 lakh)
31

32
65. RBI has apprised the Committee that they have also advised
all scheduled commercial banks, excluding RRBs, on 05.01.2006 to take
a review of IPO financing and related matters, like opening of multiple
accounts, adherence to KYC/AML guidelines, and RBI instructions on
IPO financing, advances against shares, etc. and put up a report on the
findings before their Audit Committees.
The RBI’s findings about these ten banks are as under:—
(I) Bharat Overseas Bank
— Funded YES bank issue to the extent of Rs. 29.94 crore
at both the branches and other IPO issues funded at
Goregaon branch Rs. 130.63 crore and Rs. 32.46 crore at
Worli branch.
— Extended IPO finance to fictitious/benami individuals
without appropriate due diligence to establish their
identity of existence.
— Apart from providing intra day funding of margin
money to brokers, the bank had extended huge amounts
to a group of accounts through these fictitious/benami
individuals in violation of RBI directive on limits on
funding of IPOs (which specified, inter-alia, a limit of
Rs. 10 lakh per individual).
— The internal control system has failed to arrest the above
irregularities. It also did not act upon the alerts that
emanated from the internal audit.
— Collection of account payee cheques of various
individuals who were not the customers of the bank,
besides crediting the proceeds of the refund orders to
accounts other than the accounts of the payees.
66. As per the RBI investigations, Bharat Overseas Bank virtually
played assistant to Karvy DP. Asked about the findings as well as steps

33
taken by RBI to prevent recurrence of such things in future, Ministry of
Finance have informed as under:—
“RBI has informed that the IPO related investigations by RBI at
Bharat Overseas Bank revealed that the DP provider M/s Karvy
Consultants Ltd. approached the bank for opening multiple
accounts in the names of purported applicants and also requested
the bank to fund the IPOs in respect of various demat holders, who
were benami/fictitious persons. The IPO funding was done by the
bank directly without opening SB/loan accounts, in violation of
KYC guidelines. The bank’s internal guidelines in this regard
requiring opening of SB accounts for IPO finance, were blatantly
violated by the bank. The irregularities on the part of Bharat
Overseas Bank Ltd. were committed primarily by one Senior
Manager at Worli branch. The branch manager of its Goregaon
branch was also found to have indulged in a similar practice. This
was made possible by disregarding the laid down internal
guidelines of the bank and violation of RBI directives/guidelines
and also with the active support of DP-Karvy. Acting on the
instructions of M/s Karvy Securities Ltd., the bank also credited
refund amounts to the accounts of a few entities/groups instead of
the named payees of the refund orders. This was in violation of
the RBI guidelines in this regard. Primarily, banks’ audit system
should have detected such irregularities. While some aspects of
these IPO irregularities came to the notice of the Top Management,
these were neither examined indepth nor pursued effectively for
corrective action at any level in the bank. These were also not
brought to the notice of RBI at any stage by the bank.
The Ex-Chairman & CEO of the bank was reportedly aware of the
unhealthy practices indulged in by M/s Karvy. The bank had also
failed to obtain the approval of the Board of Directors (BOD) for
financing IPOs and the IPO finance was approved by the then
Chairman on case to case basis. The BOD of the bank has charged
him with irregularities such as concealing material information
from the Board/Audit Committee of the Board, wrong reporting, etc.
RBI has also brought this fact to the notice of CBI which is
investigating the case.”

34
(2)(2)(2)(2)(2) Indian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas Bank
(The bank did not fund the YES bank issue but funded other
issues to the tune of Rs. 93.36 crore)
— Opening multiple accounts without adhering to KYC
norms.
— Facilitating manipulation of IPO process by certain
group of individuals by extending IPO finance to various
fictitious individuals.
— Failing to monitor the unusual and suspicious transac-
tions in the said accounts and the failure of internal
controls in monitoring the non-compliance with KYC
policies/procedures.
(3)(3)(3)(3)(3) Vijaya Bank, AhmedabadVijaya Bank, AhmedabadVijaya Bank, AhmedabadVijaya Bank, AhmedabadVijaya Bank, Ahmedabad
— Opening multiple accounts without adherence to KYC
norms.
— Failing to monitor large value transactions.
— Failure of internal control to check the irregularities in
KYC compliance and monitoring of transactions in
deposit accounts.
(4) CITI Bank
The bank violated RBI guidelines/directives/instructions
relating to monitoring of suspicious transactions, adherence to KYC
norms and issue of large number of cheque leaves not in
consonance with the status of the account holder.
(5) Standard Chartered Bank
The bank violated RBI guidelines/directives/instructions
relating to KYC norms, and had also failed to verify the end use
of funds in respect of loans granted against shares to a number
of individuals.

35
(6) ICICI Bank
The bank violated RBI guidelines/directives/instructions
relating to opening of accounts, and monitoring of transactions for
adherence to KYC norms. There was failure of internal control
systems and the bank accepted large number of account payee
cheques across the counter without proper authorization.
(7) HDFC Bank
The bank was found to have violated RBI guidelines/
directives/instructions relating to opening of SB, Loans Against
Shares and Demat accounts, monitoring of transactions for
adherence to KYC norms, issue of large number of cheque books,
improper credit of third party account payee cheques and failure
of internal controls.
(8) ING VYSYA Bank
The bank was found to have violated RBI guidelines/
directives/instructions relating to opening of SB, and Demat
accounts, monitoring of transactions for adherence to KYC norms,
sanction of IPO finance and Loans against shares and failure of
internal controls.
(9) IDBI Ltd.
The bank violated RBI guidelines/directives/instructions
relating to opening of accounts and monitoring of transactions for
adherence to KYC norms. Sanction of IPO finance and loans against
shares.
(10) Centurian Bank of Punjab
Several demat accounts were opened by a few individual
without adhering to KYC guidelines and through process obtained
multiple IPO finance which facilitated making multiple IPO
applications.
67. The Committee were informed that RBI had conducted three
rounds of investigations/ scrutinies of banks suspected to be involved
in the IPO scam. From the details of the three rounds of scrutinies by

36
RBI which was furnished to the Committee during their study tour at
Mumbai, it was noticed that one more bank, namely, Tamil Nad
Mercantile Bank has also been suspected to be involved in irregularities
and the investigation in this matter has been conducted.
68. Latest position in regard to the examination of staff
accountability as on 19.07.2006 along with the examination of criminality
on the part of employees by respective banks has also been made
available to the Committee, and is given below:—
IPO irregularities—Examination of staff accountability—Latest
Position (19-07-2006)
Bank Name   Action taken by the Bank
12
1. Bharat Overseas Tha bank has initiated action against seven
Bank Ltd. officials at HO level and seven officials at
branch level.
As inordinate delay was observed in taking
action against the officials involved, RBI, vide
letter dated June 28, 2006, had advised the bank
to expedite the disciplinary action. Accordingly
the bank has reported (letter dated June 30, 2006)
that consequent upon appointment of Shri Y.M.
Pai as enquiry officer, the bank had commenced
the domestic enquiry of Shri Krishnamurthy, ex-
Chairman & CEO. The last hearing was sched-
uled for July 4, 2006. Cases of three executives
were assessed and closed. That apart, one
executive has been charge-sheeted under Major
Penalty and preliminary hearing in his case was
held on June 12, 2006 and the regular hearing
posted from July 6, 2006. The five Branch
Managers, who were suspended have been
issued with charge-sheet under Major Penalty.

37
12
2. Vijaya Bank The bank initiated major penalty proceedings
against 5 officials of which one Senior Branch
Manager who was under suspension, has been
imposed the punishment of “reduction to a lower
grade from MMG to Scale-III.” In the case of four
others, punishments ranging from ‘reduction in
grade for a period of one year without cumula-
tive effect’ to ‘censure’ were imposed. The bank
is also examining the role of Controlling Office
in the matter.
3. Indian Overseas The bank has initiated action against six officials
Bank of the bank of which charge-sheets have been
issued to two officials. Show cause memos were
issued to three officials and letters of ‘censure’
issued to them on conclusion of the enquiries.
4. HDFC Bank Ltd. Show cause notices were issued to 28 officials.
Of these, in 16 cases, services were terminated
by the bank and in 11 cases warning letters with
‘no promotion and performance bonus’ were
issued. In one case, the official resigned from the
bank’s servies. Another 18 officials (mostly sales
executives) had resigned from the services of the
bank before investigation.
5. Standard W arning letters were issued to nine officials
Chartered Bank (one of whom since has quit the bank). In the
case of three other officials, warning letters were
not issued as they are not in the employment of
the bank now.
6. Citibank The bank took action against two officials one
of whom was relieved of his responsibilities in
the bank. The other officer resigned from the
services in the bank.

38
12
7. ING Vysya Bank The bank initiated action against eight officials
Ltd. of the bank w hich included issue of show cause
notice to one official, suspension of one officer,
issue of charge-sheets to two officials. Issue of
show cause notice to 3 officials is being looked
into by the bank.
8. IDBI Ltd. The bank has sought explanations from five
officials of the bank and replies submitted by
them are being looked into for further necessary
action by the bank.
9. ICICI Bank The bank reported that there were no lapses on
the part of any employees, thus no action was
taken against any employee.
10. Centurion Bank The bank has been advised to examine staff
of Punjab accountability aspect and is yet to furnish the
reply.
Examination of criminality on the part of the employees
(19.07.2006)
 Bank Name  Action taken by banks
12
1. Indian Overseas Either during the internal investigation or during
Bank the enquiry conducted with regard to the charge-
sheets issued to the employees did not reveal any
criminality on the part of the employees. Central
Bureau of Investigation is also investigating the
case. The subject matter was clarified by the
banks’s CMD while deposing before the
Honourable Chairman and Members of the
Standing Committee on Finance held on April 20,
2006  at  New  Delhi.  Further, the CBI, Banks

39
12
Securities and Frauds Cell. Mumbai had seized
certain documents from the bank’s Thaltej and
Stadium Road, Ahmedabad in respect of the case
registered by them.
2. Bharat Overseas The bank’s Legal Dept. has examined the same
Bank Ltd. in detail and as per the report, there is needle of
suspicion against Shri S.V. Rajan, the then
Manager of Worli branch. As per the report, there
is no criminal action on the part of other staff
members. Findings of the Legal Dept. have been
placed before the Board on June 21, 2006. The
Board has advised to interact with CBI for further
course of action, since CBI is seized of the matter.
3. Vijaya Bank The bank has reportedly examined the issue in
consultation with the bank’s Legal Dept. Though
the bank has admitted that “considerably large
amounts of transactions have been routed
through the account of Sugandh and through the
multiple accounts in the joint names of Parag P.
Jhaveri and Others to facilitate credit of refund
orders”, it has stated that it has not found any
act of criminality inclusive of corruption and/ or
bargains of money/material transaction except
the procedural lapses of violation of KYC norms
committed by the staff concerned. The reasons
given in support of this stand, are : (a) there was
no instance of any IPO issue funding or
financing of any individual towards subscrip-
tion to the issue at the branch or any of other
branches; (b) No money laundering has taken
place, as there are no cash deposits and
withdrawals; (c) The account holders involved in
these transactions were maintaining accounts
since 1984 and were not new to the bank.

40
12
4. ICICI Bank Ltd. The Corporate Legal Group examined the matter
and concluded that no employee appears to have
any monetary or other nexus with the persons
concerned in the IPO issue or that the irregulari-
ties/ violations for wrongful gains or consider-
ations or motivated.
5. HDFC Bank Ltd. The bank’s Legal Dept. has opined that although
there is negligence on the part of the employees
concerned, the same needs to be supplemented
by dishonest intentions in order to file a criminal
complaint against them. It is also necessary to
establish that there was, in fact a dishonest
intention in their acts with a knowledge that it
would cause a wrongful gain to the concerned
employees or the customers concerned or a
wrongful loss to the bank or such employees
have acted in connivance with the customers. If
and only if a dishonest intention or connivance
is established, would it be possible to institute
criminal action against them. The bank’s Legal
Dept. has also opined that the bank does
not have the powers which the investigating
authorities possess and without these powers, it
would be difficult for the bank to make out a
criminal case.
In these circumstances, the bank has not filed a
criminal case against the employees.
6. Citibank As per a report in the matter submitted by Wadia
Ghandy & Co. Advocates & Solicitors, there is no
evidence of “active connivance” of the concerned
staff in the IP issue at Citibank level; there is no
evidence of criminal intent on the part of the
concerned officers. For the lack of evidence at

41
12
least at this stage, it is advisable for Citibank not
to proceed against the officers concerned viz.
Shri Prashant Patel and Amresh Mohan.
7. Standard In consultation with the legal dept. an internal
Chartered Bank review was initiated specifically on the conduct
of the employees concerned to examine the issue
of possible criminality. An external legal counsel
was also instructed to conduct a parallel
investigation at law.
The two investigations concluded that no mate-
rial has been found to conclude on any
reasonable basis that the bank’s staff was
involved in the commission of a crime.
8. ING Vysya The bank’s Legal Dept. examined the issue of
Bank Ltd. criminality and has concluded that they do not
find any material to substantiate the surmise/
apprehension that the acts of negligence/miscon-
duct/violations by the employees concerned
constitutes criminality on their part.
The dept. also obtained the opinion of
M/s Khetty & Co., Advocates, who are of the
opinion that “the situation was occasioned, not
due to any deliberate criminal intention”.
The bank has concluded that there are no prima
facie grounds to initiate any criminal proceedings
against the employees concerned.
9. IDBI Ltd. The bank is arranging with its Legal Dept. to
expeditiously examine the issue of criminality on
the part of the employees (Letter dated June 28,
2006).
10. Centurion Bank The bank has been advised to examine
criminality aspect and is yet to report the position
in the matter.
of Punjab

42
69. When asked by the Committee as to how could the banks flout
the norms or rules in extending finance for IPOs so openly, the Ministry
of Finance in a written reply submitted as under:—
“Banks have not directly flouted the norms/rules in extending
finance for IPOs. But the banks allowed opening of multiple
accounts/adding multiple names to accounts as joint account
holders without adhering to the prescribed KYC norms. Non-
adherence to the requirements of necessary due diligence led to
adding names as joint holders of persons who were merely name
lenders (e.g. HDFC Bank) or non existent/fictitious person (BhoB).
These accounts were thus, created the IPO finance extending to these
account holders was effectively received/pooled and used by the
few main operators and enabled these persons to obtain IPO
finance much in excess of the prescribed ceiling of Rs. 10.00 lakh
per individual.”
70. Asked by the Committee about the pecuniary benefits that the
concerned individuls, brokers, DPs and bankers have illegally gained,
RBI has explained as under:—
“The IPO related investigations taken up by RBI was focused
on bank’s role in the IPO irregularities. The investigations revealed
linkages between certain DPs, individual/groups and brokers for
manipulating the banking processes for cornering the retail portions
of various primary issues.
Our investigations did not reveal any pecuniary benefits to the
banks involved. As regards the involvement of bank officials, banks
were advised by RBI to fix staff accountability in respect of errant
officials and also examine the criminality aspects. Some banks have
already taken action including dismissal/suspension of officials,
while some others are in the process of taking disciplinary action
in the matter.”
71. In this connection when the Committee asked SEBI about the
possible benefits that might have accrued to banks, DPs etc. It was stated
that ‘it would appear that the banks and depository participants in the
process had augmented their income on account of large number of

43
banks and demat accounts opened with the coupled with the transactions
in these accounts’.
72. From the investigations to the activities of certain banks
in the IPO scam by RBI, the Committee note that so far, the
following ten banks, namely (i) Bharat Overseas Bank Ltd. (BhOB)
(ii) Vijaya Bank (iii) Indian Overseas Bank (iv) HDFC Bank (v) ICICI
Bank (vi) Citibank (vii) Standard Chartered Bank (viii) ING Vysya
Bank (ix) IDBI Ltd. and (x) Centurian Bank of Punjab were found
to have violated RBI directives, guidelines and instructions relating
to opening of accounts, KYC norms, AML Standards, IPO financing
and sanction of loans against shares. This facilitated manipulation
of IPO process by certain unscrupulous individuals/entities for
cornering the retail portion of shares. It is clear beyond doubt that
either these banks allowed their system to be misutilised by the
scamsters or fell prey to the traps of ‘key operators’ of this scam.
The Committee find that now RBI has advised all scheduled
commercial banks (excluding RRBs) to :– (i) take a review of IPO
financing and related matters (ii) adhere to KYC/AML guidelines
and RBI’s instructions on IPO financing etc. RBI has also taken up
examination of the internal control systems of some banks to assess
weaknesses with regard to the IPO financing etc. While noting that
the inspection of RBI is limited to certain select banks only to detect
irregularities, the Committee are also convinced that the primary
responsibility lies with the internal control system of the banks which
proved to be a complete failure in the wake of IPO scam.
73. The Committee are particulrly dismayed at the irrespon-
sible role played by some of the branches of the Bharat Overseas
Bank in favour of Karvy DP. The Committee are also surprised to
note that serious revelations have come up during the course of
investigation by RBI as it has alleged that the then Chairman and
CEO of the Bharat Overseas Bank was reportedly aware of the
unhealthy practices indulged in by M/s Karvy. The Committee have
been informed that the bank has initiated major penalty proceedings
against him. The Committee also find in this connection that the
Board of Directors of the bank has charged him with certain
irregularities such as concealing material information from the Board/

44
Audit Committee of the Board, wrong reporting etc. and RBI has
brought this fact to the notice of CBI which is investigating the
case. The Committee are shocked as to how an official, who is at
the helm of affairs, can afford to flout the norms so conveniently.
They, therefore, urge RBI to issue strict directives to the
management/Boards of Directors of all Banks to ensure that
prudential norms/instructions/directives/guidelines issued by RBI
from time to time are scrupulously followed by all the banks.
74. It was also observed by the Committee, during their study
visit at Mumbai that one more bank, namely the Tamil Nadu
Mercantile Bank Ltd. has been found to be involved in the
irregularities by RBI. RBI has concluded its investigations in respect
of the bank and is yet to initiate action based on the findings of
the investigation. Moreover, the Committee feel that there may be
more banks or the same banks that may have been frequently
involved in the irregularities prior to this period. The Committee,
therefore, feel that further investigation must be conducted in this
respect and appropriate action taken.
75. The Committee note the submission made by RBI that
there was no pecuniary benefits to the Banks in the scam. However,
on the other hand SEBI’s position about informal arrangement
between Karvy DP & BhOB, that both came together on commercial
considerations and not for any altruistic purposes sounds more
convincing to the Committee. The Committee would, at the same
time, like to believe that some of the Banks have fallen into the
trap rather unwittingly and opine that they could have been saved
from this, had they diligently followed KYC norms prescribed by
RBI.
76. The Committee take note of the monetary penalties
imposed by RBI on erring Banks. They also note the staff
accountability fixed by the respective banks. (which were found
involved in irregularities in IPOs) as well as the examination of
criminality on the part of employees of these banks. RBI has also
sought to assure the Committee that regulatory discomfort, in
addition to the penalties would be imposed on the Banks involved
in the IPO Scam. However, the Committee strongly feel that the

45
transgression from the guidelines/instructions of the RBI has not
taken place without the connivance of officials of the banks, who
were found responsible for the irregularities in flouting KYC norms.
Therefore, they should be appropriately punished so as to serve as
an effective deterrent in future. The Committee further feel that
more stringent punishment be meted out to banks which are found
to be repeatedly indulging in malpractices. Besides, whenever ‘grey
areas’ in the existing legal provisions are identified, new rules to
clear the ambiguities in such grey areas should be made on an urgent
basis. They also recommend that criminal proceeding be initiated
by these banks against such employees, who were involved in
flouting KYC norms, promptly. Merely causing ‘Regulator Discomfort’
to the “scamster” banks do not convey necessary ‘message’ to the
individuals who are the real culprits. Hence, a clear cut, strong and
prompt punishment must be provided for in the system, itself so
that the fear of ‘personal punishment’ is there.
77. The Committee further recommend that the RBI should
periodically monitor the stipulated exposure of banks to the capital
market.

46
ROLE OF DEPOSITORIES
78. Investigations were undertaken by SEBI against two Deposi-
tories namely National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) and Central
Depository Services Limited in the wake of allegations that their
regulation of DPs was ineffective and thus failed to check the
irregularities committed by those entities. In this connection, it is pertinent
to note certain provisions contained in the Depositories Act, 1996, the SEBI
(Depositories and Participants) Regulations, 1996 and the SEBI Act, 1992,
which are as follows:—
– A depository can act as a depository only after it has obtained
a certificate of commencement of business from SEBI. Such
certificate is granted in accordance with the provisions of the
SEBI (Depositories and Participants) Regulations, 1996.
– A depository is deemed to be the registered owner for the
purposes of effecting transfer of ownership of security on
behalf of a beneficial owner.
– Every depository is required to maintain a register and an index
of beneficial owners in the manner provided.
– Rights and obligations of depositories and participants are
provided in the agreement between them. Bye-laws generally
govern the relationship between them.
– SEBI may call for information from a depository and
participant and can make an enquiry or inspection in relation
to the affairs of the depository or the participant.
– SEBI may issue directios to depository or participant, adjudi-
cate and impoe monetary penalty on depository or participant.
– In the interests of investors or orderly development of the
securities market or to secure the proper management of the
Depositories and Participants, SEBI can issue directions to
them.
46

47
79. In the context of the IPO scam, the committee note that SEBI
in their exparte Ad interim Order dated 27.04.2006, inter-alia, has indicted
NSDL and CDSL as under :
a. ....it can be concluded that the depositories have carried out the
inspections of Depository Participants registered with them in
a casual, cursory and perfunctory manner.
b. Also there is recurrence of same errors relating to account
opening as noticed in inspection after inspection and NSDL has
commented on them in their reports year after year. However,
the same error recurs and the cycle goes on. This has made
non-compliance while account opening a regular feature.
c. NSDL imposes penalty for non compliance with NCFM
employee requirement however, no penalty is levied on not
meeting the statutory requirement.
d. Regardless of the type of DP (broker, Bank etc.) and regardless
of the size of the operations of the DP concerned, NSDL devotes
usually only one day for inspection. Also, NSDL has allotted
a fixed time for each area of DP’s operation and the time
allotted remains the same irrespective of the quantum of
instructions processed by the DP.
e. The sample size chosen by NSDL in their inspections is
woefully inadequate.
f. NSDL had not taken appropriate penal action against DPs for
acts of repetitive violations, as observed by them during
inspections. NSDL’s action has never gone beyond imposition
of monetary penalties.
g. Most instances of levying of penalty are for mostly non
compliance with NCFM employee requirement where penalties
upto Rs. 3,50,000 has been imposed. In case of account opening
deficiencies the penalty is only 500-1000 rupees and the
instances are few.
h. The reliability of the inspection reports is very low as there are
grave errors like the number of errors being shown lesser than
the number of accounts involving errors.

48
i. Thus it can be concluded that NSDL was aware of the
irregularities in connection with opening of accounts from
the year 2003 which is evident from the inspection report of
HDFC Bank, Karvy Stock Broking etc. They failed to take
prompt action against the DPs and failed to inform SEBI of
the same.
j. As for CDSL their inspection reports are not indicative at all.
From the inspection report it is very difficult to draw a
conclusion as to whether it is in ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ format.
k. It can also be drawn that the Depositories were aware of the
possibility of existence of accounts being opened without
proper KYC Process as early as 2003 and has not put in place
system to detect such accounts and take appropriate action.
Thus it is felt that the depositaries have turned a blind eye to
these deficiencies which has led to its recurrence of error in
account opening repeatedly, in a big way later.
l. It was also observed that the procedure for inspection,
periodicity of inspection and the entity chosen for inspection
has not been in line with the responsibility cast on the
depositories. Further, from the format of inspection reports of
the Depositories it is observed that the inspection is system
specific rather than entity specific.
m. From the above it can be inferred that there is no culture of
supervision/compliance and the nature of compliance is
merely paper work
n. There was no application of mind while conducting these
inspections. The way in which the penalty was imposed
and then again waived when the DPs submit a paper
saying they have complied, shows a callous attitude towards
statutory requirements by the depositories especially when
the account opening deficiencies recur among the large
percentage of the sample collected during all inspections from
2003-2006.

49
o. The levying of penalities which runs into lakhs for non-
compliance with NCFM certification of employees of DPs by
NSDL and only penalties in range of hundreds and few
thousands for account opening deficiencies shows that NSDL
does not use a fair and objective criteria while levying penalty.
p. The depositories are required to have adequate controls,
systems and procedure for monitoring and evaluating its
compliances with statutory requirements and prevent any
conduct by DPs which is detrimental to the interest of investors
or the securities market. In this respect, the depositories have
failed to perform and supervise the operations of the DPs and
also failed to inform SEBI of the same deficiencies. Hence the
depositories have failed to conduct themselves in a manner
which is in the interest of investors and the securities market.”
80. SEBI’s Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 contained the following
direction against Depositories:—
“The interim findings in this order demonstrate the contribu-
tory negligence on the part of the depositories and their
management. It is clear that there have been grave management
lapses leading to such a situation. It is the responsibility of the
promoters to ensure that the depositories are properly managed
in the interests of investors. To that end, the promoters of NSDL
and CDSL, without further loss of time are directed to take all
appropriate actions including revamping of management
which clearly has allowed matters to come to such a sorry
pass.”
81. From the Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 of SEBI, the Committee
note that there is a Disciplinary Action Committee of NSDL having
responsibilities and powers as are delegated to it by the NSDL Board,
from time to time, which includes the following responsibilities and
powers to be discharged in accordance with the provisions of these Bye
laws:—
(i) suspension of a Participant;
(ii) expulsion of a Participant;

50
(iii) declaring a security as is ‘ineligible’ on the Depository;
(iv) freezing the account of the Participant;
(v) powers to conduct inspection; and
(vi) power to conduct an investigation/inquiry, call for records, to
issue show cause notice to Participants for suspension/
expulsion.
82. The Committee also note that inspite of repeated violations by
DPs, the Depository has not made any reference at all to its Disciplinary
Action Committee and the Disciplinary Action Committee (DAC) of the
Depository had not met since its inception.
83. While NSDL has approached the Securities Appellate Tribunal
(SAT) against the directions contained in the SEBI’s interim order, CDSL
has forwarded their response to SEBI rebutting the arguments put forth
against them. Salient points in its response are as under:—
I. “Simply because the data in the depository system is available
to Depository and Depository Participants, possibility of
fabrication by Depository Participant with the connivance of
Depository cannot be inferred. The data could have also been
available with the Depository Participant otherwise.
II. The depositories themselves have to furnish dual address
under SEBI Regulations, for seeking certificate of registration.
The demat account holders of CDSL could have used their
permanent address to be recorded by Depository Participant
and the financier’s address as correspondence address so that
refund orders from the IPO application, if any, could be
credited directly to the financier’s address. Therefore, SEBI’s
contentions that dual address facility facilitated the financers
to control benami account transactions in the Depository
Participant system besides direct control on payments, refunds
etc. is untenable.
III. The inspection of Depository Participants is conducted by
CDSL officials/empanelled auditors. Before the inspections, a

51
detailed training programme is held. The checklist format
compels the auditors to clearly indicate as to whether the
Depository Participant has complied with the points and helps
in maintaining uniformity across the various audits. Inspection
Report format is not restricted only to the checklist.
IV. The depository -DP relationship is not a pure principal agent
relationship on the basis of the contractual principles of law
of agency. The Dhanuka Committee have also recommended
the omission of the words “as agent” from section 4(1) of the
Depositories Act.
V. Merely because a fraud has been perpetrated by abusing the
depository system, it does not follow that the depository has
been negligent. In the IPO scam, there was no misuse of the
securities with the depository system, but unlawful gains were
made outside the depository system viz. in the IPO allotment
process.”
84. CDSL was queried by the Committee over the directions passed
against them by SEBI as contained in latter’s interim order dated
27.4.2006. When the depository’s response was sought on the charge in
the SEBI report of contributory negligence, CDSL has inter-alia in its post
evidence written reply submitted as under:
“It is submitted that CDSL conducts inspectons of all its DPs and
their live-connected branches every year, either by its own officials
or by empanelled auditors. In case of large DPs, the inspections are
carried on over a period of multiple days with due regard to account
holders, population size and frequency of transactions of the DP.
It is further submitted that because a fraud has been perpetrated
by abusing the depository system, it does not necessary follow that
the depository has been negligent or that there have been grave
management lapses on the part of the depository. On the contrary,
the depository has been a victim of the fraud committed by the
nefarious operators with the possible connivance of the banks, DPs
and RTI.”

52
85. The Committee note that as per the Depositories Act, 1996,
the Depository is deemed to be the registered owner for the purposes
of effecting transfer of ownership of security on behalf of a beneficial
owner. They also find that SEBI has full regulatory control over the
Depositories.
86. In regard to the role of the Depositories in the IPO scam,
the Committee have been informed that SEBI had in its interim
order indicated both the depositories, namely NSDL and CDSL for
turning a blind eye to the deficiencies in the functioning of DPs
and thereby facilitating the irregularities in the IPO Scam of 2005.
The Committee also find it very disturbing that NSDL was aware
of the irregularities in connection with opening of accounts from the
year 2003, which is evident from the inspection report of HDFC Bank,
KSBL etc. and that SEBI had accused them of failing to take prompt
action against the DPs. The Committee find that NSDL has
approached SAT to contest these allegations.
87. The Committee are also disappointed to note SEBI’s
observation that there was recurrence of the same errors by DPs
year after year, relating to account opening and this was noticed
by NSDL also in its various inspections and it had commented on
them in its reports year after year. However, NSDL took no action
against DPs. The Committee view it as a very serious matter that
the inspection reports have been reduced to a mere routine formality
and scant regard is paid to the implementation of the guidelines/
regulations prescribed by SEBI as well as the spirit of the
Depositories Act, 1996. The Committee are also of the opinion that
had SEBI been vigilant, the overlooking of the recurrence of same
errors year after year by the Depositories would have been tackled
earlier. They feel that the ultimate onus of regulating the capital
market rests with SEBI, which is also vested with the power to call
for information from a Depository as well as DP and make an enquiry
or inspection in relation to the affairs of the Depository or the DP,
as the case may be. That this was not done is nothing but regrettable.
The Committee note the observation by SEBI that NSDL conducted
inspections in a casual, cursory and perfunctory manner. They

53
recommend that SEBI should introspect to find out the reasons as
to why the matter could not be addressed by SEBI earlier. At the
same time, they prima facie feel that both the Depositories have
fared poorly in conducting their inspection of Depository Participants
registered with them. They, therefore, recommend that both NSDL
and CDSL, should devise in consultation with SEBI, a uniform system
of inspection of the DPs registered with them. This exercise should
incorporate the best practices being followed internationally. The
Depositories must strive to see that their inspection process is
capable of detecting the irregularities/manipulations being done by
individuals/entities rather than being just system/specific. The
Committee recommend that serious thought may be given to the
suggestion of SEBI regarding revamping of management of the
Depositories so that the detection of any possible violation of the
KYC norms/guidelines/various regulations that regulate the conduct
of the Depository Participants is possible at the initial stage.
88. The Committee have been given to understand the NSDL
Board has delegated certain powers and responsibilities in accordance
with the provisions of the bye-laws regarding suspensions/expulsions/
freezing the accounts of a DP as well as conducting inspections,
investigation, inquiries etc., to a Disciplinary Action Committee
(DAC). However, as per SEBI’s interim order, inspite of repeated
violations by DPs, no reference was ever made to the DAC by NSDL.
Moreover, the Committee are shocked that even in this scenario the
DAC of NSDL had not met since its inception. They wonder as
for what purpose the DAC was constituted in NSDL as no reference
was ever made to it despite violations of the bye-laws by DPs, being
noticed repeatedly by it (NSDL). This puts a question mark over
the seriousness with which DPs are being inspected by the NSDL.
In case of any such error noticed in future, the matter should
invariably be referred to DAC so that exemplary punishment is given
to them.
89. The Committee find that as per CDSL, they conduct
inspections of all DPs and their ‘live connected’ branches every year,
either by their own officials or by empanelled auditors. In this regard,

54
the Committee are of the view that the Depositories should
streamline their system of inspection with a view to make it a
continuous process rather than an ‘annual ritual’. Further, the
Committee desire that the Depositories should not remain oblivious
of what is transpiring below and therefore, should have a system
of inspection which could actually detect the irregularities/
manipulations. In line with their above recommendation, the
Committee desire that the Depositories should direct the Depository
participants to introduce ‘concurrent audit’, which should also be
a continuous process.

55
CORRECTIVE ACTION TAKEN BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE, SEBI
AND DEPOSITORIES AND SUGGESTIONS FOR
IMPROVEMENT
I. Action taken by Ministry of Finance and SEBI on DPs, Banks
& “scamsters”
90. Effective action is required to keep any irregularity/manipu-
lation in check. In this regard, on the query of the Committee as to what
action (administrative, statutory and criminal) have been initiated by
SEBI on the entities found to be involved in the IPO scam, the Ministry
of Finance have in a written reply submitted the following in April,
2006:—
“SEBI has passed Interim Orders restraining entities who were
responsible for the irregularities in the cases of Yes Bank and IDFC
from participating in all future IPOs and directed the depositories
to effectively freeze their dematerizalized accounts. It has directed
the major DPs involved, namely Karvy-DP and Pratik-DP not to
open new demateriazalized accounts till further directions. In
addition, the following actions have been taken by SEBI:
— Karvy Stockbroking Ltd., the Depository Participant involved
in the two IPOs, is being inspected.
— Karvy Computershare Ltd., the Registrar to the Issue in the two
IPOs, is being inspected.
— At the direction of SEBI, the depositories have advised their
respective DPs to verify the genuineness of the dematerialized
account-holders where 20 or more dematerialized account-
holders have a common address and to close those
dematerialized accounts where the DPs are unable to do the
above verifications.
— The depositories have also been advised to identify all the other
IPOs during 2004 and 2005 wherein the same modus operandi
55

56
has been adopted and to identify other entities besides those
already identified by SEBI who are indulging in the same
modus operandi.
— The depositories have been directed to form a co-ordination
committee to co-ordinate with the surveillance department of
SEBI for monitoring abnormal transactions in dematerialized
accounts.
— As an interim measure to check misuse through off-market
transfer prior to listing, SEBI has advised the depositories that
in case of IPOs they should activate the International Securities
Identification Numbers (ISINs) only on the date of commence-
ment of trading on the stock exchanges.
— Further detailed investigations in the matter are in progress.
Based on the findings of investigations, suitable action will be
initiated against the concerned entities who are found to have
violated the provisions of SEBI Act, Rules and Regulations
made thereunder.
91. When specifically asked by the Committee as to whether the
financiers involved in the IPO irregularities have been identified and
whether any action has been taken against them, the Ministry of Finance
in their post evidence written reply stated as under:—
“Based on the findings of investigation, SEBI has issued appropriate
directions against the financiers. SEBI has initiated adjudication
proceedings against the financiers and is also initiating prosecution
proceedings. SEBI has also referred the matter to other revenue and
enforcement agencies.”
92. It has also been stated before the Committee that the
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance has been
coordinating with various agencies, viz. SEBI, RBI, IB, CBDT, Banking
Division and Ministry of Company Affairs to ensure that action against
the involved entities is taken expeditiously and systemic issues emerging
out of the present event are addressed. CBI has also registered criminal
cases against the entities involved, conducted search operations and has
also arrested 7 persons in the matter.

57
93. Explaining the action taken by the Income Tax Authorities
found, the representative of CBDT, Ministry of Finance, has deposed
before the Committee as under:—
“With regard to income-tax violations, the CBDT has directed the
matter to be investigated. Then, searches have been conducted in
the premises of Roopalben as well as Sugandh Estate. We have
found out a lot of breaches. Subsequently the searches were
conducted and the matter is under investigation. We have stumbled
upon a similar case where we have taken action in October, 2005
and there also we found out similar subscription using the demat
accounts. These matters are under investigation, but as far as
violation of income-tax in this current affairs of Yes Bank scam and
IDFC, the legal position is that, returns showing the income arising
out of profits earned from these unfair transactions are due only
in financial year 2006-07.
So at that time, if they do not show the profits, then they would
definitely be violating and the matter would be taken in due course.
Some of them have paid advance tax taking into account the profits
which they likely have earned.”
94. When the Committee sought clarification as to whether the
source of money of the entities involved would not be questioned at the
time, when it is shown in the next year’s return, the representative of
CBDT submitted as under:—
“These (all the deposits in the IPOs) are all made by cheques. The
second thing is, they would have earned profits when they sold the
shares and they have to pay tax on that income. Of course, we are
investigating how they got the money for making applications. A
few banks have loaned them the money. Naturally, it is an
explained source. This source we would be examining.”
II.II.II.II.II. Action taken by CBIAction taken by CBIAction taken by CBIAction taken by CBIAction taken by CBI
95. As regards, action taken by CBI in connection with the scam,
the Ministry of Finance have furnished as under:—
“CBI has informed that it is investigating two cases of IPO scam
on the basis of complaint lodged by SEBI. The first case

58
(RC. 3(E)/2006) pertains to the scam in the IPO of YES Bank Ltd.
(YBL). The second case (RC.4(E)/2006) pertains to the IPO of IDFC
Ltd. The investigation so far has established the following:
— A few sub-brokers/brokers to the Depository Participants,
M/s. Karvy Consultants Ltd., namely, Deepak Panchal, Parag
Jhaveri, Purushottam Budhwani and Manoj Sekseria have
opened all the fictitious bank accounts and fictitious demat
accounts.
— In the name of fictitious persons, individual applications were
filled up for the IPO and were submitted through collection
agents to the Registrar to the issue (Karvy) and allotments were
made to these fictitious applications.
— A few financiers namely, Bharat Overseas Bank, Karvy
Consultants Ltd., Indian Overseas Bank, Dushyant Dalal,
Dhiren Vora and Jayesh Khandwala have given loans to these
sub-brokers.
— Karvy Consultants Ltd. has given loans of Rs. 44 crores to
finance IPO of IDFC. The entire Rs. 44 crore was directly
transferred to the Escrow Account (Collection Account) of IDFC
IPO, which is a gross violation.
— Bharat Overseas Bank, violating the loan sanction procedures,
has sanctioned Rs. 22 crore to Deepak Panchal and the
fictitious applications were funded from the single account of
Deepak Panchal.
— On allotment, by extensive forgery of the Delivery Instructions
Slips in the name of fictitious persons, the allotted shares were
transferred to the pool account of the sub-brokers, in off market
transactions, one day prior to the date of listing. These shares
were further transferred by these sub-brokers to financiers,
except Karvy and the Banks. On the date of listing, the
financiers sold these shares in the market and made huge
profits.

59
— So far seven persons (sub-brokers and financiers) have been
arrested and they are all on bail. No Bank official and no
official from Karvy has been arrested by the CBI. There is no
absconder in the cases.
— The investigation of the cases is progressing.”
Corrective Measures
1. Action taken by Ministry of Finance for checking unusual
activities in the Capital Market
96. It is worthwhile to mention the steps taken over the last few
years by the Ministry/institutions concerned to check such unusual
activities which may adversely affect the stock market. While replying
to the Committee’s query in October 2005, when there were steep rise
in the prices of “penny stocks” the Ministry of Finance, in a written note
had furnished as under:—
(a) “RBI-SEBI joint group on Integrated System of Alerts“RBI-SEBI joint group on Integrated System of Alerts“RBI-SEBI joint group on Integrated System of Alerts“RBI-SEBI joint group on Integrated System of Alerts“RBI-SEBI joint group on Integrated System of Alerts
The Joint Parliamentary Committee on Stock Markets Scam
and Matters Relating Thereto (JPC) recommended the necessity
for RBI and SEBI to put in place an Integrated System of Alerts
which would piece together disparate signals from different
elements of the market to generate special attention to any
unusual activity anywhere in the system which might have a
bearing on the integrity of the stock market. They have also
noted that regulation of the market could only be provided
through constant vigil and coordination with various other
regulatory agencies.
In order to review the existing system and to avoid delays, if
any, a meeting of the officials of RBI, BSE, NSE, NSDL and
CDSL was convened on August 5, 2005. After deliberating over
the said issue, it was felt that the information provided by the
Stock Exchanges and Depositories should assist in providing

60
meaningful alerts so that RBI can take up the matter
expeditiously with the banks.
(b) Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
Ministry of Finance, Government of India had issued a press
release on Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 on
June 30, 2005 wherein, inter-alia, every banking company,
Financial Institution and Intermediary shall have to maintain
a record of all transaction. Such transactions include all cash
transactions of the value of more than rupees ten lakhs or its
equivalent in foreign currency. The Stock Exchanges were
advised to issue a notice in this regard to its members. The
Stock Exchanges have issued the said circular on July 06,2005,
SEBI has also finalized Know Your Client (KYC) procedures
in line with the Act.
(c) Integrated Market Surveillance System (IMSS)
SEBI had signed an agreement with a consortium of HCLT and
SMARTS Ply. Ltd., Australia on May 17, 2005 for the
implementation of a comprehensive Integrated Market Surveil-
lance System (IMSS) for monitoring the market activities across
various stock exchanges and market segments (including both
equities and derivatives) in India.”
It was asked by the Committee whether there is any intelligence
machinery in place to monitor flow of funds to unscrupulous
persons for investment in the capital market. The Ministry in
a written reply stated as below—
“There are various agencies in the Ministry of Finance which
deal with different aspects of illegal flow of money. For
example, Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) monitors transac-
tions covered by the Prevention of Money Laundering Act. The
Enforcement Directorate deals with violations of FEMA, CBDT
deals with violations of the Income Tax Act. SEBI does need-

61
based information sharing with other agencies such as RBI,
CBI. Income Tax, MCA and FIU in respect of findings of
investigation in stock market transaction.”
(d) Introduction of MAPIN
In order to facilitate checking of identity of a demat account
holder, the Committee desired to know specifically about the
efforts being made to introduce a Unique Identification
Number (UIN) to investors and its compulsory quoting in
financial transactions. To this, the Ministry submitted in
writing as follows:—
“The SEBI (Central Database of Market Participants) Regula-
tions, 2003 which were notified on 20th November, 2003
provide for the creation of a centralized database of Market
Participants and Investors (MAPIN database) for the registra-
tion of all the participants i.e. intermediaries, listed companies,
investors, etc., in the Indian securities market by allotting a
Unique Identification Number (UIN), Biometrics impression is
used to achieve uniqueness for natural persons. When
completed, the MAPIN data base will be the most comprehen-
sive database of its kind in India having key descriptors of
all persons participating in the Indian securities market. SEBI
has entered into a MoU with NSDL, in terms of which the
electronic central database is created and maintained by NSDL
as the Designated Service Provider (DSP), for all persons (both
natural and juridical). The NSDL had appointed Points of
Service (PoS) for collecting data and biometric impressions
from investors.
During the process of implementation, certain apprehensions
were raised by the market participants. In order to address
these issues and concerns raised by market participants and
investors, SEBI appointed a Committee under the Chairman-
ship of Shri Jagdish Capoor former Dy. Governor, Reserve Bank
of India and current Chairman of HDFC Bank. Pending a final
view on the Committee report, SEBI suspended all fresh

62
registrations of UIN under SEBI (Central Database of Market
participants) Regulations, 2003 and the requirement to obtain/
quote UIN, under the existing MAPIN regulations with effect
from July 1, 2005.”
97. In a related submission, it was further informed by the
Ministry of Finance about MAPIN database as follows:
“....Once created, the database would not only help the regulator in
establishing the identity of person(s) who have taken large
exposures in the market and/or who are trading through a large
number of different brokers but also enable the regulator to take
adequate risk containment measures such as imposition of margins,
trading or exposure limits etc., depending upon the exposures of
various investors. Hence in the event of a failure of market integrity
an immediate audit trail would be possible and the regulator would
be able to take early preventive and/or remedial measures and track
down the defaulters and / or manipulators. Needless to say this
would enable risk containment in the event of a systemic failure
and help in minimizing the cascading effects of such a failure. The
database would also cover regulatory actions taken by SEBI against
entities/personnel operating in the securities market which would
be made accessible to the public in order to enable the investors
to make a rational choice about the entities they choose to deal with.
Further, an UIN would help to detect the existence of multiple
accounts and to reduce, if not eliminate, benami transactions in
securities.
The cut off limit for obtaining UIN with biometric impressions for
natural persons has been raised to Rs.5.00 lakh or more from the
existing limit trade order value of Rs.1.00 lakh. For trade order value
of less than Rs.5.00 lakh, a choice is given to investors to provide
either the Permanent Account Number of Income Tax Department
or UIN obtained under MAPIN.”

63
98. It was further informed that the state of progress in the work
relating to creation of Central database of MAPIN for registration of all
market participants by allotting a UIN was as follows:
(a) Till September 30, 2005 a total of 3,84,663 number of UINs were
allotted as given in the table below:
No. of UINs allotted under MAPIN database
upto September 30,  2005
Sr. Category No. of UINs
No.
1. Retail individual investors 266781
2. Individuals linked as Employees/Directors/ 46054
Promoters
3. Total no. of UIN allotted to Natural persons 312835
(total of (1) above)
4. SEBI Registered Intermediaries 8639
5. Other Corporate bodies 63189
6. Total no. of UIN allotted to Non-Natural persons 71828
(total of (5) above)
7. Total no. of UIN allotted (total of (3) and (6) 384663
above)
(b) During the course of implementation the following difficulties
and concerns were expressed by the common investors.
(i) Common investors expressed a general apprehension regarding
the use of biometric expression which is generally associated
with persons with criminal record.
(ii) The cost incurred by the common investor in obtaining UIN
alongwith hidden cost of travel.
(iii) Difficulties faced by common investors in reaching the Point
of Service as the number of Point of Service were limited and
were not widely available.

64
II. Corrective action taken by Depositories and suggestions for
improvement in the system
99. NSDL had proposed the following measures as corrective
steps to check scams in the primary market for consideration of the
Committee.
(i) In view of recent anti-money laundering guidelines, it has
become imperative that every investor has a unique ID. Our
proposal about unique ID and its usefulness is as under:
1. A mechanism should be established for allotting unique
IDs to all investors such that:
(a) The investor has to be personally present to register
while obtaining the ID.
(b) It is not possible for the same investor to get two
IDs.
(c) It is possible to verify from the central database,
whether a particular investor has indeed been
allotted an ID that he/she claims.
This will make it difficult for the investor to hide his/
her identity while applying for shares or while opening
a demat account.
2. The Registrar to the issue may then be told to reject the
applications that do not mention the unique ID as well
as the demat account number.
3. Applications with the same unique ID should be clubbed
together.
4. No demat account should be opened without the investor
having obtained such an unique ID.
(ii) The system of proportionate allotment should be
introduced.
(iii) If it has been found (and not suspected) that applications in
fictitious names were made by any entities say Deepak Panchal
or Roopalben Panchal etc. they should be prosecuted u/s 68A

65
of the Companies Act. which prescribes imprisonment upto
5 years. Even if a single case is investigated and prosecuted
successfully, it will send a powerful signal in the market that
wrong doors will be dealt with firmly. It will also discourage
many fence sitters from venturing in the same direction.”
(a) Compulsory quoting of PAN
100. Responding to a query made by the Committee about the
efforts being made to introduce PAN compulsorily as a requirement for
opening the demat accounts, the Ministry of Finance has submitted as
under:—
“Meanwhile PAN card has been made mandatory for opening
new demat accounts from April 1, 2006. Existing demat accounts
holders would have to submit PAN details by September 30, 2006
and they would not be able to operate their accounts from October
1, 2006 unless they submit copy the PAN Cards to their respective
DPs. The above requirements relating to compulsory requirement
of PAN for opening/operating demat accounts are being
implemented by the depositories.”
101. In this regard, (i) NSDL has submitted as under:—
“SEBI has made PAN Card compulsory for all categories of
investors for opening a demat account w.e.f. April 1, 2006.
According to SEBI directive, existing demat account holders would
not be able to operate the accounts if they do not produce the PAN
Card or do not resolve discrepancies, if any, in the PAN details by
September 30, 2006. Based on this, NSDL has advised its DPs to
follow the SEBI directive. Every PAN holder is not required to file
an income tax return and obtaining a PAN is not a difficult
process.”
102. (ii) CDSL has submitted as under:—
“In the past, SEBI has prescribed that documents like Voter
Identity Card. Passport, Driving License etc. can be submitted as
proof of Identity, PAN Card was also one of the eligible documents.
Other documents, like Ration Card etc. could be submitted as proof
of address. It can be seen that these documents were obtained by
investors (or prospective investors) for reasons other than investing

66
in the securities market or opening demat accounts. Further, the use
of bank’s letters (issued by Scheduled Commercial Banks contain-
ing the applicant’s photo/address) was permitted by SEBI vide their
Circular no. MRD/DoP/Dep/Cir-29/2004 dated August 24, 2004. In
other words, investors would not have to obtain a document
specially for opening demat accounts.
However, except for PAN Cards, where the DP could perform
a check on the web site of the Income Tax authorities, the other
documents did not have an easily accessible authentication
mechanism. Therefore, the thought of making PAN Cards
mandatory was considered, and subsequently implemented by
SEBI. Thus, presently, an intending demat accountholder who does
not otherwise require a PAN Card, is also required to obtain one.
However, it may be noted that while there are approx, 4.33 crore
PAN Card holders as on March 1, 2006, the total number of
depository accounts in the country is approx, 90 lakh. Therefore,
it can be surmised that many of existing demat account holders
would already have PAN Cards and would be able to furnish them
to their DPs before October 1, 2006, in order to operate their demat
accounts. It may also be noted that PAN Card applications are now
processed by NSDL and UTI Technology Services Ltd. at an
approximate cost of Rs. 72/- Thus, obtaining a PAN Card does not
place an onerous burden on a prospective demat account holder.
However, in view of the discomfort that this step may cause to a
section of prospective investors, the matter can receive further
consideration.”
103. In addition, CDSL has also in its post evidence written reply
submitted the following suggestions to the Committee:—
“It is suggested that submission of multiple applications in
IPOs must be made an offence under the Companies Act,
punishable with fine and/or imprisonment. Secondly, the quality
and adequacy of Registrar and Transfer Agents is an issue that
could be examined. It is observed that almost all the IPOs are
handled by a few such Agents. The number of R & T Agents has

67
shrunk mainly because the primary market was listless for many
years after the problems of the early 1990s, when many companies
which had launched IPOs, were subsequently untraceable. Also, the
scope of these agents activities was considerably diminished with
the advent of the depository system. In recent years, while the IPO
market has flourished, yet the R&T Agents business has not drawn
new entrants. It may therefore be considered that the fee structure
of all market intermediaries, especially R&T Agents be examined
to ensure that margins and profit distribution is equitable without
casting an unfair burden on investors. In view of the success of
a stock exchange and depositories set up by leading financial
institutions, similar setting up of an R&T Agent could be considered.
Thirdly, as already submitted above, suitable penal action must be
taken against all the errant parties be they DPs. RTI or banks. In
addition the Companies Act must be amended to make the
submission of multiple applications, an offence.”
104. In this connection, the Committee recall their recommendations
in their fortieth report, 2006-07 regarding comprehensive review of the
Companies Act, 1956 wherein the Committee have inter-alia recom-
mended as under:—
“From the response of the Government, they gather the
impression that the Comprehensive Bill amending provisions of
Companies Act may be Tabled on the floor of the House shortly.
They expect that this long awaited piece of legislation will soon see
the light of the day and many provisions of the Companies Act
needing reforms, as per the requirements of modern day corporate
governance practices as well as investors protection, may be
amended suitably.”
(b) Checking Off–Market Transactions
105. Asked whether SEBI’s order of activating ISIN only on the date
of listing would eliminate misuse through off-market transactions before
listing, SEBI in a written reply stated as under:—
“In the case of IPOs, there is a gap of 4-5 days between the date
of crediting the shares to the allotees and the date of listing and

68
commencement of trading on the stock exchanges. Off-market
transactions during the above gap, also known as grey market
transactions, has been engaging the attention of SEBI since
April – May 2005. Examination of such transactions by SEBI in the
Yes Bank IPO, in the first instance, led to the uncovering of the
irregularities. Thereafter, SEBI vide a circular dated January 19, 2006
issued the directions as stated in the question. Amendment to SEBI
(D&P) Regulation is proposed to supplement this by casting an
obligation on the depositories to prevent transfer of such securities
till listing and trading permission are given by all the stock
exchanges to whom listing application is made under section 73(1)
of the Companies Act. Accordingly, on June 19, 2006 a discussion
paper has been put up on the SEBI website seeking public
comments on the proposed regulation to prevent transfer of such
securities till listing and trading permission are given by all the
stock exchanges to whom listing application is made.”
106. As regards, off–market transactions SEBI has furnished as
under:—
“As long as spot transactions are recognized under Securities
Contract Regulation Act (SCRA), it may not be possible to prohibit
off-market transactions. Transferability is the basic characterstic of
a security. However, certain limited restrictions could be imposed
on off–market transactions in case of securities which are offered
under IPO.
Off-market transactions in notified areas is already prohibited by
section 13 of the SCRA 1956, except in case of spot delivery
contracts. SEBI has not suggested such prohibition in the SCRA for
spot delivery contracts also.
However, SEBI proposes to impose certain limited restrictions on
spot delivery contracts also through appropriate provisions in the
SEBI (Depositories and Participants) Regulations, 1996, as fol-
lows:—
(a) in case of shares allotted in an IPO, they will be frozen till
trading permission is given by all stock exchanges to which
listing application was made by the issuer;

69
(b) In case of any further issue of shares made by a listed company
in the dematerialized form (including preferential allotments),
the shares will be frozen in the demat account of the allottees
till listing permission is given by all stock exchanges where
the original shares of the same class are listed.
A Discussion Paper containing these proposals along with the
Draft Amendments is currently placed for public comments in
the SEBI website. They will be finalized after consideration of
public comments received.”
107. when the Ministry was asked to consider the possibility of
amending SCRA so that off-market transactions are prevented, they have
replied as under:—
“SEBI has informed that off-market transactions in notified
areas are already prohibited by section 13 of the SCRA, except in
case of spot delivery contracts. It proposes to impose certain limited
restrictions on spot delivery contracts also through appropriate
provisions in the SEBI (Depositories and Participants) Regulations,
1996.
108. The Committee find that in the recent IPO scam several
rules/guidelines prescribed by SEBI, as well as some provisions of
the Companies Act, 1956 have been blatantly violated as is evident
from the conclusions following the investigations carried out by RBI
and SEBI. They note that adherence to KYC/AML guidelines was
almost nil both by the banks as well as the DPs. As per the action
taken by SEBI, the Committee note that so far SEBI has passed
Interim Orders restraining some entities, (who were responsible for
the irregularities in the case of Yes Bank & IDFC IPOs) from
participating in all future IPOs and have directed the Depositories
to activate International Securities Identification Numbers (ISINs)
only on the date of commencement of trading on stock exchanges.
They feel that this measure would be helpful in restraining
off–market transaction, which have been grossly abused in the
present case to corner the benefits by the ‘scamsters’, and
recommend the Government to explore the option of making it a

70
permanent feature. The Committee also expect that investigations
will be finalized at the earliest so that SEBI comes out with a final
report on the IPO scam.
109. The Committee note that CBDT is also investigating the
matter as they have detected a number of breaches with respect
to income tax. However, the legal position according to CBDT is
that the returns showing the income arising out of profits earned
from the unfair transactions by the beneficiaries of the scam are
due in the Financial year, 2006-07. The Committee further note that
as per CBDT, some of the entities involved in the scam have paid
advance tax taking into account the profits which they would have
earned. In this connection, CBDT has sought to assure the
Committee that the source of money for making applications by the
entities involved is under their investigation. In this regard, the
Committee urge CBDT to select these particular cases for scrutiny
assessment and proceed on the matter accordingly. The CBDT should
ensure that the illegal benefits earned by the scamsters are retrieved
in full.
110. The Committee also observe that section 68A of the
Companies Act very clearly lays down that any person who attempts
to and induces to issue a security in a fictitious name, is guilty of
violation of the relevant provision of the Act and can be prosecuted
and imprisoned up to 5 years. The Committee opine that in the
instant case, the stringent implementation of the law has left much
to be desired. They feel that the law regarding fake accounts is
quite clear and recommend that the perpetrators of the opening of
fictitious/benami accounts be prosecuted under this section.
111. The Committee are concerned to note that the law as such
does not impose any restriction on multiple applications. They note
that the maximum consequence that a person indulging in making
multiple applications, is rejection of all applications. In this regard,
they take note of the suggestion made by CDSL, that the Companies
Act must be amended to make the submission of multiple
applications, an offence. The Committee recall that they had in their
40th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Company Affairs emphasized that the Government should expedite

71
the introduction of the comprehensive amendment to Companies Act.
The Committee recommend that the above submission by CDSL may
be examined as a part of the exercise for comprehensive revision
of the Companies Act, 1956.
112. The Committee also recall that the JPC on Stock Market
scam, in their report presented in December, 2002 had recommended
the necessity of a Joint Group of RBI-SEBI on Integrated System
of Alerts. They also observe that accordingly an Integrated Market
Surveillance System has been designed to monitor the market
activities across various stock exchanges and market segments. This,
they feel, is essential so as to detect the irregularities at the initial
stages. In this connection, the officials of RBI, BSE, NSE, NSDL
and CDSL have stated to have met and decided that information
provided by Stock Exchanges and Depositories should assist in
providing meaningful alerts so as to enable the RBI to take up the
matter. The Committee also note that SEBI has signed an agreement
with a consortium of HCLT and SMARTS Ply. Ltd. Australia in May,
2005 for implementation of a Comprehensive Integrated Market
Surveillance System for monitoring market activities in India. The
Committee feel that an early action should be taken by authorities
on these matters. The Committee would also like to place on record
their unhappiness over the fact that overall the Government have
failed to impart due seriousness to the recommendations given by
the two JPCs on scams.
113. The modus operandi involved in the IPO scam was to open
multiple or fake accounts. In this regard, the Committee have been
informed by the Depositories that as an interim measure, quoting
of PAN has been made compulsory from April, 1, 2006 for new
accounts and mandatory submission of copy of PAN card till October,
2006 for old demat accounts. Besides, the Committee note that efforts
are being made to introduce a Unique Identification Number (UIN)
for investors and compulsory quoting of the same in financial
transactions. For this, a centralized database of Market Participants
and Investors (MAPIN) for the registration of all the participants
is being created. The Committee find that there has been some
progress in allotting a Unique Identification Number (UIN) as part

72
of the work relating to the creation of central database of MAPIN
for registration of all market participants. They, however, note that
certain concerns and difficulties have been expressed by the common
investors, during the course of implementation of allotment of a UIN.
The Committee are disappointed with the current scenario of delay
and uncertainly in so far as introduction of UIN and creation of
MAPIN is concerned which in their view, could have contributed
substantially in making perpetuation of this kind of scam difficult.
They expect the Ministry of Finance and SEBI to attend to the
difficulties expeditiously with a view to find an amicable solution
and create a comprehensive central database of MAPIN at the
earliest. They feel that this move will impart uniqueness to natural
and juridical persons thereby enabling the regulator to take adequate
risk containment measures which, in turn, will go a long way
in reducing and ultimately eliminating benami transactions in
securities.
114. Though the Committee find that SEBI, RBI and CBDT have
taken action against DPs, Banks, Depositories as well as individual
perpetrators of the scam, it would have been in the fitness of things,
had SEBI acted timely in taking action against the damage that has
already been done by way of irregularities in the IPO process.
However, they are perturbed over the fact that the irregularities in
the IPOs are believed to have been going on since 1999 and the
authorities have not made any effort so far to detect the irregularities
in the IPO process since 1999 to 2003. The Committee, therefore,
recommend SEBI to first expedite its investigations and take suitable
action against concerned entities involved in the IPO scam. In
addition, they recommend that the Government should spare no
efforts to investigate and unearth any kind of manipulations in the
IPOs since 1999 without further delay. Besides, the pace of progress
in various areas of market reforms needs to be speeded up to deal
with such scams in future.
 N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
24 November , 2006 Chairman,
3 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

73
ANNEXURE I
IPOS EXAMINED BY SEBI
Based on the investigations, subject to certain benchmarks, SEBI found
that the modus operandi of cornering the retail portion of IPOs through
opening numerous demat accounts in benami/fictitious names and
making IPO applications using these demat accounts had been adopted
in respect of the following 21 IPOs:—
1. Amar Remedies Ltd. (Aug. 2005)
2. Datamatics Technologies Ltd. (Apr. 2004)
3. Dishman Pharma & Chemicals Ltd. (Mar. - Apr. 2004)
4. FCS Software Solutions Ltd. (Apr. 2005)
5. Gateway Dispriparks  Ltd. (Mar. 2005)
6. Gokaldas Export (Mar. – Apr. 2005)
7. ILFS Investmart (Jul. 2005)
8. Indraprasth Gas Eq (Nov. - Dec. 2003)
9. Infrastructue Development Finance Co. Ltd. (Jul. 2005)
10. Jet Airways (India) Ltd (Feb. 2005)
11. Nandam Exim Ltd. (May 2005)
12. National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. (Oct. 2004)
13. Nectar Lifesciences Ltd. (Jun. 2005)
14. Patni Computer Systems Ltd. (Jan. - Feb. 2004)
15. Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd. (Aug. 2005)
16. Shoppers Stop Ltd. (Apr. - May 2005)
17. SPL Industries Ltd. (Jun. - Jul. 2005)
18. Suzlon Energy Ltd. (Sep. 2005)
19. T.V. Today Network Ltd. (Dec. 2003)
20. Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. (Jul. 2004)
21. Yes Bank Ltd. (Jun. 2005)
73

74
ANNEXURE II
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
ANNEXURE ‘A’
IPOs - Equity : January 1999 - December 2002
S. Company Issue Issue Face Premium Issue Issue Size Issue List
No. Open Close Value Price (No. of Amount Date
Date Date (Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) Shares) (Rs. lacs)
1  2 3 4567891 0
19991999199919991999
1. IDBI Bank Ltd. 2/9/1999 2/18/1999 10.00 8.00 18.00 40000000 7200.00 4/12/1999
2. SQL Star International Ltd. 6/18/1999 6/24/1999 10.00 45.00 55.00 2600000 1430.00 8/24/1999
3. Times Bank Ltd. 6/30/1999 7/10/1999 10.00 10.00 35000000 3500.00 9/20/1999
4. Polaris Software Lab Ltd. 8/4/1999 8/10/1999 10.00 200.00 210.00 4365648 9167.86 9/29/1999
5. Hughes Software Lab Ltd. 9/22/1999 9/28/1999 10.00 620.00 630.00 4375000 27562.50 11/11/1999
6. Kale Consultants Ltd. 9/17/1999 9/23/1999 10.00 110.00 120.00 2875000 3450.00 11/24/1999
7. Centurion Bank Ltd. 9/20/1999 9/29/1999 10.00 10.00 33750000 3375.00 12/6/1999
8. Vintage Cards & 9/29/1999 10/6/1999 10.00 215.00 225.00 1260250 2835.58 12/8/1999
Creations Limited
74

75
1  2 3 4567891 0
19. Syndicate Bank 10/25/1999 10/30/1999 10.00 10.00 125000000 12500.00 12/27/1999
10. HCL Technologies Ltd. 11/16/1999 11/24/1999 4.00 576.00 580.00 14200000 82360.00 1/11/2000
11. Visesh Infosystems Limited 11/24/1999 11/29/1999 10.00 40.00 50.00 27775000 1387.50 1/14/2000
(currently known as Visesh
Infotecnics Limited)
12. S.Kumars Power Corp. Ltd. 12/14/1999 12/20/1999 10.00 10.00 1500000 1500.00 1/27/2000
13. Software
 Technology Group 12/9/1999 12/14/1999 10.00 56.00 66.00 3125000 2052.50 2/7/2000
International Ltd.
14. Glenmark Pharmaceuticals 12/10/1999 12/16/1999 10.00 190.00 200.00 2570000 5140.00 2/10/2000
Ltd.
15. Zenith Infotech Ltd. 12/15/1999 12/22/1999 10.00 100.00 110.00 2875000 3162.50 2/14/2000
16. Television  Eighteen India Ltd. 12/16/1999 12/21/1999 10.00 170.00 180.00 2738000 4924.80 2/16/2000
17. Sibar Software Services 12/29/1999 1/4/2000 10.00 10.00 2500000 250.00 2/28/2000
(India) Ltd.
18. Integrated Hitech Ltd. 12/20/1999 12/23/1999 10.00 10.00 5000000 500.00 3/2/2000
20002000200020002000
11. Melstar Information Tech- 1/17/2000 1/22/2000 10.00 82.00 72.00 3150000 2268.00 3/9/2000
nologies Ltd.

76
1  2 3 4567891 0
12. Shree Rama multi-tech Ltd. 1/15/2000 1/21/2000 5.00 115.00 120.00 13647750 16377.30 3/23/2000
13. Geometric Software 1/28/2000 2/2/2000 10.00 290.00 300.00 1310000 3930.00 3/29/2000
Solutions Co. Ltd.
14. Pentagon  Global Solutions Ltd. 2/4/2000 2/9/2000 10.00 2.00 12.00 2500000 300.00 4/4/2000
15. Telesys Software Ltd. 2/10/2000 2/14/2000 10.00 5.00 15.00 5000000 750.00 4/10/2000
16. Cadila Healthcare Ltd. 2/9/2000 2/16/2000 5.00 245.00 250.00 14886000 37215.00 4/27/2000
17. Elder Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 2/18/2000 2/22/2000 10.00 100.00 110.00 4283000 4711.30 4/28/2000
18. Cinevista  Communications Ltd. 2/7/2000 2/11/2000 10.00 290.00 300.00 2533500 7600.50 5/3/2000
19. Biopac India Corp. Ltd. 4/15/2000 4/24/2000 10.00 10.00 403000 403.00 5/30/2000
10. Ajanta Pharma Ltd. 3/23/2000 3/28/2000 10.00 215.00 225.00 3000000 6750.00 6/5/2000
11. Softpro Systems Ltd. 3/20/2000 3/24/2000 10.00 76.00 85.00 1500000 1275.00 6/5/2000
12. Mascot Systems Ltd. 4/10/2000 4/18/2000 4.00 476.00 480.00 3000000 14400.00 6/12/2000
13. Baron Infotech Ltd. 4/17/2000 4/20/2000 10.00 10.00 2600000 260.00 6/19/2000
14. GDR Software Ltd. 4/11/2000 4/18/2000 10.00 10.00 2864700 266.47 6/26/2000
15. Omni Axs software Ltd. 4/24/2000 4/27/2000 10.00 5.00 15.00 4750000 712.50 6/30/2000
16. Balwas E-COM India Ltd. 6/15/2000 5/20/2000 10.00 10.00 3500000 350.00 7/3/2000

77
1  2 3 4567891 0
17. Softbol India Ltd. 5/3/2000 5/8/2000 10.00 85.00 95.00 3592484 3412.86 7/12//2000
18. Padmalaya Telefilms Ltd. 5/31/2000 6/6/2000 10.00 90.00 100.00 2600000 2500.00 8/14/2000
19. Kirloskar Multimedia Ltd. 6/12/2000 6/19/2000 10.00 10.00 3650000 365.00 8/21/2000
20. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. 6/28/2000 7/4/2000 5.00 55.00 60.00 5950000 3576.00 8/23/2000
21. Sibar Media & Entertainment 7/3/2000 7/7/2000 10.00 10.00 5500000 550.00 8/28/2000
Ltd.
22. Online Media Solution Ltd. 8/19/2000 6/26/2000 10.00 10.00 2700000 270.00 9/4/2000
23. Telephoto Entertainment Ltd. 6/19/2000 6/24/2000 10.00 10.00 2750000 275.00 9/4/2000
24. Teledata Informatics Ltd. 7/20/2000 7/24/2000 10.00 15.00 28.00 2600000 625.00 9/11/2000
25. Mukta Arts Ltd. 7/10/2000 7/15/2000 5.00 160.00 168.00 6060697 10000.15 9/13/2000
26. Comp-U-Learn Tech India Ltd. 7/3/2000 7/7/2000 10.00 10.00 2500000 250.00 9/18/2000
27. Cyberscafe Multimedia Ltd. 7/10/2000 7/15/2000 10.00 10.00 3400000 340.00 9/18/2000
28. Dynacons  System & Solutions 7/21/2000 7/28/2000 10.00 20.00 30.00 7200000 2160.00 9/20/2000
Ltd.
29. PNS Gilts Ltd. 7/11/2000 7/18/2000 10.00 20.00 30.00 35000000 10500.00 9/22/2000
30. Kanika Infotech Ltd. 7/11/2000 7/17/2000 10.00 10.00 3800000 380.00 10/3/2000

78
1  2 3 4567891 0
31. Lanco Global Systems Ltd. 7/21/2000 7/26/2000 10.00 10.00 2670000 267.00 10/3/2000
32. Virinchi Consultants Ltd. 8/9/2000 8/14/2000 10.00 9.00 19.00 3000000 570.00 10/23/2000
33. Hughes Telecom. (India) Ltd. 8/29/2000 8/3/2000 10.00 2.00 12.00 624342833 74921.14 10/26/2000
34. MRO-TEK Ltd. 9/4/2000 9/9/2000 5.00 90.00 95.00 5109000 4853.55 11/8/2000
35. Datanet Systems Ltd. 8/23/2000 8/26/2000 10.00 10.00 3150000 315.00 11/8/2000
36. Tabassum International Ltd. 9/8/2000 9/12/2000 10.00 10.00 4000000 400.00 11/13/2000
37. IQMS Software Ltd. 9/28/2000 13/3/2000 10.00 10.00 4500000 450.00 11/15/2000
38. Galaxy Multimedia Ltd. 9/22/2000 9/27/2000 10.00 10.00 2550000 255.00 11/16/2000
39. Tips Industries Ltd. 9/5/2000 9/12/2000 10.00 315.00 325.00 3000000 9750.00 11/20/2000
40. Balaji Telefilms Ltd. 10/8/2000 10/12/2000 10.00 120.00 133.00 2300000 3640.00 11/22/2000
41. Vision Organics Ltd. 10/19/2000 10/21/2000 10.00 30.00 40.00 3525000 1450.00 11/23/2000
42. Siris Soft Ltd. 9/25/2000 10/3/2000 10.00 10.00 2600000 260.00 11/28/2000
43. AZTEC Software & Tech- 10/12/2000 10/18/2000 3.00 77.00 80.00 6500000 6200.00 11/29/2000
nology Services Ltd.
44. Pritish  Nandy Communications 9/4/2000 9/11/2000 10.00 145.00 155.00 2617000 4056.35 12/11/2000
Ltd.

79
1  2 3 4567891 0
45. Indian Overseas Bank 9/25/2000 9/29/2000 10.00 10.00 111200000 11120.00 12/11/2000
46. Creative Eye Ltd. 11/3/2000 11/9/2000 5.00 45.00 50.00 5004800 2502.40 12/10/2000
47. Opto Circuits (India) Ltd. 9/29/2000 10/6/2000 10.00 40.00 50.00 2702000 1351.00 12/18/2000
48. IT&T Ltd. 10/18/2000 13/24/2000 5.00 78.00 81.00 3910000 3167.10 1/1/2001
49. Adlabs Films Ltd. 12/11/2000 12/16/2000 5.00 115.00 120.00 4400000 5280.00 1/8/2001
50. Vijaya Bank 11/27/2000 12/4/2000 10.00 10.00 100000000 10000.00 1/9/2001
51. V&K Softech Ltd. 11/29/2000 12/4/2000 10.00 10.00 3750000 375.00 1/11/2001
52. Fourth Generation Informa- 11/8/2000 11/10/2000 10.00 10.00 4750000 475.00 1/12/2001
tion Systems Ltd.
53. CCS Infotech Ltd. 11/2/2000 11/8/2000 10.00 10.00 5000000 500.00 1/18/2001
54. Saven Technologies Ltd. 12/7/2000 12/12/2000 10.00 10.00 3500000 380.00 1/18/2001
55. Moschip Semiconductor 12/14/2000 12/19/2000 10.00 10.00 2679500 267.95 1/29/2001
Technology Ltd.
20012001200120012001
1. IKF Software Com. Ltd. 2/19/2001 2/24/2001 10.00 10.00 4000000 400.00 3/30/2001
2. Mid-day Multimedia Ltd. 2/12/2001 2/18/2001 10.00 60.00 70.00 7142887 5000.00 4/2/2001

80
1  2 3 4567891 0
3. Andhra Bank 2/14/2001 2/23/2001 10.00 10.00 150000000 15000.00 4/4/2002
4. D-Link (India) Ltd. 2/20/2001 2/27/2001 10.00 290.00 300.00 1523740 4571.22 4/11/2002
5. E. Star Infotech Ltd. 2/15/2001 2/24/2001 10.00 10.00 4000000 400.00 4/16/2002
6. IQ Infotech Ltd. 2/8/2001 2/12/2001 10.00 6.00 16.00 5500000 880.00 4/23/2002
7. Sequelsoft India Ltd. 3/19/2001 3/23/2001 10.00 10.00 6000000 600.00 4/24/2002
8. SMR Universal Softech Ltd. 8/9/2001 8/18/2001 10.00 10.00 4500000 450.00 10/28/2002
9. South Asian Petrochem Ltd. 12/20/2001 12/29/2001 10.00 10.00 5000000 500.00 2/11/2002
2002
1. Bharti Tele-ventures Ltd. 1/28/2002 2/2/2002 10.00 35.00 45.00 185336689 83401.51 2/18/2002
2. Punjab National Bank 3/21/2002 3/28/2002 10.00 21.00 31.00 53060710 16448.82 4/26/2002
3. I-Flex Solutions Ltd. 6/5/2002 6/11/2002 5.00 525.00 530.00 3961700 20997.01 6/28/2002
4. Union Bank of India 8/20/2002 8/28/2002 10.00 6.00 16.00 180000000 28800.00 9/24/2002
5. Allahabad Bank 10/23/2002 10/31/2002 10.00 10.00 100000000 10000.00 11/29/2002
6. Canara Bank 11/18/2002 11/27/2002 10.00 25.00 35.00 110000000 38500.00 12/23/2002
*Listing price available only for issues listed at BSE/NSE

81
IPOs during 2003-2005
Sr. Name of the Company Type of Designated Issue  size Issue open Issue close Issue Price Listing
No. Issue St. Exch. (No. of date date (Rs.) date
shares)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1. Radean Media Works IPO Madras Stock 2,700,200 5-Feb-03 8-Feb-03 40 2/27/2003
India Limited Exchange
2. Divi’s Laboratories Ltd. IPO NSE 3,204,684 17/02/2003 21/02/2003 140 3/12/2003
3. Maruti Udyog Ltd. IPO BSE 72,243,300 12/06/2003 19/06/2003 125 7/9/2003
4. UCO Bank IPO NSE 200,000,000 03/09/2003 12/09/2003 12 10/9/2003
6. B.A.G. Films Ltd. IPO NSE 14,860,000 06/09/2003 17/19/2003 10 10/17/2003
7. Vardhman Acrylics Limited IPO NSE 27,658,527 15-Sep-03 19-Sep-03 10 9/30/2003
(Offer for
Sale)
9. Jai Balaji Sponge Ltd. IPO NSE 10126900 21/Oct/2003 21/Oct/2003 10 12/9/2003
10. Indraprastha Gas Ltd. IPO BSE 40000000 28/11/2003 05/12/2003 48 12/26/2003
11. T.V. Today Network Ltd. IPO BSE 14500000 18/12/2003 27/12/2003 95 1/16/2004
12. Surya Pharmaceuticals Ltd. IPO NSE 3000000 18/12/2003 22/12/2003 45 1/21/2004

82
1 2 34 5 6 789
13. Patni Computer Systems Ltd. IPO BSE 18,724,000 27/01/2004 05/02/2004 230 2/25/2004
14. Four Soft Ltd. IPO NSE 7,950,000 16/02/2004 23/02/2004 25 3/12/2004
20. Petronet LNG Ltd. IPO BSE 260,979,900 01/03/2004 09/03/2004 15 3/26/2004
22 Biocon Ltd. IPO NSE 10,000,000 11/03/2004 18/03/2004 315 4/7/2004
23. PTC India Ltd. IPO BSE 58,499,990 01/03/2004 08/03/2004 16 4/7/2004
24. Bank of Maharashtra IPO BSE 100,000,000 25/02/2004 04/03/2004 23 4/12/2004
25. Dishmax Pharma. & IPO NSE 3,433,500 29/03/2004 07/04/2004 175 4/22/2004
Chemicals Ltd.
27. Ramkrishna Forgings Ltd. IPO NSE 6,125,000 02/04/2004 10/04/2004 20 5/5/2004
28. Datamatics Technologies Ltd. IPO BSE 10,300,000 12/04/2004 19/04/2004 110 5/7/2004
29. New Delhi Television Ltd. IPO BSE 15,571,428 21/04/2004 28/04/2004 70 5/19/2004
30. Vishal Exports Overseas Ltd. IPO NSE 6,000,000 29/Apr./2004 7-May-04 45 5/28/2004
(Offer for
Sale)
31. Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. IPO NSE 63,770,480 29/07/2004 05/08/2004 850 8/25/2004
32. Indiabulls  Financial Services Ltd. IPO BSE 27,187,519 06/09/2004 10/09/2004 19 9/24/2004
33. Crew B.O.S. Products Ltd. IPO BSE 4,000,724 19/08/2004 27/08/2004 35 9/24/2004

83
1 2 34 5 6 789
34. Sah Petroleums Ltd. IPO NSE 9,080,000 30/08/2004 06/09/2004 35 9/24/2004
35. MSK Projects (India) Ltd. IPO BSE 6,000,000 27/09/2004 08/10/2004 40 11/4/2004
36. National Thermal Power IPO NSE 865,830,000 07/10/2004 14/10/2004 62 11/5/2004
Corporation Ltd.
37. S.A.L. Steel Limited IPO NSE 42,000,000 01/11/2004 05/11/2004 14 11/24/2004
39. Deccan Chronicle Holdings Ltd. IPO BSE 9,215,060 25/11/2004 02/12/2004 162 12/22/2004
40. Bharati Shipyard Ltd. IPO BSE 12,500,000 02/12/2004 08/12/2004 66 12/30/2004
41. Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd. IPO BSE 5,000,0000 29/11/2004 03/12/2004 65 12/31/2004
42. Indoco Remed ies Ltd. IPO NSE 3,000,000 17/12/2004 23/12/2004 245 1/14/2005
43. Imped Ferro Tech. Ltd. IPO BSE 8,000,000 22/12/2004 31/12/2004 10 2/3/2005
45. Jet Airways (India) Ltd. IPO NSE 17,266,801 18/02/2005 24/02/2005 1100 3/14/2005
46. UTV Sofware Communications IPO NSE 6,999,950 21/02/2005 25/02/2005 130 3/17/2005
Ltd.
49. Gateway Distriparks Ltd. IPO BSE 21,000,000 9-Mar-05 14/03/2005 72 3/31/2005
51. Jaiprakash Hydropower Ltd. IPO NSE 180,000,000 22/03/2005 29/03/2005 32 4/18/2005
52. 31 Infotech Ltd. IPO NSE 23,000,000 30/03/2005 04/04/2005 100 4/22/2005
53. Gokaldas Exports Ltd. IPO BSE 3,125,000 30/03/2005 06/04/2005 425 4/27/2005

84
1 2 34 5 6 789
54. Saksoft Limited IPO NSE 2,500,000 30-03-05 7/4/2005 30 5/9/2005
56. Shrinagar Cinemas Ltd. IPO BSE 8,150,000 05/04/2005 11/04/2005 53 4/29/2005
57. Allsec Technologies Ltd. IPO NSE 3,141,200 13/4/2005 20/04/2005 135 5/9/2005
59. India Infoline Ltd. IPO NSE 11,878,138 21/4/2005 27/04/2005 76 5/17/2005
60. Mangalam Drugs & IPO BSE 6,500,000 19/4/2005 26/04/2005 22 5/23/2005
Organics Ltd.
61. Shoppers Stop Ltd. IPO BSE 6,946,033 28/4/2005 04/05/2005 238 5/23/2005
62. Cyber Media (India) Ltd. IPO NSE 2,822,500 4/5/2005 09/05/2005 60 6/10/2005
63. Nandan Exim Ltd. IPO BSE 6,000,000 12/5/2005 20/05/2005 20 6/13/2005
64. Shree Ganesh Forgings Ltd. IPO BSE 5,000,000 18/5/2005 24/05/2005 30 6/22/2005
67. Uniply Industries Ltd. IPO BSE 5,000,000 09/06/2005 16/06/2005 24 7/6/2005
68. Provogue (India) Lt d. IPO BSE 4,049,402 10/06/2005 16/06/2005 150 7/7/2005
69. Yes Bank Ltd. IPO BSE 70,000,000 15/06/2005 21/06/2005 45 7/12/2005
70. MSP Steel & Power Ltd. IPO BSE 16,000,000 20/06/2005 24/06/2005 10 7/18/2005
71. Nectar Lifesciences Ltd. IPO NSE 3,870,000 22/06/2005 28/06/2005 240 7/18/2005
72. SPL Industries Ltd. IPO NSE 9,000,000 29/06/2005 06/07/2005 70 7/26/2005

85
1 2 34 5 6 789
73. IL&FS Investment Ltd. IPO NSE 11,400,000 04/07/2005 08/07/2005 125 7/27/2005
76. Shri Ramrupai Balaji Steels Ltd. IPO NSE 20,000,000 08/07/2005 14/07/2005 22 8/2/2005
77. Infrastructure Development IPO NSE 403,600,000 15/07/2005 22/07/2005 34 8/12/2005
Finance Co. Ltd.
79. Vivimed Labs Ltd. IPO NSE 2,500,000 09/07/2005 13/07/2005 70 8/17/2005
80. HT Media Ltd. IPO BSE 6,995,000 4/8/2005 10/8/2005 530 9/1/2005
81. Sasken  Communication IPO BSE 5,000,000 11/8/2005 17/8/2005 260 9/9/2005
Technologies Ltd.
82. Amar Remedies Ltd. IPO BSE 15,000,000 25/8/2005 31/8/2005 28 9/16/2005
83. FCS Software Solutions Ltd. IPO BSE 35,000,000 22/8/2005 26/8/2005 50 9/21/2005
85. Suzlon Energy Ltd. IPO NSE 29,340,000 23/9/2005 29/9/2005 510 10/19/2005
87. Aurionpro Solutions Ltd. IPO BSE 3,000,000 27/9/2005 4/10/2005 90 10/25/2005
88. Shree Renuka Sugars Ltd. IPO BSE 35,08,722 7/10/2005 14/10/2005 285 10/31/2005
90. Paradyne Infotech Ltd. IPO BSE 3,300,000 30/9/2005 7/10/2005 42 11/10/2005
91. K.M. Sugar Mills Ltd. IPO BSE 6,400,000 14 /10/2005 19/10/2005 52 11/14/2005

86
1 2 34 5 6 789
92. Bannari Amman Spinning IPO NSE 7,000,000 19/10/05 25/10/05 135 11/14/2005
Mills Ltd.
93. Prithvi Information IPO BSE 5,000,000 25/10/05 28/10/05 270 11/16/2005
Solutions Ltd.
94. PBA Infrastructure Ltd. IPO BSE 5,000,000 24/10/05 28/10/05 60 11/24/2005
95. Vikash Metals Ltd. IPO BSE 18,902,900 24/10/05 28/10/05 20 11/28/2005
96. Bombay Rayon Fashions Ltd. IPO BSE 13,475,000 11/11/05 17/11/05 70 12/5/2005
97. Pyramid Reta il Ltd. IPO BSE 9,000,000 10/11/05 16/11/05 120 12/6/2005
98. ABG Shipyard Ltd. IPO BSE 8,500,000 18/11/05 24/11/05 185 12/13/2005
100. AIA Engineering Ltd. IPO NSE 4,700,000 17/11/05 22/11/05 315 12/14/2005
101. Everest Kanto C yllinder Ltd. IPO BSE 5,625,000 22/11/05 25/11/05 160 12/15/2005
103. Kamex Micorsystems (India) Ltd. IPO BSE 3,960,444 28/11/05 3/12/05 250 12/20/2005
104. Repro India Ltd. IPO BSE 2,620,037 26/11/05 1/12/05 165 12/22/2005
105. Compulink Systems Ltd. IPO NSE 4,538,462 25/11/05 30/11/05 60 12/28/2005

87
APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 7 March, 2006 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
15. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
 6. Shri K.S. Rao
 7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
19. Shri Yashwant Sinha
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF FINANCEMINISTRY OF FINANCEMINISTRY OF FINANCEMINISTRY OF FINANCEMINISTRY OF FINANCE
A. Department of Economic Affairs
1. Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary,
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (Banking)
3. Dr. K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary (CM)
87

88
B. Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
Shri J.G. Pendse, Member (Investigation), CBDT
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of the Directions by
the Speaker.
3. Then the Chairman invited the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance to brief the members on ‘IPO Scam in Capital Market
involving multiple demat accounts’.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the representatives of Ministry
of Finance to furnish notes on certain points raised by the Members to
which replies were not readily available with them during the discussion.
5. The briefing was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

89
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 4th April, 2006 from 1030 to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
15. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
16. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
17. Shri Rupchand Pal
18. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
 9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
19. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
20. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
89

90
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekher — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Investors’ Grievances ForumInvestors’ Grievances ForumInvestors’ Grievances ForumInvestors’ Grievances ForumInvestors’ Grievances Forum
1. Dr. Kirit Somaiya, President
2. Shri Hinesh Doshi, Vice President
3. Shri S. Vedula, General Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Investors’ Grievances Forum and invited their attention to the
provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the witnesses on
the subject, ‘Working of Capital Market including the recent IPO Scam
and Efficacy of Reform Processes’. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives that the information with regard to
queries of the Members which was not readily available with them might
be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned

91
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 5th April, 2006 from 1030 to 1200
hrs. and 1210 to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
13. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
18. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
19. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekher — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
91

92
PART-IPART-IPART-IPART-IPART-I
(1030 to 1200 hrs.)
WITNESSES
SEBI
1. Shri M. Damodaran, Chairman
2. Shri G. Anantharaman, Whole Time Member
3. Dr. T.C. Nair, Whole Time Member
4. Shri R. Ravichandran, Chief General Manager
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of SEBI briefed the Committee on the
subject ‘Working of Capital Market including the recent IPO Scam and
Efficacy of Reform Processes’. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed
the representatives of SEBI that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-IIPART-IIPART-IIPART-IIPART-II
(1210 to 1400 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)Reserve Bank of India (RBI)Reserve Bank of India (RBI)Reserve Bank of India (RBI)Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
1. Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor
2. Shri V. Leeladhar, Dy. Governor
3. Shri Anand Sinha, Executive Director

93
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and invited their attention to the provisions
contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of RBI briefed the Committee on the
subject ‘Working of Capital Market including the recent IPO Scam and
Efficacy of Reform Processes’. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed
the representatives of RBI that the information with regard to queries of
the Members which were not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned

94
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 20th April, 2006 from 1030 to
1315 hrs. and 1430 to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
13. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
14. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
15. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
17. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
18. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekher — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
PART-IPART-IPART-IPART-IPART-I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Indian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas BankIndian Overseas Bank
1. Shri T.S. Narayanasami, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri A.P. Nagappan, Executive Director
94

95
3. Shri G. Gopinath, General Manager
4. Shri C. Badri, Chief Vigilance Officer
Vijaya Bank
1. Shri Prakash P. Mallya, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri B. Mahabala Shetty, General Manager (Inspection)
3. Shri H. Rathnakara Hegde, General Manager
ICICI Bank
1. Shri K.V. Kamath, Managing Director and CEO
2. Smt. Kalpana Morparia, Deputy Managing Director
3. Smt. Chanda Kochhar, Executive Director
4. Shri C. Sundareswaran, Senior Officer
5. Dr. Sanjay Chougule, Joint General Manager
6. Mr. Kedar Deshpande, Assistant General Manager
HDFC Bank
1. Shri Aditya Puri, Managing Director
2. Shri G. Subramanian, Country Head-Audit & Compliance
3. Shri Rajender Sehgal, Senior Vice-President
2. The representatives of Bharat Overseas Bank were also
scheduled to tender evidence before the Committee. The Committee,
however decided that the representatives of the Bank may be called
separately at 1400 hrs. for tendering evidence.
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Indian
Overseas Bank, Vijaya Bank, ICICI Bank and HDFC Bank and invited
their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the witnesses on the
subject ‘Working of Capital Market including the recent IPO Scams and
Efficacy of reform processes’. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed
the representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
5. The evidence was concluded.

96
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
(1400 to 1430 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Bharat Overseas BankBharat Overseas BankBharat Overseas BankBharat Overseas BankBharat Overseas Bank
1. Shri G. Chandran, Sr. General Manager
2. Shri R.D. Sharma, Deputy General Manager
3. Shri S. Venkatesh, Chief Manager
4. Shri Vinod Juneja, Director
5. Shri Sella Ganapathy, Director
6. Shri P.C. Kudaisya, Territory Head (North)
6. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Bharat Overseas Bank and invited their attention to the provisions
contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
7. The Committee then took oral evidence of the witnesses on the
subject ‘Working of capital market including the recent IPO Scams and
Efficacy of reform processes’. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed
the representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
8. The evidence was concluded.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-II
(1430 to 1510 hrs.)
** ** ** ** **
The evidence was concluded.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

97
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 1st June, 2006 from 1030 to
1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Shri Rupchand Pal
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
18. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
19. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
11. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)
1. Shri Ravi Narain, MD & CEO
2. Ms. Chitra Ramakrishna, Deputy Managing Director
97

98
(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)
1. Shri Rajnikant Patel, CEO/MD
2. Shri P.R. Prasad, Consultant
(C) National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL)(C) National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL)(C) National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL)(C) National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL)(C) National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL)
1. Shri C.B. Bhave,  Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Gagan Rai, Executive Director
3. Shri Jayesh Sule, Sr. Vice President
(D) Central Depository Service Ltd. (CDSL)(D) Central Depository Service Ltd. (CDSL)(D) Central Depository Service Ltd. (CDSL)(D) Central Depository Service Ltd. (CDSL)(D) Central Depository Service Ltd. (CDSL)
1. Shri V.V. Raut, Managing Director & CEO
2. Shri Umesh Maskeri, Vice President — Legal & Company
Secretary
3. Shri Dominic Fernandes, Assistant Vice President —
Business Development.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the National Stock Exchange (NSE), Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE),
National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL) and Central Depository
Services Ltd. (CDSL) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Efficacy of Reform
Process in Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam’. The Chairman then asked
the representatives to furnish written notes on certain issues on which
clarifications were sought by the Members, in respect of which
information was not readily available with them.
4. As the Committee found the replies of the representatives of
NSE and BSE unsatisfactory, it was decided to call them again to tender
evidence before the Committee.
5. The evidence of NSDL and CDSL was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned

99
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 12th June, 2006 from 1100 to
1210 hrs. and 1225 to 1340 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
13. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
14. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
15. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
18. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
19. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
99

100
PART-IPART-IPART-IPART-IPART-I
(1100 to 1210 hrs.)
WITNESSES
(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)(A) National Stock Exchange (NSE)
1. Shri Ravi Narain, MD & CEO
2. Ms. Chitra Ramakrishna, Deputy Managing Director
3. Shri Ravi Varanasi, Assistant Vice President
4. Shri K. Hari, Assistant Vice President
5. Shri T. Venkat Rao, Branch-in-Charge, Delhi
(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)(B) Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE)
1. Shri Rajnikant Patel, CEO/MD
2. Shri P.S. Reddy, Chief General Manager
3. Shri P.R. Prasad, Consultant
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the National Stock Exchange (NSE) and Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE),
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction
55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Efficacy of Reform
Process in Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam’. The Chairman then asked
the representatives to furnish written notes on certain issues on which
clarifications were sought by the Members, in respect of which
information was not readily available with them.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-II
(1225 to 1340 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. The evidence was concluded.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

101
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 13th June, 2006 from 1030 hrs. to
1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
16. Shri Yashwant Sinha
17. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
18. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
19. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora  — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Department of Economic Affairs
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary
2. Dr. K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary (Capital Markets)
3. Shri M.S. Sahoo, Director (Capital Markets)
101

102
4. Dr. Shashank Saksena, Director (Stock Exchange)
5. Shri Vikram Sahay, Deputy Secretary (Inv.)
6. Ms. Sangeeta Saxena, A.D. (Capital Markets)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Efficacy of Reform
Process in Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam’. The Chairman then asked
the representatives to furnish written notes on certain issues on which
clarifications were sought by the Members, in respect of which
information was not readily available with them.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned

103
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 6th November, 2006 from
1030 hrs. to 1130 hrs., 1145 hrs. to 1300 hrs. and 1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri Rupchand Pal
15. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
16. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
17. Shri K.S. Rao
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
 9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
15. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekher — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
103

104
PART-IPART-IPART-IPART-IPART-I
(1030 to 1130 hrs.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee. The Committee took up for consideration the draft report on
subject. ‘Efficacy of Reform Process in Capital Market – Recent IPO
Scam’. The Committee after deliberation adopted the report with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the report
in the light of the amendments/suggestions made by the Members and
also to make consequential verbal changes and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
PART-IIPART-IIPART-IIPART-IIPART-II
(1145 to 1340 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** **
PART-IIIPART-IIIPART-IIIPART-IIIPART-III
(1430 to 1630 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** **
3. The evidence was concluded.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

105
105
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE SUBJECT ‘EFFICACY OF REFORM PROCESS IN THE
CAPITAL MARKET – RECENT IPO SCAM’ AT THEIR
SITTING HELD ON 6 NOVEMBER, 2006]
Page No. 12 Last Para
Delete “The Committee are apprehensive that
though as per SEBI irregularities were
committed in respect of 21 IPOs during
2003-2005, yet the scam with such seem-
ingly simple modus operandi may have been
continuing, in a clandestine manner for
a long time. They have examined this
matter in detail, which is given in subse-
quent pages of this Report under the
Chapter ‘Extent of scam and benefits to
scamsters’.”
Page No. 21 Line 3
Insert before last para “The Committee are apprehensive that
though as per SEBI irregularities were
committed in respect of 21 IPOs during
2003-2005, yet the scam with such seem-
ingly simple modus operandi may have been
continuing, in a clandestine manner for a
long time. In this connection, the Commit-
tee note the submission made by Ministry
of Finance that investigation by SEBI as
well as Income Tax Department seem to
indicate that to a limited extent this started
in 1999. Although, the Ministry of Finance
were repeatedly asked to furnish informa-
tion about IPOs where irregularities were
noticed since 1999, the Committee are
disappointed that no such information was
furnished to them.

106
For The Committee, however, are of the view
that there is enough scope for further probe
in the matter. More so, because they are
given to understand that the irregularities
in the IPOs by utilising multiple fake
accounts had begun in 1999.
Substitute They are of the view that there is enough
scope for further probe in the matter.
Page No. 26 Line 3
from below
After the word ‘which’
add “affects the credibility of its investigation
and therefore”
Page No. 27 Last Sentence
for The Committee, therefore, desire that a
time-frame for codifying these be fixed.
Substitute “The Committee, therefore, desire that a
time-frame not exceeding three months for
codifying these be fixed.”
Page No. 34 Line 1
For In this connection, the Committee have
been given to understand that certain
regulations do direct the intermediaries to
have ‘Chinese Walls’ separating their mul-
tiple functions from one another.
Substitute “The Committee feel that law should be
examined with a view to separating the
various functions of the intermediaries so
that not only there is complete separation
of functions, but the management includ-
ing the Board of Directors of different
entities is also not common.
Page No. 46 Line 26
For In view of the fact that transgression from
the guidelines/instructions of RBI needs to
be taken very seriously, the Committee are

107
of the opinion, that it would be more
appropriate, if accountability is fixed on
those officials of the banks who were
found responsible for the irregularities in
flouting KYC norms and they should be
appropriately punished so as to serve as an
effective deterrent in future.
Substitute “However, the Committee strongly feel that
the transgression from the guidelines/
instructions of the RBI has not taken place
without the connivance of officials of the
banks, who were found responsible for the
irregularities in flouting KYC norms. There-
fore, they should be suitably punished so
as to serve as an effective deterrent in
future.”
Line 26
after ...effective deterrent in future.
Insert “The Committee further feel that more
stringent punishment be meted out to
banks which are found to be repeatedly
indulging in malpractices. Besides, when-
ever ‘grey areas’ in the existing legal
provisions are identified, new rules to clear
the ambiguities in such grey areas should
be made on an urgent basis.
Page No. 55 Line 10
from below
For They therefore urge NSDL to carry out their
inspections of DPs seriously and refer the
matter immediately to its DAC in case
recurrence of errors are noticed so that
suitable action could be initiated.
Substitute “This puts a question mark over the
seriousness with which DPs are being
inspected by the NSDL in case of any such
error noticed in future the matter should
invariably be referred to DAC so that
exemplary punishment is give to them.”

108
Page 71 Line 5 from below
For In addition, the Committee would also like
to see that illegal benefits earned by the
scamsters are retrieved in full.
Substitute “The CBDT should ensure that the illegal
benefits earned by the scamsters are
retrieved in full.”
Page 72 Line 30 &
Page 73 line 1
For The Committee feel that these are steps in
the right direction and hope that an early
action would be taken by authorities on
these matters.
Substitute “The Committee feel that an early action
should be taken by authorities on these
matters. The Committee would also like to
place on record their unhappiness over the
fact that overall the Government have failed
to impart due seriousness to the recommen-
dations given by the two JPCs on scams.”
Page No. 73 Line 16
After ...implementation of allotment of a UIN.
Insert The Committee are disappointed with the
current scenario of delay  and uncertainly
in so far as introduction of UIN and
creation of MAPIN is concerned which in
their view could have contributed substan-
tially in making perpetuation of this kind
of scam difficult.