CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure & Disinvestment) which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May,
2007.
2. The Report contained 13 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations pertaining to Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment contained in the Report. These have
been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 11
(Total 7)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 13
(Total 2)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 5 and 10
(Total 3)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 12
(Total 1)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies of the observations
contained in Chapters I & V may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Setting up of Stabilisation Fund
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 21, 22 & 23)
5. Keeping in view the rising inflation, the Committee suggested
that measures such as strengthening Public distribution System as an
instrument of intervention in the market, withdrawal of other essential
commodities from futures trading and setting up of a stabilization
Fund to address changes in international oil prices be taken for
controlling inflation.
6. The Government in their action taken reply have, inter-ralia,
stated that the following administrative measures were taken:
• Reduction in the retail prices of petrol by Rs. 2 per litre
and diesel by Rs. 1 per litre first in November, 2006 and
again in February, 2007.
• Suspension of futures trading in tur and urad from January
24, 2007 and in wheat and rice from February 28, 2007.
• Extending up to August 28, 2007, the order enabling the
State Governments to prescribe stock limits, etc., in respect
of wheat and pulses under the Essential Commodities Act.
• Constitution of an Expert Committee under the chairmanship
of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission, to look
into all the issues relating to futures trading.
• Strengthening the monitoring mechanism of the public
distribution system.
7. The Committee note that the Government have taken a number
of measures to control inflation. The Government’s reply is, however,
silent on the Committee’s specific suggestion for setting up
stabilization fund to address changes in international oil prices as
one of the measures to contain inflation. The Committee hope that
the Committee’s suggestion has been taken note of for appropriate
action.

3
B. Computerisation and implementation of core banking solutions
in public sector banks
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 47, 48 and 49)
8. The Committee were concerned to find that the public sector
banks had lagged behind their private and foreign counterparts in
implementing modern technology for banking operations as only 10 of
the 27 public sector banks were stated to be fully computerized despite
incurring a huge expenditure of Rs. 10,676 crore in the preceding few
years. The Committee had noted that public sector banks initiated the
implementation of CBS in the year 2004-05 and that it would take
another four years to complete the process. Taking serious note of the
tardy progress so far made by the public sector banks in modernization
the Committee recommended that (i) appropriate measure be taken
for implementation of modern technology in public sector banks at a
faster pace, (ii) RBI should impress upon the banks to complete the
transformation towards Core Banking Solution (CBS) at the earliest,
and; (iii) Government/RBI must provide assistance to the banks in
addressing problems relating to computer hardware and software,
networking equipments, skilled manpower etc., which were said to be
hindering the progress of modernization of the public sector banking
practices and processes.
9. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
• The amount indicated reflects a 7 year period from 1999 to
2006.
• Computerisation in the first part of the period was based
on the CVC directive to computerise all business of the
PSBs.
• The approach at that time was to computerise bank business
but now the objective is to computerise bank operations at
branches.
• The real thrust towards implementation of Core Banking
Solutions (CBS) has been taking place from the year
2004-05 onwards.
• Some of the amounts spent by banks may not be on CBS
per se but for computerisation, networks etc. as well.
• Implementation of CBS requires many aspects to be taken
care of, such as the provision of central servers, reliable
networks, Business Continuity systems to take care of
Disaster Recovery Management, Process Re-engineering etc.
Further, implementation of CBS at each branch takes some
time and hence the time line indicated.

4
• The comparison between the PSBs and private (new private
sector) may not be a justifiable one since the RBI has been
insisting that new private sector banks shall commence
operations only on a fully technology base which is not the
case for the PSBs. As far as old private sector banks are
concerned, they are at various stages of implementation of
CBS. Foreign banks are part of the global approach followed
by their respective head offices; foreign banks do have an
edge over Indian banks in terms of IT implementation since
they have had an early start while Indian banks had to
grapple with issues relating to manpower, unions, change
in attitudinal aspects, average age of the employees etc.,
before the large scale implementation of IT based systems
could commence.
• The problems indicated are true.
• As far as CBS systems are concerned, there are only a few
reliable solution providers and the choice of range available
is not very large.
• Legacy issues continue to be a challenge which PSBs are
faced with.
• Implementation of systems such as the CBS across branches
is generally a decision taken by the management of banks
keeping in focus the benefits accruing out of the IT based
implementation and the local customer preferences. This has
resulted in banks focusing CBS implementation at large,
metro and urban branches in the initial phase. The other
branches are now being covered by banks in a phased
manner.
• As far as the role of the RBI is concerned, RBI does not
provide any prescriptive details to banks; banks are free to
implement systems which meet the overall parameters.
Nevertheless, in respect of CBS, the RBI does monitor this
in a broad manner and this is a matter for discussion during
the periodical review meetings with the in-charges of the
IT Departments of banks held by the RBI.
10. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government
has put forth a number of problems/excuses to justify the slow pace
of implementation of modern technology for banking operations.
They are of the view that the managements of the public sector
banks should have anticipated the technological and human resource
related problems encountered in computerization of the banks
especially implementation of Core Banking Solutions (CBS) and taken
suitable measures to address these problems (instead of citing these
very issues as reasons for four year deadline for completion). The

5
Committee believe that had the public sector banks taken timely
action for technological upgradation, it would have put them on par
with their private and foreign counterparts in much needed efficiency
in delivery of services. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that
appropriate measures be taken for implementation of modern
technology in public sector banks at a faster pace.
C. Lending to Weaker Sections by Commercial Banks
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para Nos. 58 and 59)
11. The Committee observed that the principal reasons cited for
non-compliance of the lending targets for the weaker sections include,
inter alia , delay in submission of forms by sponsoring agencies, lack of
awareness of guidelines of schemes among officials of both sponsoring
and banks, poor sponsoring of applications, poor recovery and defaults
by borrowers. The Committee recommended in this context that the
Government/RBI should take appropriate steps for increasing awareness
and enabling effective co-ordination between banks and sponsoring
agencies so that timely credit is made available to the borrowers.
12. The Government in their Action taken reply, inter-alia, stated as
under:
“In order to make the financially-excluded as also the existing
customers of banks, aware of the various financial products and
services available in the market/offered by the banks and also to
make them understand the benefits and ways to join the formal
financial system, RBI has embarked upon the project of Financial
Education. A Steering Group on Reaching Out to the Common
Man has already been constituted in the RBI for launching the
financial education programme.
13. The Committee are glad to note that in pursuance of the
Committee’s recommendation, the RBI has embarked upon the project
of Financial Education to promote, among weaker sections, awareness
of various financial products and services offered by the banks. A
Steering Group has reportedly been constituted in the RBI for
launching the project. It is, however, not clear, when the Steering
Group was constituted and how soon the programme will be
launched. The Committee hope that the educational programme will
be launched expeditiously to ensure that lending targets for weaker
sections are achieved without fail during the current year.
D. Crop Insurance
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para Nos. 70, 71, 72 and 73)
14. The Committee reiterated their earlier recommendation on the
need for standardizing and fixing the unit area of insurance as ‘Gram

6
Panchayat’. In view of the problems cited by the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance during the course of evidence the Committee
desired that the Ministry of Finance should come out with a status
paper on crop insurance scheme within a period of three months
specifying the extra trained manpower and extra funding which were
required for undertaking additional crop cutting experiments as a result
of reducing the unit of insurance to the village panchayat level.
15. In the light of the unaffordable rates of premium charged by
the Agriculture Insurance Company (AIC) under Varsha Bima Yojana
the Committee also recommended that the Government needed to
subsidize the premium under the scheme so that a large number of
farmers could avail the scheme.
16. The Government in their reply stated inter alia as under:
“Gram Panchayat has been recommended as ‘unit of insurance’ by
various Committees. Some of the states have already taken steps
in this direction.
The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) in its existing
form does provide for smaller insurance unit viz. village panchayat.
However, the States could not lower the insurance unit to the
desired level because of the huge consequent increase in the
number of CCEs required to be conducted and the consequent
manpower requirement and the costs involved. As mentioned in
the report of the Joint Group submitted to the Government, a
sample exercise was conducted a few years ago under CCIS which
broadly estimated an anticipated increase in the cost of the
programme by about 35% for every one level of reduction in the
size of the insurance unit i.e. from block/taluka to Village
panchayat.
The Joint Group also studied the manpower and the cost
implications and made the following recommendations:
State should make use of the existing manpower of the concerned
departments to the extent possible. However, where existing
manpower is inadequate, staff identified by the State Government
as surplus may be trained and re-deployed. Additional Manpower
can also be out-sourced in consultation with the implementing
agency from agri-clinics, agri-preneurs, agricultural universities,
KVKs, retired department officials, unemployed agricultural
graduated etc.

7
Assuming that the three major crops would be notified at village
panchayat level (on an average two during Kharif and one during
Rabi), the number of CCEs required at the village panchayat level
based on the sample size of 8 CCEs per unit per crop would be
24 (i.e. 8 x 3). With nearly 2.2 lakh village panchayats likely to be
notified for the major crops, 50 lakh additional CCEs would be
required to lower the insurance unit to village panchayat. The cost
of conducting each CCE is estimated at Rs. 300. At an estimated
cost of Rs. 300 per CCE, the cost of 55 lakh CCEs (existing 5 lakhs
+ additional 50 lakhs) could be of the order of Rs. 165 crores, of
which approx. 90% of the expenditure is recurring. The Joint Group,
after considering the importance of reduction of insurance unit
and the costs involved in conducting additional CCEs,
recommended that the costs for CCEs may be shared between the
Government of India and States on 50 : 50 basis.
The reduction in the size of the insurance units as already
experimented by some of the states for certain areas and crops as
stated above, has raised a question mark on the quality aspects of
the Crop Cutting Experiment exercise for various reasons such as
lack of adequate and trained manpower with the concerned
Departments of the State Governments, lack of required additional
funds for conducting the huge number of CCEs required to be
conducted, NSSO’s inability to meet the stipulated supervision
norms, the local influence of the farmers, their groups and
associations, and the local opinion leaders etc., besides having
resulted in manifold increase in the administrative work for the
Implementing Agency .
The Varsha Bima was launched in 130 districts in the country in
Kharif 2006 season and Weather based Insurance Scheme was
launched in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and
Maharashtra during Rabi 2006-07 season.
17. The Committee regret that though the Joint Group, set up by
the Ministry of Agriculture, had inter-alia recommended reduction
in the size of insurance units from block/taluka to ‘Gram Panchayat’
for crop insurance, the Government response seems to be non-
commital. The reply of the Government is also silent on Committee’s
specific recommendation on subsidizing the premium which ranges
from 6%-9% under Varsha Bima Yojana. The Committee in this
connection would like to point out that the Government, in its own
submission earlier, had admitted that there was a need to keep the
premium rates affordable by subsidizing the scheme. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that unit area for crop insurance should be Gram
Panchayat and there should be subsidised premium rates under
Varsha Bima Yojana to benefit a large number of poor farmers.

8
E. SEBI-Investor Protection Fund
Recommendation (No. 7, Para No. 98)
18. Taking note of the delay in setting up of Investor Protection
Fund under the aegis of SEBI, as proposed in the Budget 2006-07, the
Committee had recommended that the Government should bring the
legislative amendments required to create a centralized Investor
Protection Fund with SEBI without further delay.
19. The Government in their action taken reply have stated that a
draft Cabinet Note seeking amendments to the SEBI act for, inter alia,
this purpose has been prepared and sent to various Ministries/
Departments for comments. Consultations with Ministry of Law and
Justice are under progress to finalise the proposals in the Cabinet
Note.
20. The Committee regret to note that even 20 months after
announcement of the proposal for setting up of Investor Protection
Fund with SEBI, the legislative amendments required for the purpose
have not been finalized as yet. Inter-Ministerial consultations in this
regard are stated to be still in progress. The Committee urge that
the legislative proposals in this regard be finalized expeditiously
and amendment Bill for the purpose introduced in Parliament soon
thereafter.
F. Achievement of FRBM Targets
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para Nos. 130 and 131)
21. In view of the Planning Commission’s submission that it may
not be easy for the Government to cut the revenue deficit from 2.1%
in 2006-07 to zero percent by 2008-09 while also achieving large
increases in Plan expenditure and also in view of the increase in
revenue expenditure by 6.5% in 2007-08 (BE) the Committee were
inclined to believe that adhering to fiscal correction targets and
measures stipulated under the FRBM Act would be an extremely
difficult task for the Government. The Committee, therefore, while
emphasizing on the need for strict adherence to deficit reduction targets,
recommended to prepare a detailed note on the policy measures by
way of which the FRBM goals were proposed to be achieved.
22. The Government in their action taken reply stated inter alia as
under:
“The fiscal outcomes projected in the Task Force Report are subject
to various assumptions while the implementing process, being
dynamic, is expected to respond to economic developments on a
real time basis. During the FRBM mandated regime, on the strength

9
of buoyant tax performance and institutional improvements in
conjunction with measures to rationalize expenditure, the fiscal
performance is on course. The non-plan expenditure as a percentage
of GDP , including interest payments, defence, petroleum and
fertilizers subsidies, has been progressively declining during the
past four years as can be seen in the following table.
Trends in Non Plan Expenditure as a percentage of GDP
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
BE
Non-Plan Expenditure 11.70 10.25 10.01 9.40
Major components:
Interest payments 4.06 3.72 3.62 3.43
Defence Expenditure 2.43 2.26 2.07 2.07
Major Subsidies 1.47 1.33 1.28 1.17
Transfer to State & UT Governments 0.47 0.85 0.90 0.83
Pensions (Defence+Civil) 0.59 0.57 0.53 0.51
Internal Security 0.34 0.35 0.38 0.30
The expenditure on defence, interest payments, and major subsidies,
transfers to States/UTs, pensions, internal security etc., are
obligatory in nature and account for about 89 per cent of total
non-plan expenditure in 2006-07. Any increase in expenditure in
these areas would commensurately increase overall non-plan
expenditure. Despite the burden of such obligatory expenditure,
the non-plan expenditure as a percentage of the total expenditure
has declined from 73 percent in 2004-05 to 70 percent in 2007-08
(BE).
Evaluation of non-plan expenditure is an on-going exercise.
Notwithstanding the inherent inflexibility in non-plan expenditure,
the Government is committed to achieving moderation in growth
of non-plan expenditure. Guidelines on austerity and expenditure
management are issued from time to time to supplement the
General Financial Rules. The progressively declining non-plan
expenditure, as well as improving tax-GDP ratio, reflect the
Government’s commitment to achieving the FRBM targets.
The FRBM Act enjoins the Government to eliminate the revenue
deficit and to reduce fiscal deficit to not more than 3 percent of
GDP by 2008-09. Increase in expenditure in the social sectors has

10
implications particularly on Revenue Deficit and is sought to be
balanced by containment of non-plan revenue expenditure and by
increasing revenue realisation through various measures including
inter-alia, through improved tax administration, broadening the tax
base and periodical revision of exemptions. The Government is
sensitive to the challenging task of mobilizing resources to meet
the expenditure commitments envisaged in XI Plan, while at the
same time adhering to FRBM targets. Such challenges also originate
from a virtuous shift in Plan priorities in favour of open ended
programmes like National Employment Guarantee Scheme as also
Bharat Nirman, Urban Renewal Mission which are in the nature
of creating pressure on revenue expenditure though these
programmes contain substantial component of expenditure on asset
creation. Nevertheless, the increase in expenditure on various
schemes for poverty alleviation and social sector development
including provision for an upgradation of physical infrastructure,
budgeted during 2007-08, is sought to be met while adhering to
the FRBM deficit targets for the year 2007-08.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, on 29.9.2006, had
directed ‘all the Ministries/Departments to plan and administer
their activities keeping in view the fiscal corrections prescribed in
the FRBM Act 2003’. Buoyant economic growth along with the
above measures is expected to contribute to the achievement of
the budgeted deficit targets.
23. The Committee note that though non-plan expenditure as a
percentage of GDP is budgeted to decline by 2.3% in 2007-08 as
compared to 2004-05 (from 11.70% in 2004-05 to 9.40% in 2007-08), as
a percentage of total expenditure, it is expected to decline by
3 percent. This coupled with the Ministry’s own admission that there
is inherent inflexibility in reducing the non-plan expenditure,
reinforces the Committee’s apprehension that the Government may
not be able to meet the deficit targets (both fiscal and revenue
deficits) as enunciated in the FRBM Act. It is in this context, the
Committee had desired the Government to provide them a detailed
note on the policy measures required for achieving the FRBM targets
in the given time frame. The Government have, however, not
furnished the details as to how the FRBM goals are going to be
accomplished. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation and desire that the Government should come out
with a detailed note on policy measures by which the FRBM goals
are proposed to be achieved.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Inflation
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 21, 22 and 23)
The Committee observed that while the Wholesale Price Index
(WPI) based inflation rose from 4 per cent in April, 2006 to 6.1 per
cent in February , 2007, the inflation level as measured by the Consumer
Price Index which peaked to as much as 7.6% in June, 2006, the highest
in the last seven years, was placed at 6.7 per cent in January, 2007.
Though the inflation rate for primary articles and manufactured
products at 9.75 per cent and 5.65 per cent respectively as on
20th January, 2007 was higher than 5.87 per cent and 2.32 per cent
recorded in the corresponding week a year ago, the inflation rate for
the fuel group decreased from 7.84 per cent to 3.67 per cent in the
same period. Rise in prices of wheat, pulses, edible oils, fruits and
vegetables, condiments and spices were the major contributory factors
towards increasing the inflation rate of primary articles. The variation
between the WPI and CPI measured inflation rates is owing to the
different weightages and composition of commodities in the baskets of
the two price indices. While the food group of items’ have been given
a weightage of 46.79% in the CPI basket, these items are accorded a
weightage of 26.94% in the WPI basket. The CPI measured inflation in
the current times being higher vis-a-vis the WPI measures inflation,
which is owing to rise in food prices, the Committee cannot help
taking note of the fact that the inflationary being witnessed affects the
working class, or the lower strata of the society the most.
The measures initiated and pursued by the Government to control
inflation include inter alia reducing the retail prices of petrol, importing
wheat and pulses at zero duty, banning export of wheat, pulses and
skimmed milk powder, reducing import duty on palm group of oils
and banning futures trading in tur, urad, wheat and rice. Concomitant
to address the supply side factors, monetary policy initiatives for
regulating liquidity by increasing the Cash Reserve Ratio and Repo
Rate have been initiated by the RBI with a view to controlling the
inflationary trend and simultaneously facilitating the growth rate of
GDP which has been to the extent of 7.5% (provisional estimates) for
2004-05 and 9.0 per cent (quick estimates) for 2005-06. The Committee,
in this regard, take note of the fact that in the Economic survey

12
2006-07 too an apprehension has been expressed that supply-demand
imbalances in primary articles and firming of international prices may
continue to exert pressure on inflation. It has, therefore been stated
that unless supply side constraints, especially in food items are
removed, the inflationary pressure would not be tamed fully.
Since the primary factor in generating inflationary pressure is
observed to be the increase in prices of food items, the Committee are
of the view that the Government’s policy direction should be essentially
and seriously oriented towards addressing ‘supply side’ factors on a
mid and long term basis. The Committee feel this to be essential despite
the initiatives taken by the Government for addressing supply side
factors by restoring to imports etc., which can, at best be a short-term
or stop gap arrangement for controlling prices. Moreover, rise in prices
along with the rise in interest rates affect the common man hard. For
the purpose of effectively tackling the inflationary trend, and at the
same time maintaining the trajectory of growth, the Committee are of
the considered view that the Government should emphasize on
proactive steps so that the problem of inflation is tackled effectively.
The Committee are of the views that strengthening the public
distribution system as an instrument of intervention in the market,
withdrawal of other essential commodities too from futures trading
and setting up a stabilization fund to address changes in international
oil prices are some of the measures required to be taken for controlling
inflation.
Reply of the Government
Inflation, which was under pressure in 2006-07, showed some signs
of abatement  in early 2007-08. Inflation, as measured by the Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) of all commodities on a year-on-year basis, had
remained above 6 per cent in each of the 12 weeks beginning the
week ending January 6, 2007. For the week ending March 31, 2007,
inflation got moderated to 5.94 per cent, but increased to 6.44 and
6.09 per cent for each of the two weeks ending April 7 and April 14,
2007. Rate of inflation has declined by 129 basis points in the seven
weeks since then and was 4.80 per cent on June 2, 2007. Inflation
based on consumer price indices (CPI) in April 2007 varied between
6.67 per cent for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) and 9.44 per cent for
Agricultural Labourers (CPI-AL) on a year-on-year basis. On June 2,
2007, inflation recorded by primary articles at 8.20 per cent was slightly
higher than 7.04 per cent recorded a year ago. Primary articles
contributed as much as 37.92 per cent to overall inflation. The
manufactured product group (with a weight of 63.75 per cent in WPI)
recorded year-on-year inflation of 5.13 per cent on June 2, 2007 and

13
contributed 59.15 per cent to overall inflation. Fuel group, year-on-
year inflation has decelerated to 733 basis points from June 3, 2007
and their contribution to current inflation was 2.64 per cent which is
significantly lower than 35.41 per cent a year ago.
The problem of inflation in 2006-07 started with shortfalls in
domestic supply of some agricultural commodities, mainly wheat,
pulses, edible oils and hardening of international prices of some
essential commodities during this period. Any failure on the supply
management front will not only damage inflation perception in people’s
mind but also build up pressure for upward adjustment of wages and
other prices and for fiscal and monetary accommodation of higher
overall inflation. Therefore, containment of inflation remains high on
the agenda of the Government. Anti-inflationary policies of the
Government include strict fiscal and monetary discipline, rationalization
of excise and import duties of essential items so that there is no undue
burden on the poor, effective supply-demand management of essential
commodities through liberal tariff and trade policies, and strengthening
the public distribution system. Moderation in rates of inflation in last
seven weeks indicates that various policy initiatives taken by
Government have started yielding results.
The recent steps taken by Government to control inflation include:
Monetary Measures
• Increasing the cash reserve ratio by 25 basis points each of
six occasions so far on December 23, 2006, January 6, 2007,
February 17, 2007, March 3, 2007, April 14, 2007 and
April 28, 2007 to reach 6.5 per cent as on April 28, 2007.
• Repo rates revised upwards five times in 2006-07 by
25 basis points on each occasion to reach 7.75 per cent on
March 30, 2007.
• On March 2, 2007, the Reserve Bank of India announced
three further measures to manage liquidity in the system:
first, starting March 5, 2007, under the Liquidity Adjustment
Facility, to limit daily reverse repo absorption to a maximum
of Rs. 3,000 crore each day; second, to issue dated security
for Rs. 6,000 crore (nominal) on March 6, 2007 under the
Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS); and third, to auction
Treasury Bills for a notified amount of Rs. 2,500 crore on
March 7, 2007.
Fiscal Measures
• As against the normal applicable duty of 50 per cent,
allowing private trade to import wheat at 5 per cent duty

14
from June 28, 2006, and at zero duty from September 9,
2006.
• Reduction of customs duty on import of pulses to zero on
June 8, 2006.
• Reduction in import duty on palm group of oil by
10 percentage points in August 2006 and by a further
10-12.5 percentage points in January 2007. Maintaining the
tariff value for assessing import duty unchanged at the July
2006 level.
• In January 2007 customs duty was reduced on portland
cement, various metals, machinery items and project imports.
• Reducing peak rate of basic customs duty for non-
agricultural products from 12.5 per cent to 10 per cent in
Budget 2007-08;
• Reducing basic customs duty on selected raw materials,
intermediate and capital goods to 5-7.5 per cent in Budget
2007-08;
• Removal of additional customs or countervailing duty of
4 per cent on edible oils in Budget 2007-08;
• Reducing basic customs duty on sunflower oil by
10 percentage points in January 2007 and by a further
15 percentage points in Budget 2007-08;
• Reducing excise duty on petrol and diesel, umbrellas and
footwear, and on cement up to Rs. 190 per bag in Budget
2007-08;
• Exempting biscuits up to Rs. 100 per kg. and food mixes
from excise duty in the Finance Act of 2007-08.
• Basic customs duty on palm group of oils was further
reduced by 10 percentage points in April 2007.
Measures for augmenting domestic availability
• STC contracted for import of 55 lakh tonnes of wheat to
supplement domestic availability.
• Decision to release up to 4 lakh tonnes of wheat under the
Open Market Sale Scheme in February and March 2007.
• Ban on export of pulses with effect from June 22, 2006;
wheat and skimmed milk powder from February 9, 2007.

15
• At the initiative of the Government, National Agricultural
Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED)
executed a contract for import of 49,300 tonnes of pulses,
of which entire quantity was received during July-October
2006. To increase availability of pulses, NAFED executed a
new contract in December 2006 for import of 30,000 tonnes
of pulses. In 2007-08, public sector agencies are expected to
import an additional 1.5 million tonnes of pulses.
• For a sustained improvement in agriculture production and
productivity, Budget 2007-08 has proposed measures to
increase irrigation, availability of improved seeds,
institutional credit and fertilizers and measures to accelerate
the adoption of new technologies through a revamped
training and visit system.
Administrative measures
• Reduction in the retail prices of petrol by Rs. 2 per litre
and diesel by Rs. 1 per litre first in November 2006 and
again in February 2007.
• Suspension of futures trading in tur and urad from January
24, 2007 and in wheat and rice from February 28, 2007.
• Extending up to August 28, 2007, the order enabling the
State Governments to prescribe stock limits, etc., in respect
of wheat and pulses under the Essential Commodities Act.
• Constitution of an Expert Committee under the chairmanship
of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission, to look
into all the issues relating to futures trading.
• Strengthening the monitoring mechanism of the public
distribution system.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), F. No. 3
(23)/EC.Dn./2007, dated 26/6/2007]
Lending of Weaker Sections by Commercial Banks
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para Nos. 58 & 59)
Though scheduled commercial banks are requested to extend a
minimum of 10 per cent of the Net Banking Credit to the weaker
sections as a part of the overall target of extending 40 percent of the
credit to priority sector, the data for the last four years shows that the

16
actual lending has been much lower, both in the case of public sector
and private sector banks. While the public sector banks extended 7.67
and 7.70 percent of the Net Banking Credit to the weaker sections in
2004-05 and 2005-06, such lending extended by the private sector banks
was as low as 1.2 percent and 1.7 percent during the years. The
principal reasons cited for non-compliance of the lending targets for
the weaker sections include, inter alia , delay in submission of forms by
sponsoring agencies, lack of awareness of guidelines of schemes among
officials of both sponsoring and banks, poor sponsoring of applications,
poor recovery and defaults by borrowers.
The Committee is surprised at the satisfaction being derived by
the Government that the lending to the weaker sections of society has
been steadily increasing in absolute terms since 2002-03. Government
should not lose sight of the fact that the lending to this section in
terms of percentage of net bank credit has no where been near the
stipulated 10 percent. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government/RBI should take appropriate steps for increasing awareness
and enabling effective coordination between banks and sponsoring
agencies so that timely credit is made available to the borrowers. The
banks also need to be impressed upon to promote awareness among
the weaker sections about the availability of credit. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the details of the interest charged on
the loan-schemes to the poor sections as well as the data on recoveries
of such loans.
Reply of the Government
Financial Inclusion of the Weaker Sections
The policies relating to the rural credit are reviewed by Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) from time to time to bring about maximum
financial inclusion of the weaker sections of the society so as to bridge
the gap in achieving a minimum target of 10% NBC to the weaker
sections. Besides, constituting various Working Groups to address the
issues related to farmers in distress, simplication of procedures for
obtaining agricultural loans, and formulating guidelines on one-time
settlement for small and marginal farmers, the RBI has revised the
guidelines on priority sector lending with effect from April 30, 2007
wherein only those sectors were included as part of the priority sector,
that impact large sections of the population, the weaker sections and
the sectors which are employment intensive such as agriculture, and
tiny and small enterprises.

17
RBI has taken concerted initiatives to provide smooth and efficient
banking services to the general public at large. With a view to
enhancing the access of the common man to basic banking facilities,
RBI has launched a project called ‘Financial inclusion’ for delivery of
banking services at an affordable cost of the vast sections of
disadvantaged and low-income groups. Towards achieving this end,
SLBC convenor banks of the States/and Union Territories have been
advised to identify districts for launching the Financial Inclusion project,
introducing a basic banking ‘no frills’ accounts with minimum
documentation and general credit card.
Rate of Interest for the poor sections and recoveries of loans
In order to make the financially-excluded as also the existing
customers of banks aware of the various financial products and services
available in the market/offered by the banks and to make the former
to understand the benefits and the ways to join the formal financial
system, RBI has embarked upon the project of Financial Education. A
Steering Group on Reaching Out to the Common Man has already
been constituted in the RBI for launching the financial education
programme.
With a view to provide timely credit under various Government
Sponsored Schemes, RBI has taken the following steps:
(a) carried out studies on various Government Sponsored
Schemes, the findings of which have been brought to the
notice of the banks and Government for ensuring successful
implementation of the schemes.
(b) advised all the scheduled commercial banks to circulate the
instructions issued by RBI in the local languages and also
give due publicity of benefits extendable to SCs/STs under
different Government sponsored Schemes.
(c) advised the banks to help the poor illiterate borrowers in
filling up the forms and completing other formalities so
that they are able to get credit facility within a stipulated
period from the date of receipt of applications.
(d) advised the banks to contact illiterate borrowers and explain
to them the salient features of the schemes as also the
advantages that will accrue so as to minimize the rate of
rejection of applications.

18
(e) advised the banks to enhance the credit flow to SCs/STs as
recommended by the Parliamentary Committee on the
Welfare of SCs/STs.
As regards the rates of interest charged on various priority sector
advances, loans upto Rs. 2 lakhs carry the prescription of not exceeding
the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) while on the loans above Rs. 2 lakhs,
banks are free to determine the rate of interest. Thus, the interest rates
on advances have been partly deregulated.
As such, it is left to the individual banks to fix their own interest
rates for the loans and advances under Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana (SGSY), Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), Prime
Minister’s Rozgar Yojana (PMRY) and Scheme for Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers (SLRS) within the broad guidelines issued
by RBI. Nevertheless, banks were advised to link the rates of interest
to be charged on Group loans under SGSY scheme, to per capita size
of the loans so as to mitigate the burden on the BPL beneficiaries on
the analogy of IRDP group loans.
Under Differential Rates of Interest (DRI) Scheme, banks are
required to provide finance at a concessional rate of interest of 4% p.a.
to the weaker sections of the community for engaging in productive
and gainful activities so that they could improve their economic
conditions.
The data on the recovery position of banks under Government
Sponsored Schemes (SGSY, SJSRY, PMRY & SLRS) for the years 2003-
04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 is given below:
Recovery Position of Banks under Swarnjayanti
Gram Swarozgar Yojana
(Amt. Rs. in Lakhs)
Year Demand Recovery Overdues %
Ind SHG Ind SHG Ind SHG Ind SHG
2003-04 77078.42 29645.80 32408.85 17253.74 44669.57 12392.06 42.05 58.20
2004-05 82116.44 42847.70 33010.70 28143.88 49105.74 14704.19 40.20 65.68
2005-06 114347.32 62270.42 46815.56 40042.67 67531.76 22227.56 40.94 64.30
Ind—Individual

19
SHG-Self Help Group: Data as reported by scheduled commercial
banks
Recovery Position of Banks under Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
(Amt. Rs. in lakhs)
Year Demand Recovery Outstanding %
2003-04 36370.64 14015.80 22354.84 38.54
2004-05 36095.65 16012.30 20083.35 44.36
2005-06 39274.32 17601.39 21672.93 44.82
Data as reported by scheduled commercial banks.
Recovery Position of Banks under Prime Minister’s Rojgar Yojana
(Amt. Rs. in lakhs)
Years Demand Recovery Overdues %
2003-04 270449.70 94542.81 175906.89 34.96
2004-05 290923.23 102957.83 187965.40 35.39
2005-06 296575.41 104560.39 192015.02 35.26
Data as reported by scheduled commercial banks.
Recovery Position of Banks under Scheme for
Liberation of Scavengers
(Amt. Rs. in lakhs)
Year Demand Recovery Overdues %
2003-04 5105.89 1849.16 3256.73 36.22
2004-05 6064.09 1928.23 4135.86 31.80
2005-06 5922.85 1997.65 3925.20 33.73
Data as reported by scheduled commercial banks.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) F. No. 1/
10/P/BKG/2007, dated 18.7.2007]

20
Customer service in banking sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para Nos. 87, 88 & 89)
The Committee were dismayed to note that between July 2005
and June 2006, the Reserve Bank of India received 5772 complaints
against public sector banks. The total number of complaints against
private sector banks was 1492 where as in the case of foreign banks
it was 879. They find that whereas the number of complaints received
through Banking Division decreased consecutively during the last three
years i.e., 2004, 2005 and 2006, the number of complaints directly
received by banks increased sharply during the same period. Out of
the total complaints, maximum number of complaints have been
registered against credit card related services of the banks. They note
with utmost concern the fact that the RBI has received representations
from the public about the unreasonable and non-transparent service
charges/hidden charges being levied by banks, especially with respect
to non-maintenance of minimum balances in account, delayed payment
on credit card dues, remittance charges, ATM/Debit Card fees etc.
The Committee find that the RBI has created a separate Customer
Service Department in July 2006 to give focused attention to customer
service in banks. The Banking Ombudsman Scheme has been revised
with effect form January 1, 2006 to include additional complaints. RBI
has also issued guidelines on credit card operations in 21st November
2005. In order to ensure fair practices in banking services, RBI in its
Annual Policy Statement for the year 2006-2007 proposed to make
display and updation of details of various service charges obligatory
for the banks. It has also proposed to constitute a Working Group
comprising of Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and representatives of
customers to formulate a scheme for ensuring reasonableness of bank
charges and to incorporate the same in the Fair Practices Code, the
compliance of which would be monitored by the Banking Code and
Standards of Board of India (BCSBI). They also find that based on the
recommendations of the Working Group, guidelines on credit card
operations of banks have been issued in the form of a Master Circular
on credit card operations on July 1, 2006.
Though the measures taken by RBI are a step towards right
direction, a lot depends on the implementation. The Committee are of
the view that RBI should play a more proactive role in reducing the
incidence of customer grievances in the first instance. In view of the
largest number of complaints being in respect of credit card services,
RBI should have a study conducted of these services in particular

21
with a view to identify and plug the lacunae in these services. The
RBI should also institute a monitoring mechanism to see that all the
guidelines issued are scrupulously observed by individual banks. There
should be a penal provision against banks for taking negligent attitude
towards customer grievances. The number of complaints should be
gradually reduced by taking appropriate measures to improve the
particular service of banks. The Committee would also like to be
apprised in this regard within next three months.
Reply of the Government
RBI has reported that it has already issued detailed guidelines on
credit card operations of banks vide Circular dated November 21, 2005
as updated by Master Circular dated July 1, 2006. These guidelines
cover various aspects like Fair Practices Code, Issue of Cards, Interest
rates and other charges, Wrongful billing, Use of DSAs/DMAs and
other agents, protection of customer rights, redressal of grievances,
internal control and monitoring systems, fraud control and right to
impose penalty.
The Banking Ombudsmen have also been taking up individual
complaints received from customers regarding various credit card
related issues with the banks concerned with a view to redress the
grievances of customers. Further, even during the meetings held by
RBI with the CMDs/MDs/CEOs of banks for discussing their Annual
Branch Expansion plans, a lot of emphasis is given in discussing issues
related to customer service including the display of their Service
Charges and fees on their website, making available a Complaints
Form on their website itself, speedy disposal of complaints received
directly by the banks or those received through Banking Ombudsmen,
efforts taken by the bank to provide ‘no-frills accounts’ and efforts
taken by the bank in respect of financial inclusion aspects etc.
As regards unreasonable and non-transparent service charges/
hidden charges being levied by banks especially with respect to non-
maintenance of minimum balances in account, delayed payment on
credit card dues, remittance charges, ATM/Debit Card fees etc., it is
submitted that in terms of RBI circular dated September 7, 1999 on
‘levy of services charges by commercial banks’ (copy enclosed), banks
have been given the freedom to fix service charges for various types
of services with the approval of their Board. However, banks have
been advised that while fixing service charges, they should ensure
that the charges are reasonable and not out of line with the average
cost of providing these services. In order to ensure transparency, banks

22
are required to display and update on their websites the details of
various service charges in a prescribed format.
Further, based on the recommendations of the “Working Group to
formulate a scheme for ensuring reasonableness of bank charges”, RBI
has issued necessary instructions vide circular dated February 2, 2007
(copy enclosed) advising banks to identify basic banking services and
the principles to be adopted/followed by them for ensuring
reasonableness in pricing and communicating the service charges for
the basic banking services.
In addition, RBI has also issued a circular dated May 7, 2007
regarding excessive interest charged by banks. The circular was issued
in the context of Reserve Bank and Banking Ombudsmen offices
receiving several complaints regarding levying of excessive interest and
charges on certain loans and advances. In the circular, the reference of
banks was invited to RBI’s Master circular dated July 1, 2006 advising
them to have an objective and transparent policy approved by their
Boards for the purpose of fixing interest rates on loans and advances.
Banks were advised that though interest rates have been
deregulated, rates of interest beyond a certain level may be seen to be
usurious and can neither be sustainable nor be conforming to normal
banking practice. Boards of banks were, therefore, advised to lay out
appropriate international principles and procedures so that usurious
interest, including processing and other charges, are not levied by
them on loans and advances. In laying down such principles and
procedures in respect of small value loans, particularly, personal loans
and such other loans of similar nature, banks may take into account,
inter-alia, the following broad guidelines:
• An appropriate prior-approval process should be prescribed
for sanctioning such loans, which should take into account,
among others, the cash flows of the prospective borrower.
• Interest rates charged by banks, inter-alia, should in corporate
risk premium as considered reasonable and justified having
regard to the internal rating of the borrower. Further, in
considering the question of risk, the presence or absence of
security and the value thereof should be taken into account.
• The total cost to the borrower, including interest and all
other charges levied on a loan, should be justifiable having
regard to the total cost incurred by the bank by extending
the loan, which is sought to be defrayed and the extent of

23
return that could be reasonably expected from the
transaction.
• An appropriate ceiling may be fixed on the interest,
including processing and other charges that could be levied
on such loans, which may be suitably publicized.
RBI has reported that as noted by the Committee, RBI has been
initiating a number of steps to improve customer service while
simultaneously setting up adequate institutional infrastructure for
complaints’ and grievance redressal in the banking system. As already
mentioned against recommendation number 88 above, based on the
recommendations of the “Working Group to formulate a scheme for
ensuring reasonableness of bank charges”, RBI has issued detailed
guidelines to banks vide circular dated February 2, 2007 advising banks
to identify basic banking services and the principles to be adopted/
followed by them for ensuring reasonableness in pricing and
communicating the service charges for the basic banking services.
In particular, banks were advised to take action as under in terms
of the above circular;
(i) to identify the basic banking services on the basis of the
broad parameters indicated by the Working Group.
(ii) to make available the basic banking services at reasonable
prices/charges and towards this, delivering the basic services
outside the scope of the bundled products.
(iii) to adopt/follow the principles for ensuring reasonableness
in fixing and communicating the service charges as
enunciated by the Working Group.
(iv) To take steps to ensure that customers are made aware of
the service charges upfront and changes in the service
charges are implemented only with the prior notice to the
customers.
(v) To implement the recommendations of the Working Group
relating to redressal of grievances and financial education.
RBI has reported that it has set up a separate Customer Service
Department in July 2006 to bring all customer service aspects handled
by the Reserve Bank under a single roof.
RBI’s Customer Service Department is in the process of undertaking
a study conducted on the credit card services provided by banks. As

24
regards the monitoring mechanism to see that the various guidelines
relating to credit cards/service charges are implemented by banks,
during the course of the Annual Financial Inspection of banks, RBI’s
Department of Banking supervision also looks into various aspects
including the implementation of the various RBI guidelines. The
Customer Service Department also takes up the matter with banks
based on various complaints received by it with a view to redressing
the same. Penal provisions against banks for non-implementation of
the various guidelines, already exist. For instance, in the Master Circular
on Credit Card guidelines, it has been clearly indicated in paragraph
11 of the circular that RBI reserves the right to impose penalty on a
bank under the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for
violation of any of the said guidelines.
Similarly, in other cases also, where the banks do not implement
the guidelines issued by RBI on various aspects, RBI has the right to
impose penalty on banks for violation of the guidelines.
As may be seen from the above, Reserve Bank of India has already
taken necessary action regarding issue like unreasonable and non-
transparent service charges/hidden charges levied by banks especially
those relating to non-maintenance of minimum balance in accounts,
delayed payment on credit card dues, remittance charges, ATM/Debit
Card fees, excessive rates of interest charged on certain category of
loans etc.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) F.No. 1/10/
P/BKG/2007, dated 18.7.2007]
SEBI-Investor Protection Fund
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 96, 97 & 98)
The Committee are concerned to note that Investor Protection Fund
under the aegis of SEBI was proposed to be created as far back as
Budget 2006-07 but the proposed fund has not been created so far.
The proposed fund was to be created with the sums collected by SEBI
by way of fines and penalties. At present these proceeds are credited
to the Consolidated Fund of India as required under the Securities
Law. They further observe that for creation of Investor Protection Fund,
SEBI Act needs to be amended so that all proceeds collected by way
of penalities, settlement of proceedings and compounding of offences
under the SEBI Act, the Securities Contract (Regulation) Act and the
Depositories Act could be credited to the Investor Protection Fund.

25
The Committee also notice that an Expert Group was set up under
Shri G.N. Bajpai to suggest measures for protection of interests of
small investors and new avenues for safe investment of their savings.
The expert Group has suggested for creation of a Centralized Investor
education effort with adequate funding.
The Committee therefore recommend that the Government should
bring the legislative amendments required to create a centralized
investor protection fund with SEBI without further delay. The
Committee also desire that the issue of adequacy of funds to enable
SEBI to undertake the investor protection and education activities in a
big way should be addressed by the Government. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate the need to impress on the Government to ensure
that adequate capital is available in the proposed fund so that SEBI is
not in any way incapacitated in undertaking investor protection
activities. They further recommend that the fund should not be utilized
for merely compensating the investors who suffer loss due to violation
of security laws but also be utilized to educate the small investors as
suggested by the Expert Group which would enable them in taking
wise investment related decisions.
Reply of the Government
The Government has initiated the process of amendments to the
SEBI Act for the purpose, inter-alia, of creation of an Investor Protection
Fund under the aegis of SEBI. A draft Cabinet Note proposing the
amendments has been circulated to various Ministries/Departments
for their comments. Consultations with Ministry of Law and Justice
are under progress to finalize the proposals in the Cabinet Note.
The Government has decided to create an institutional mechanism
through a sub-committee of Investor Education and Protection Fund
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) comprising of the nominees
of each segment of the financial markets, which could coordinate the
efforts and activities undertaken by various agencies for investor
education and awareness. This sub-committee is in the process of being
constituted and operationalised by the MCA.
Creation of the Investor Protection of Fund under the aegis of
SEBI would require amendments to the SEBI Act, 1992. A draft Cabinet
Note seeking amendments to the SEBI Act for, inter-alia, this purpose
has been prepared and sent to various Ministries/Departments for
comments. Consultations with Ministry of Law and Justice are under
progress to finalize the proposals in the Cabinet Note.

26
It is proposed that all sums realized by way of monetary penalty,
disgorgement, settlement of proceedings and compounding under the
securities laws, shall be credited to this fund, which shall ensure
adequate capital for the proposed Fund.
The suggestion of the Committee regarding utilization of the
proposed fund shall be acted upon when the rules for the same are
drafted by the SEBI.
[Ministry of Finance Department of Economic Affairs O.M. No. 5/
2/PM/2007, dated 21 June, 2007]
Demand No. 32—Information Technology—Other Charges
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para Nos. 103 & 104)
It is seen that there has been wide variation between the budgetary
estimates, revised estimates and actual expenditure under the head,
‘Information Technology—other charges’ since the year 2004-05. The
Committee are dismayed over the fact that despite incurring an
expenditure of only Rs. 2,28,78,000 in 2004-05, and proposing an
allocation of Rs. 5,95,00,000 under the head at the stage of BE in
2005-06, the amount was increased substantially at the RE stage during
the year but it could not be utilized due to procedural delays in
finalization of tenders. Consequently, huge amounts had to be
surrendered at the end of the year, 2005-06. What the Committee find
to be even more surprising is that the same exercise was repeated in
the following year 2006-07, where the total expenditure was only
Rs. 6,84,40,000 as against the revised allocation of Rs. 11,00,00,000 which
resulted in savings of around Rs. 5,00,00,000.
The Committee deprecate such a casual approach towards
budgetary exercise and that too by a Ministry dealing in finances of
the country as it is indicative of their inability to make realistic
projections. The Committee would urge that the budgetary projections
by the Ministry should be made more realistically in future. They are
also unable to comprehend the reasons for the delay in implementing
the IT Plan for which the allocations are meant which had the
consequent effect of delaying the modernization of Department of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Revenue. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should avoid procedural delays and
should try to utilize the allocated funds in time.

27
Reply of the Government
Provision at RE 2006-07 stage was proposed based on the tentative
cost of each hardware and software item supposed to be procured
under the IT Plan during 2006-07. The savings occurred due to
variations in the actual/negotiated cost of each hardware/software item.
The recommendation of the Committee  i.e. making the budgetary
projections by the Ministry more realistic in future, avoiding procedural
delays in implementing project and trying to utilize the allocated funds
in time have been noted and the Ministry will make every effort to
comply with them.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) O.M. No. 1/
2/2007-IT & IIC dated 17.7.2007]
Demand No. 32—Minor-Works (Maintenance)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para Nos. 110 & 111)
The Committee observe that the expenditure under the head
“Secretariat—Minor Works” is meant for maintenance of Air
Conditioning system, Generator and Machinery and their parts. They
find from the information furnished by the Ministry that the actual
expenditure on this count has been shown to be much lower than the
budgetary allocations as a sum of Rs. 19,68,265 spent for maintenance
of Air conditioning system and Generator of the Budget Press and
Administration Section was misclassified and shown under some other
head of account. They further find that budgetary provisions have
been increased substantially in the year 2007-08 to meet additional
anticipated expenditure on repair/renovation/maintenance of the office
premises and the allocation for the head, “Office Expenses” reduced
simultaneously.
The Committee are perturbed to note that the actual expenditure
“Secretariat—Minor Works” has not been recorded under the current
head of account and adjustment have been made under the head,
“Office Expenses” during the current year. The Committee emphasize
on the need for ensuring that the allocation and expenditure are shown
correctly, as otherwise, it would result in arriving at misleading
conclusions.
Reply of the Government
Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 33011/
22/2006-Admin. IV , dated 26.7.2007]

28
Demand No. 38—Publication
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para nos. 137 & 138)
The Committee observed that the actual expenditure under this
head has been short of the estimates during 2005-06 and 2006-07 by
almost the same margin. The main reason for the variation between
the BE allocation and actuals in 2005-06 put forth by the Ministry, is
the lesser than anticipated receipt of bills from the Government of
India Press etc.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government
with regard to variation between the BE and Actuals in 2005-06. In
the opinion of the Committee, application of rationality in preparing
the estimates by the Government would have avoided the gross
mismatch between Budget estimates and the actual expenditure. The
Committee also feel pertinent to mention here that the similarity in
the amount of shortfall in “Actuals” as compared to the estimates
under this head in 2005-06 and 2006-07, is indicative of the
Government’s casual approach towards budget allocations. The
Committee are also surprised at the justification given by Government
on proposing an allocation of Rs. 22,00,000 under this Head for
2007-2008, on the basis of the “current trend” of expenditure as the
actual expenditure under this Head for the last three years has been
to the extent of Rs. 16,90,000 in 2004-05, Rs. 13,58,000 in 2005-06 and
Rs. 13,72,000 in 2006-07. The Committee, therefore, would like to urge
the Government to apply fiscal prudence and discipline when making
allocations under this Head so as to eliminate the mismatch between
the BEs and the Actuals in future.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted. Observations of
the Committee have been noted for compliance. Accordingly, allocations
under this head shall be reviewed with reference to the actual
expenditure at RE stage.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) F.No. G-20018/7/
07-IFU dated 21/6/2007]

29
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Agriculture Credit
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 38, 39, 40 & 41)
The Committee observe that, in pursuance of the Budget
announcement of 2006-07, the Government has been providing interest
subvention of 2 percent for enabling banks to extend short term crop
loans to farmers at 7 per cent rate of interest with an upper limit of
Rs. 3 lakh on the loan amount. The interest subvention of 2 percent
is made available to public sector banks, Regional Rural Banks and
cooperative banks on the lending from their own resources; and
Cooperative Banks and RRBs are refinanced at concessional rate on
their borrowing from NABARD.
Though the interest subvention scheme to the extent of 2 percent
has been formulated to enable short-term production credit to farmers
at 7 percent interest rate, the Committee find this not to be adequate
vis-a-vis the requirements of the farming community . For instance, the
National Commission for Farmers headed by Dr. M.S. Swaminathan
had recommended for reducing the interest rate on crop loans i.e.
short-term loans to 4 per cent. The representatives of the Ministry of
Finance had, on the issue of extending cheaper short-term credit to
the farming community, contended that the rate of interest applicable
to the agricultural sector could not be looked into in isolation
vis-a-vis other sectors such as micro-finance, where credit at higher
interest rates was being effectively absorbed. The Committee are,
however, not inclined to agree to this viewpoint, as agriculture has
long remained starved of funds, which has the negative effect of
incapacitating farmers in continuing with agricultural operations
profitably . The Committee, therefore, desire that the suggestions of the
National Commission on Farmers, which include, inter alia, reducing
the rate of interest on crop loans are acted upon so as to enable the
farmers to access institutional credit on large scale.
The Committee further observe that long term loans for agriculture
purposes are provided as investment credit for farm mechanization,
irrigation, equipment loans etc., and the rate of interest on such loans
range between 10 percent to 14 percent per annum, which in their
view is unviable. As long terms loan at high range of interest can
deter farmers to go in for mechanization and technology infusion in

30
a big way, the Committee recommend the Government/RBI to initiate
steps to further reduce the rate of interest on long term agricultural
loans so as to make it an affordable proposition for farmers.
The Committee note from the information furnished that banks as
a whole have been able to achieve the targets set out under the
‘package for doubling of credit flow to agriculture’ during 2005-06.
From the information made available, the Committee, however, cannot
also, help noting that of the 27 public sector banks, only 10 banks
could achieve the targeted level of extending 18% of the net bank
credit to the agriculture sector. The shortfalls in meeting the agriculture
lending targets is also reflected in the growing accruals to the RIDF
on account of the compensatory deposits made by banks. The growing
accruals to the RIDF is also indicative of the fact that the penal rate
of interest payable on RIDF deposits has not served as an effective
deterrent on banks from shying away from lending to the agricultural
sector. The Committee, therefore, emphasise that the Government
should make concerted efforts in impressing on banks to increase the
agricultural credit disbursement. The Committee also express the need
for ensuring that the yearly targets for agricultural lending are so
designed that the banks are able to fulfill the obligation of achieving
the target of extending 18 percent credit to the agriculture sector at
the earliest. RBI should strictly monitor the performance of the banks
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Consequent upon the Budget announcement for the year 2006-07
the Government has decided to ensure that the farmers receive short
term crop loans at 7% with an upper limit of Rs. 3 lakh on the principal
amount w.e.f. kharif 2006-07. Accordingly, instructions have been issued
to all banks. The scheme of providing short term production loans to
farmers at 7% with an upper limit of Rs. 3.00 lakh on the principal
amount has been extended for the year 2007-08 as well.
Banks fix the rates of interest taking into account their cost of
fund, transaction cost and risk. With the deregulation of interest rates
by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Banks are free to fix the rate of
interest on loans above Rs. 2 lakh provided by them to farmers.
However, interest rates for loans up to Rs. 2 lakh should not exceed
the Benchmark Prime Lending Rate (BPLR) in order to benefit small
borrowers including small and marginal farmers.
Banks have been providing crop loans to the farmers @7% with
an upper limit of Rs. 3 lakh on the principal amount w.e.f. Kharif
2006-07. This has happened on account of the interest subvention
provided by the Government to Public Sector Banks, Cooperative Banks
and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) on the involvement of their own
funds and concessional refinance to RRBs and Cooperative banks
through NABARD.

31
The burden of Government of India on account of this subvention
for the current year itself is more than Rs. 2000 crores.
The loans provided for investment purposes such as farm
mechanization, equipments etc. are for longer periods and are related
to the size of the project. The rates of interest charged on such
investment loans are related to cost of borrowings, transaction and
risk cost of the lending bank. Any reduction in the rate of interest for
such purposes as in the case of crop loans may not be financially
viable for the lending banks. Bank are taking steps to reduce their
transaction costs through better use of information Technology, Banking
Correspondents/Business Facilities models, etc. Risk premium can come
down by introduction of appropriate insurance products, positive credit
information from credit bureaus, better market facilities, proposed credit
guarantee scheme for the distressed farmers, etc. With these measures,
the rates of interest are likely to come down.
An internal Working Group set up in the Reserve Bank reviewed
the existing policy on priority sector lending including the segments
constituting the priority sector, targets and sub-targets, etc. Based
on its recommendations and the feedback thereon, the revised
guidelines on priority sector lending have been issued effective from
April 30, 2007.
According to the said revised guidelines banks are required to
lend 40 per cent and 18 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC)
or credit equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever
is higher, to priority sector and agricultural sector respectively. As per
the new method of computation, the ANBC will be computed with
reference to the outstanding advances as on March 31 of the previous
year. This would facilitate banks to have a clear-cut base for
computation of targets as compared to the previous method of
computation of targets, which was on an on-going basis and more
difficult to monitor. Under the new dispensation, banks can devise a
strategy for achieving the targets set for lending to priority sector/
agriculture. As matter of fact, credit to agriculture has grown from
Rs. 86,981 crore in 2003-04 to Rs. 2,03,746 crore during 2006-07 i.e.
growth rate of 134% in 3 years.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) F.No. 1/10/
P/BKG/2007, dated 18/7/2007]
Demand No. 44—Inter Account Transfer
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 156)
It is a matter of deep concern to the Committee that a huge amount
of money has been allocated under the Head ‘Inter Account Transfer’
in 2006-07, whereas the actual expenditure under the head was ‘nil’ at
the close of the previous financial year. The Committee are further

32
constrained to note that though no allocation has been shown under
this Head in the Detailed Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of
Finance, the Government, in a written reply stated that Rs. 1651 crore
has been assumed in BE 2007-08 as ‘disinvestment’ proceeds. It appears
to the Committee that the Government is proposing allocations
randomly without proper and objective estimation. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate the need for ensuring that the budgetary exercise is
undertaken/allocations proposed on the basis of proper parameters so
as to avoid gross miscalculations.
Reply of the Government
The Budget Estimates of Rs. 3840 crore in the Capital Section under
Head No. 5467 viz. Capital Outlay on National Investment Fund for
2006-07, was based on the estimated realization from the approved
proposals of disinvestment of small portions of equity in National
Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (NDMC) and Power Finance
Corporation Ltd. (PFC). The proposal for sale of 5% of the pre-issue
paid-up equity capital of PFC, out of Government’s shareholding, along
with a Fresh Issue of 10% of the pre-issue paid-up capital, through an
Initial Public Offering (IPO) was approved by the Government on
22nd December, 2005. The proposal for Offer for Sale of 15% of the
pre-issue paid-up equity capital of NDMC, was approved by the
Government on 12th January, 2006. The estimated realization in the
case of NDMC was worked out on the basis of two weeks’ average
price ended on 10th February, 2006. For PFC, which is an unlisted
CPSE, the estimated realization was based on book value as on 31st
March, 2005. Subsequently, on 6th July, 2006, Government decided to
keep all disinvestment proposals and decisions on hold, pending further
review. Thereafter, in February, 2007 PFC got listed through an IPO
consisting of a Fresh Issue of equity only. Since no disinvestment of
Government equity has taken place in PFC and NDMC, there was no
receipt or corresponding expenditure under this Head.
In 2007-08, three power companies viz. Rural Electrification
Corporation Ltd., Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. and National
Hydro-electric Power Corporation propose to make public offering of
equity equal to 10% each of their pre-issue paid-up equity capital. On
8th February 2007, Government decided to piggyback with an ‘offer
for sale’ of 10%, 5% and 5% respectively out of its share holding. The
realization from sale of Government equity in these three power
companies has been estimated at Rs. 1651 crore based on book value
as on 31st March, 2006. A provision of Rs. 1651 crore has accordingly
been made in Demand No. 44 of Department of Disinvestment in the
Capital Section under Head No. 5467 viz. Capital Outlay on National
Investment Fund.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment) O.M. No. 3/10/
2007/DD-II, dated 16th July, 2007]

33
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Computerisation and implementation of core banking solutions in
public sector banks
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 21, 22 & 23)
The Committee note that despite incurring an expenditure of
Rs. 10,676 crore from September, 1999 to March, 2006 on computerization
and development of communication network of public sector banks,
only 10 of the 27 public sector banks are fully computerized as on
date. Twelve of the public sector banks presently have more than
50 percent fully computerized branches, while in the case of rest of the
five banks, less than 50 per cent branches have been fully computerised.
On the specific issue of implementing Core Banking Solutions
(CBS), which provided a host of benefits such as ‘anywhere banking’,
the Committee note from the information furnished that the public
sector banks initiated the implementation of CBS in the year 2004-05
and it will take another four years to complete the process. As on
March 31, 2006, 28.9 per cent of branches of public sector banks were
providing CBS.
The Committee are concerned to find that the public sector banks
have lagged behind their private and foreign counterparts in
implementing modern technology despite incurring a huge expenditure
of Rs. 10,676 crore in the preceding few years. Since the process of
implementing CBS was initiated by the public sector banks as late as
in 2004-05, one would have expected them to pick up pace in this
regard in order to catch up with the private sector and foreign banks.
However, the Committee are perturbed to note that this has not
happened. The reasons advanced for the slow and tardy progress of
implementation of the modernization plans by public sector banks, as
informed, include inter-alia problems relating to acquisition of hardware,
software and networking equipments, non availability of service
providers and skilled manpower, as well as ‘legacy issues’ of branches/
offices working on different technological platforms. The Committee
are utterly displeased to note tardy progress so far made by the public
sector banks towards modernization. They, therefore recommend that
appropriate measure be taken for implementation of modern technology

34
in public sector banks at a faster pace. The Committee also express
the need on the part of RBI to impress upon the banks to complete
the transformation towards CBS at the earliest. The Government/RBI
must provide assistance to the banks in addressing problems relating
to computer hardware and software, networking equipments, skilled
manpower, etc., which are said to be hindering the progress of
modernization of the public sector banking practices and processes.
Reply of the Government
• The amount indicated reflects a 7 year period from 1999 to
2006.
• Computerisation in the first part of the period was based
on the CVC directive to computerise all business of the
PSBs.
• The approach at that time was to computerise bank business
but now the objective is to computerise bank operations at
branches.
• The real thrust towards implementation of Core Banking
Solutions (CBS) has been taking place from the year
2004-05 onwards.
• Some of the amounts spent by banks may not be on CBS
per se but for computerisation, networks etc. as well.
Implementation of CBS requires many aspects to be taken care of,
such as the provision of central servers, reliable networks, Business
Continuity systems to take care of Disaster Recovery Management,
Process Re-engineering etc. Further, implementation of CBS at each
branch takes some time and hence the time line indicated.
• The comparison between the PSBs and private (new private
sector) may not be a justifiable one since the RBI has been
insisting that new private sector banks shall commence
operations only on a fully technology base which is not the
case for the PSBs. As far as old private sector banks are
concerned, they are at various stages of implementation of
CBS. Foreign banks are part of the global approach followed
by their respective head offices; foreign banks do have an
edge over Indian banks in terms of IT implementation since
they have had an early start while Indian banks had to
grapple with issues relating to manpower, unions, change
in attitudinal aspects, average age of the employees etc.,
before the large scale implementation of IT based systems
could commence.

35
• The problems indicated are true.
• As far as CBS systems are concerned, there are only a few
reliable solution providers and the choice of range available
is not very large.
• Legacy issues continue to be a challenge which PSBs are
faced with.
• Implementation of systems such as the CBS across branches
is generally a decision taken by the management of banks
keeping in focus the benefits accruing out of the IT based
implementation and the local customer preferences. This has
resulted in banks focusing CBS implementation at large,
metro and urban branches in the initial phase. The other
branches are now being covered by banks in a phased
manner.
• As far as the role of the RBI is concerned, RBI does not
provide any prescriptive details to banks; banks are free to
implement systems which meet the overall parameters.
Nevertheless, in respect of CBS, the RBI does monitor this
in a broad manner and this is a matter for discussion during
the periodical review meetings with the in-charges of the
IT Departments of banks held by the RBI.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) F.No. 1/10/
P/BKG/2007, dated 18.7.2007]
Crop Insurance
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para Nos. 70, 71, 72 & 73)
The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS), implemented
by the Agricultural Insurance Company of India Limited (AIC), since
Rabi 1999-2000 is the principal scheme presently in operation for
administration of crop insurance. The scheme is being implemented
on ‘Area approach’ with the block/tehsil taken as a unit area’ and
claims settled on the basis of yield data received form the State
Governments on the basis of conduct of requisite number of crop
cutting experiments. While loanee farmers are compulsorily covered
under the scheme with the Government providing a 10% subsidy on
premium amounts, the scheme is voluntary for non-loanee farmers. It
is seen from the information furnished that in Kharif 2004, 12687046
farmers were covered under the scheme, of whom 1222455 loanee
farmers were benefited. In Kharif 2005 a total of 12674080 farmers
subscribed to the scheme and 1234263 loanee farmers were benefited.

36
Further, while 3531045 and 4048524 loanee farmers subscribed to this
scheme in Rabi 2004-2005 and Rabi 2005-06 respectively the number of
beneficiaries were 563141 and 590283 farmers in the two consecutive
cropping seasons.
The Committee observe that a Joint Group of Ministry of
Agriculture, set up to study the improvements required in the crop
insurance schemes which submitted its report in December 2004 had
inter alia recommended that the village Panchayat be taken as the unit
of insurance for major crops; covering selected pre-sowing and post
harvest losses, fixing indemnity levels at 90% in low risk areas/crops
and 80% for others, and extending insurance coverage to perennial
horticultural and vegetable crops and damage caused by wild animals
on individual basis. In a similar vein, the Standing Committee on
Finance had in their report on Flow to Agriculture and Crop Insurance
Scheme presented in 2004-05 recommended that the unit area or area
approach of insurance coverage be standardized and fixed as the gram
Panchayat for the whole of the country. In their Action taken note on
the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Finance had
agreed with the view that reduction in the unit area of insurance
would help in more realistic assessment of claims. A representative of
the Ministry too informed inter alia that the intention of the Government
was also to reduce the unit area of insurance from the Block to Gram
Panchayat level.
The Committee note that while the Government agrees that
reducing the unit area of insurance to the village panchayat would
enable in realistic and objective assessment of claims, the avowed
hindrance in this regard is the additional expenditure and manpower
requirements for the crop cutting experiments. The fact however
remains that the expert groups set up by the Government too had
recommended that the unit area for the crop insurance coverage needs
to be reduced for enabling realistic assessment of claims. As
recommended in their earlier report of 2004-05, the Committee,
therefore, reiterate the need for standardizing and fixing the unit area
of insurance as ‘Gram Panchayat’. The Committee are further surprised
to note that the report of the Joint Group, which was submitted as far
back as in December, 2004 is still being considered. As agreed to by
the representatives of Ministry while tendering evidence, the Committee
desire that the Ministry of Finance should come out with a status
paper on crop insurance scheme within a period of three months
specifying the extra trained manpower and extra funding which are
required for undertaking additional crop cutting experiments as a result
of reducing the unit of insurance to the village panchayat level.

37
The Committee further note that the Agricultural Insurance
Company has launched a ‘weather based Insurance scheme’, namely
the Varsha Bima Yojana for specific crops whose yields are largely co-
related to rainfall. The Committee, however, find that the premium
rate under the scheme which ranges from 6 to 9 percent is quite high.
The Government too have in their written submission agreed that there
was a ‘need to keep the premium rate affordable by subsidizing the
scheme’. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
needs to subsidise the premium under the scheme so that a large
number of farmers can avail the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The figures of farmers benefited during Kharif 2004, Kharif 2005,
Rabi 2004-05 and Rabi 2005-06 relate to loanee Small & Marginal
farmers. Details of loanee & non-loanee farmers benefitted are given
in the Annexure.
ANNEXURE
NAIS-DETAILS OF NUMBER OF FARMERS
COVERED & BENEFITTED
Season Kharif Rabi Kharif Rabi Kharif Rabi
2003 2003-04 2004 2004-05 2005 2005-06
Farmers 7970830 4421287 12687046 3531045 12674080 4048524
Covered
Farmers
Benefitted
Loanee-S/M 573802 242810 1222455 563141 1234263 590283
Farmers
Loanee- 269652 73888 797814 153701 777820 325441
Others
Loanee- 843454 316698 2020269 716842 2012083 915724
Total
Non Loanee- 275816 636336 342687 29392 312531 34277
S/M Farmers
Non Loanee- 585553 1119882 297980 26545 329680 30073
Others
Non Loanee 861369 1756218 640667 55937 642211 64350
Total
Grand 1704823 2072916 2660936 772779 2654294 980074
Total

38
Gram Panchayat has been recommended as ‘unit of insurance’ by
various Committees. Some of the states have already taken steps in
this direction.
The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) in its existing
form does provide for smaller insurance unit viz. village panchayat.
However, the States could not lower the insurance unit to the desired
level because of the huge consequent increase in the number of CCEs
required to be conducted and the consequent manpower requirement
and the costs involved. As mentioned in the report of the Joint Group
submitted to the Government, a sample exercise was conducted a few
years ago under CCIS which broadly estimated an anticipated increase
in the cost of the programme by about 35% for every one level of
reduction in the size of the insurance unit i.e. from block/taluka to
village panchayat.
The Joint Group also studied the manpower and the cost
implications and made the following recommendations:
State should make use of the existing manpower of the concerned
departments to the extent possible. However, where existing
manpower is inadequate, staff identified by the State Government
as surplus may be trained and re-deployed. Additional Manpower
can also be out-sourced in consultation with the implementing
agency from agri-clinics, agri-preneurs, agricultural universities,
KVKs, retired department officials, unemployed agricultural
graduated etc.
Assuming that the major crops would be notified at village
panchayat level (on an average two during Kharif and one during
Rabi), the number of CCEs required at the village panchayat level
based on the sample size of 8 CCEs per unit per crop would be
24 (i.e. 8 x 3). With nearly 22 lakh village panchayats likely to be
notified for the major crops, 50 lakh additional CCEs would be
required to lower the insurance unit to village panchayat. The cost
of conducting each CCE is estimated at Rs. 300. At an estimated
cost of Rs. 300 per CCE, the cost of 55 lakh CCEs (existing 5 lakhs +
additional 50 lakhs) could be of the order of Rs. 165 crores, of
which approx. 90% of the expenditure is recurring. The Joint Group,
after considering the importance of reduction of insurance unit
and the costs involved in conducting additional CCEs,
recommended that the costs for CCEs may be shared between the
Government of India and States on 50:50 basis.

39
Following the provision of NAIs, some of the States/UTs have
already notified smaller units for some of the notified crops as detailed
below:
Sl.No. State Unit of Insurance
1. Assam Revenue circle/District
2. Bihar Paddy, Wheat-Block/Anchal
3. Kerala Zone comprising of 4-5 villages
4. Madhya Pradesh Tehsil/Patwari Halka
 5. Meghalaya Community Development Block
 6. Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane—Block/no. of blocks; Other
crops—Nyay Panchayat/gp of Nyay
Panchayats
 7. West Bengal Gram Panchayat (for selected crops)
 8. Pondicherry Commune Panchayat
 9. A&N Islands Gram Panchayat
10. Uttaranchal Nyaypanchayat (for wheat crop in
Plains)
Further, Govt. of AP notified village as Insurance Unit on pilot
basis during Kharif 2005 & Kharif 2006 seasons in the following districts
& crops mentioned against each:
Sl.No. District Crop
1. Prakasam Redgram
2. Kadapa Groundnut (UI)
3. Ananthapur Groundnut (UI)
4. Mahaboobnagar Castor
5. Karimnagar Maize
The reduction in the size of the insurance units as already
experimented by some of the States for certain areas and crops as
stated above, has raised a question mark on the quality aspects of the
Crop Cutting Experiment exercise for various reasons such as lack of
adequate and trained manpower with the concerned Departments of

40
the State Governments, lack of required additional funds for conducting
the huge number of CCEs required to be conducted, NSSO’s inability
to meet the stipulated supervision norms, the local influence of the
farmers, their groups and associations, and the local opinion leaders
etc., besides having resulted in manifold increase in the administrative
work for the Implementing Agency .
The Varsha Bima was launched in 130 districts in the country in
Kharif 2006 season and Weather based insurance Scheme was launched
in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra during
Rabi 2006-07 season.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) F.No. 1/10/
P/BKG/207, dated 18/7/2007]
Achievement of FRBM Targets
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para Nos. 130 & 131)
Government has claimed that the projections of revenue and fiscal
deficit reduction targets for the current year 2007-08, whereby the
revenue and fiscal deficit are budgeted to be brought down from 2%
(RE) to 1.5% of GDP and from 3.7% (RE) to 3.3% of the GDP
respectively are in consonance with the FRBM roadmap, which
envisages to eliminate revenue deficit and bring down fiscal deficit to
level below 3% by 2008-09. While the deficit reduction targets projected
may be inline with FRBM roadmap, unlike the year 2005-06, where
the progress in this direction was ‘paused’, the rise in the non-plan
expenditure of the Government is a matter of concern. Besides, the
expenditure on defence, petroleum and fertilizer subsidies etc., is also
not in consonance with the recommendations of the ‘Task Force on
Implementation of the FRBM’.
The non-plan expenditure of the Government for 2007-08, as
pointed out by the Finance Secretary amounts to a 6.5% increase over
the previous year, excluding the expenditure on purchase of RBI stake
in SBI. Moreover the submission, made before the Committee by the
Planning Commission, inter alia reads, ‘it may not be easy for the
Government to cut the revenue deficit from 2.1% in 2006-07 to zero
percent by 2008-09 while also achieving large increase in Plan
expenditure’. The Committee are, therefore, inclined to believe that
adhering to fiscal correction targets and measures stipulated under the
FRBM Act would be an extremely difficult task for the Government.
The Committee, therefore, while emphasizing on the need for ensuring
that the deficit reduction targets are strictly adhered to, would also
like to have a detailed note on the policy measures by way of which
the FRBM goals are proposed to be achieved.

41
Reply of the Government
As per the Taskforce Report, the central feature of fiscal
consolidation should be improvement of the tax-GDP ratio along with
improvements in the quality of public investment. The fiscal outcomes
projected in the Task Force Report are subject to various assumptions
while the implementing process, being dynamic, is expected to respond
to economic developments on a real time basis. During the FRBM
mandated regime, on the strength of buoyant tax performance and
institutional improvements in conjunction with measures to rationalize
expenditure, the fiscal performance is on course. The non-plan
expenditure as a percentage of GDP , including interest payments,
defence, petroleum and fertilizers subsidies, has been progressively
declining during the past four years as can be seen in the following
table:
Trends in Non-Plan Expenditure as a percentage of GDP
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
BE
Non-Plan Expenditure 11.70 10.25 10.01 9.40
Major components:
Interest payments 4.06 3.72 3.62 3.43
Defence Expenditure 2.43 2.26 2.07 2.07
Major Subsidies 1.47 1.33 1.28 1.17
Transfer to State & UT Governments 0.47 0.85 0.90 0.83
Pensions (Defence+Civil) 0.59 0.57 0.53 0.51
Internal Security 0.34 0.35 0.38 0.30
The expenditure on defence, interest payments, and major subsidies,
transfers to States/UTs, pensions, internal security etc., are obligatory
in nature and account for about 89 per cent of total non-plan
expenditure in 2006-07. Any increase in expenditure in these areas
would commensurately increase overall non-plan expenditure. Despite
the burden of such obligatory expenditure, the non-plan expenditure
as a percentage of the total expenditure has declined from 73 percent
in 2004-05 to 70 percent in 2007-08 (BE).

42
Evaluation of non-plan expenditure is an on-going exercise.
Notwithstanding the inherent inflexibility in non-plan expenditure, the
Government is committed to achieving moderation in growth of non-
plan expenditure. Guidelines on austerity and expenditure management
are issued from time to time to supplement the General Financial
Rules. The progressively declining non-plan expenditure, as well as
improving tax-GDP ratio, reflect the Government’s commitment to
achieving the FRBM targets.
The FRBM Act enjoins the Government to eliminate the revenue
deficit and to reduce fiscal deficit to not more than 3 percent of GDP
by 2008-09. Increase in expenditure in the social sectors has implications
particularly on Revenue Deficit and is sought to be balanced by
containment of non-plan revenue expenditure and by increasing revenue
realisation through various measures including inter-alia , through
improved tax administration, broadening the tax base and periodical
revision of exemptions. The Government is sensitive to the challenging
task of mobilizing resources to meet the expenditure commitments
envisaged in XI Plan, while at the same time adhering to FRBM targets.
Such challenges also originate from a virtuous shift in Plan priorities
in favour of open ended programmes like National Employment
Guarantee Scheme as also Bharat Nirman, Urban Renewal Mission
which are in the nature of creating pressure on revenue expenditure
though these programmes contain substantial component of expenditure
on asset creation. Nevertheless, the increase in expenditure on various
schemes for poverty alleviation and social sector development including
provision for an upgradation of physical infrastructure, budgeted during
2007-08, is sought to be met while adhering to the FRBM deficit targets
for the year 2007-08.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, on 29.9.2006, had
directed ‘all the Ministries/Departments to plan and administer their
activities keeping in view the fiscal corrections prescribed in the FRBM
Act 2003’. Buoyant economic growth along with the above measures
is expected to contribute to the achievement of the budgeted deficit
targets.
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), F.No. 3
(10)/2006-FRBM, dated 27.7.2007]

43
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Disinvestment Policy
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para Nos. 149 & 150)
The Committee express their anguish over the fact that in spite of
the assurance given and the reiteration of the Committee’s
recommendation for bringing out a policy document spelling out the
disinvestment policy approach, goals and objectives, the Government
has been unable to come out with the same till date. The Committee
cannot understand as to why a clear policy on Disinvestment, which
is of immense national importance inter alia  in regard to aspects of
utilizing disinvestment proceeds for funding social welfare projects and
capital investment requirements of profitable and revivable PSUs is
not being enunciated by the Government. The Committee are
constrained to note that though a decision was taken on 6 July, 2006
to keep all disinvestment decisions and proposals on hold pending
further review, the Government is unable to indicate any timeframe
for completion of the said review. The Committee are also perturbed
to note that despite the decision to keep on hold all proposals and
decisions relating to disinvestment, the Government has, on 8 February,
2007 proposed to back the “Offer of Sale” of 10%, 5% and 5% of
shareholding by the three power companies, viz., Rural Electrification
Corporation Limited (REC), Power Grid Corporation of India Limited
(PGCIL), and National Hydro-electric Power Corporation Limited
(NHPC) respectively.
The Committee would like to urge upon the Government to avoid
the apparent ambiguous stance on Disinvestment of PSUs and refrain
from resorting to ad-hocism in its policy approach. The Committee,
therefore, once again, emphasize on the need for coming out with a
comprehensive policy document on the Government’s approach to
disinvestment of public sector holdings.
Reply of the Government
A review of the Government’s decision dated 6th July, 2006 to
keep all disinvestment decisions and proposals on hold has not taken

44
place so far. Three power companies, viz, Rural Electrification
Corporation Limited, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and
National Hydro-electric Power Corporation Limited propose to make
public offerings of equity equal to 10% each of their pre-issue paid-up
equity capital. Government has decided to piggy-back with an ‘Offer
for Sale’ of 10%, 5% and 5% respectively, out of its shareholding.
The White Paper on Disinvestment of Central Public Sector
Enterprises has after completion of inter-ministerial consultations been
submitted for the approval of the competent authority. After approval,
further action would be taken for tabling the White Paper in the
Parliament for information.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

45
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:
(i) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 51st Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

46
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)
above with modifications as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

47
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) OF THE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC
AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
Total      % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 13
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 7 53.84%
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 4,
6, 7, 8, 9 & 11)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 2 15.38%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 & 13)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 3 23.07%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 5
& 10)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect 1 07.69%
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 12)

FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE &
DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure & Disinvestment)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


COF No. 59
Price : Rs. 57.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 29
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 33
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 43
A
NNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
28th November, 2007 ................................................ 45
APPENDICES
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the  recommendations contained in the Fifty-first
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Af fairs,
Expenditure & Disinvestment)] ............................. 47

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Ms. Shanta B. Datta — Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty-ninth report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-first Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure
and Disinvestment).
2. The Fifty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April,
2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2007. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 30th July, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-first Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

59
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE & DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure & Disinvestment)]
FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
