40 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2005-06) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07)  
 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928(Saka)

 
FORTIETH  REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2005-2006) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07)  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.May, 2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
May, 2006/Jyaistha, 1928(Saka)

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
REPORT………………………………………………………………..     
 
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATION ……             
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 19 th, April, 2006…….. 
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 19th May, 2006…….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2005-2006    
 
 
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
23. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
24. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
25. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
26. Shri Amar Singh 
27. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
28. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
29. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia  
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.B. Arora   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Under Secretary  
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Fi nance having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behal f, present this Fortieth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.  
2.   The Demands for Grants of the Minist ry of Company Affairs were laid on the 
Table of the House on the 11 th March, 2006. Under Rule 331E  of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, th e Standing Committee on Finance are required 
to consider the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction 
and make Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. Thereafter, the 
Demands are considered by the House in the light of the reports of the Committee.  
However, this year, the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Company Affairs were 
passed by Lok Sabha on the 17th March, 2006 prior to their consideration by the Standing 
Committee on Finance. Nonetheless, the Committee examined the Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs and issues arising out of these.  
3.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of  the Ministry of 
Company Affairs at their sitting held on 19 th April, 2006 in conne ction with Demands for 
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs. The Committee considered and 
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 19th May, 2006. 
4.   The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs for the co-operation extended by them in furnishing written replies and 
for placing their considered views and perceptions before the Committee. 
5.  For facility of reference, the obs ervations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI) 
19 May, 2006                                                              Chairman, 
29 Vaisakha,1928 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
Introductory 
“Ministry of Company  Affairs”, earlier k nown as Department of  Company Affairs 
under Ministry of Finance, was  designated as  a separate Ministry in May, 2004 to  
function under Minis ter of State with In dependent Charge. It is  now headed  by a 
Cabinet Minister sinc e January, 2006. The Mi nistry is primarily  concerned with the 
administration of the Companies Act, 1956, other allie d Acts and rules & regulatio ns 
framed thereunder mainly for regulating the functioning of the co rporate sector in 
accordance with law. The Ministry is also responsible for administering the Competition 
Act, 2002 which will eventually  replace the Monopolies and Re strictive Trade Practices 
Act, 1969 under whic h the Monopolies and Re strictive Trade Practices Commissio n 
(MRTPC) is functioning. Besi des, it exercises super vision ov er three professional 
bodies, namely, Institute of Char tered Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of Company 
Secretaries of India (ICSI) and Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) 
which are constituted under three separate Acts of the Parliament for proper and orderly 
growth of professions of Chartered A ccountants, Company Se cretaries and Cost 
Accountants in the Country. The Ministry also has the responsibility for carryi ng out the 
functions of the Central Government relati ng to the administrati on of the Partnership 
Act, 1932, the Companies (Donations to National Funds) Act, 1951 and Societies  
Registration Act, 1860. 
 
Review of Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) 
  
2. The Committee in their 20 th Report on the examination of Demands for Grants 
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Company A ffairs had examined detailed Demands for 
Grants under the Dem and No. 17 as well as  the following issues r elated to the overall 
performance of the Ministry.-  
1. Discrepancies in the Demands for Grants 
2. Office Expenses – SFIO 
3. Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
4. Competition Commission of India 
5. Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
 1

6. Vanishing Companies 
7. Inspection of companies 
8. Filing of statutory returns by companies 
 
3.   The Report contained eight recommendations.. Action Tak en Notes  
were received from the Government wit h regard to all the rec ommendations 
contained in the Report. As  per the Action Taken Notes furnished thereo n as  
well as the statement made by the Minister of Company Affairs on the floor of the 
House on 23.12.2005 under Direc tion 73A of the Direct ions by the Speaker. The 
Committee had acc epted replies of th e Government pertaining to five 
recommendations/observations. The recommendations mainly covered the 
following aspects:- 
1. Utmost care should be taken by the Government to prevent  
discrepancy in figures while furn ishing Demands fo r Grants before 
Parliament. 
2. Government should take suitabl e measures to further strengthen 
SFIO. 
3. The legislation in regard to ‘o perationalisation of Competition Act, 
2002’ has already been del ayed on account of legal tangles. There 
should not be further delay in bringing conformity amendments. 
4.  In respect of one re commendation, the Committee di d not wish to pursue the 
matter keeping in view the reasons cited in the Government’s replies. 
5.  As regards remaining two recommendat ions/observations, the replies of the 
Government were not accepted by the Committee and, thus, were aga in commented 
upon. These recommendations pertained to V anishing Companies, the efforts of the 
regulators to find way s to ensure that in vestors who had thus b een duped, get back 
their money, penal action against the prom oters and dir ectors of the Vanis hing 
Companies and stringent penalties for inconsis tencies in filing of annual returns by 
companies. 
 
 2

CHAPTER – II 
 
6.  In the present report,  the Committee exa mined following issues arising out of 
the Budget Proposals (2006-07) and other related matters: 
 
(i) Comprehensive revision of the Companies Act, 1956  
(ii) Functioning of Serious Fraud Investigation Office  
(iii) Vanish ing Companies 
(iv) Utilis ation of the accruals to Investor Education and  Protection  
Fund 
(v) Liquidation of Companies 
 
COMPREHENSIVE REVISION OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956. 
 
7.  As per the Ministry, a comprehensiv e revisio n of the Companies Act, 1956  
had been undertaken by them on the basis of a broad based consultative exercise. A 
concept paper on Company Law, drawn up in the legislative format, was exposed on 4th 
August, 2004 for viewing on the electronic m edia so that all interested may not only  
express their opinion on the concept ev olved but may also suggest formalities on 
various aspects of Company Law. Comment s and suggestions f rom a large number of 
organizations, professional bodies and individuals have been  rec eived. This  
consultative process not only  allowed ideas, comments and suggestions to f low in form 
all quarters, but also enabled t he Ministry to work out appropr iate legislative proposal to 
meet the requirements of India’s growing economy in the years to come. 
8.  In this regard, the Committee take note of their recommendation contained in 
5th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Company Affairs. 
“The Committee do appreciate the endeav our of the Government to 
take up the exercis e for developing the concept paper for comprehensive  
overhaul of the Companies Act, 1956. They are given to understand that the 
said conc ept paper has been c irculated to all the int erested pa rties e.g. 
corporates, regulatory bodies, st akeholders and autonomous professiona l 
institutions. They want that adequate publicity may also be made through 
print and electronic media so that public at large may also involve 
 3

themselves in the exercise and make  suggestions. The Committee expec t 
that the exercise wou ld be com pleted in a fixed time  and Government will 
come forward with a new look Companies Bill which meets the requirements 
of all concerned without any delay.”  
9.  The Government had in their “action taken reply” stated that a concept paper  
on Company Law was placed on the Minis try website and a large number of response s 
had been received. Detailed consultations were being held with various industry  
associations, professional bodies etc. On t he basis of consensus achieved through this 
process, a revised Companies Bill would be dra fted. It is expected that the preparation 
of a new, revised Companies Bill would be possible by the first quarter of Financial Year 
2006-07.  
10.  The Ministry further informed that in  order to hav e an exper t opinion in  this 
direction, the Government cons tituted an expert committee on 2 nd Dec ember, 2004 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. J. J. Irani, Director, Tata Sons to advise the Government 
on Company Law. Terms of reference of the Expert Committee were as follows: 
1. Issues arising from the revision of the Companies Act, 1956 
2. Response received from various stakeholders on the concept paper. 
3. Bringing about compactness by reducing the size of the Act and 
removing redundant provisions. 
4. Enabling easy and unam biguous interpretation by recasting the 
provisions of the law. 
5. Providing greater flexibility in ru le making to enable tim ely response to 
ever-involving business models. 
6. Protecting the interest of stakeh olders and investors including s mall 
investors. 
7. Any other issue, related or incidental, to the above. 
 
11.  The Expert Committee has since submitted its report on 31st May, 2005. The 
Ministry, in their written reply, furn ished the major findings, observations an d 
recommendations as  contained in this Committee Report, which is appended as 
Annexure-I. 
12.  When asked by the Committee about  the recommendations of the Irani  
Committee Report accepted by the Governmen t, the Ministry, in a wr itten reply, 
 4

informed inter-alia t hat presently, the process of consultation with concerned 
Ministries/Departments is progressing. Ba sed on the above inputs, a Bill would b e 
introduced in the Parliam ent that would enable comprehensive rev ision of t he 
Companies Act, 1956. 
13.  Asked specifically about the date by wh ich the Ministry is lik ely to come out 
with the c omprehensively rev ised version of the Companies Law, the Ministry in a 
written reply, submitted as under:- 
 
“The Bill on the revis ed Company Law is likely to be introduced in the 
Parliament once the process of consul tation and appr oval is completed. 
However, this requires appropriate in ter-ministerial c onsultations and 
approvals. Draft proposals for a new Companies Bill have already  been 
circulated f or comments by various Mi nistries. With r equisite approvals 
and proper vetting by the Legislative Department, a new Companies Bill 
would be prepared for introduction in the Parliament. Efforts are being 
made to introduce the above in the Parliament as early possible”. 
 
14.  Asked about the details of the di fference in the  recommendations of the 
Narayana Murthy and Irani Committees, the Ministry of Company Affairs  in their 
written replies inter-alia infor med that the Narayana Murthy Committee’s 
recommendations related to issues concer ning Corporate Governance in Companies, 
whereas t he Irani Committee was constitut ed to examine iss ues arising from the 
revision of the Companies Act, 1956. It was further added that the scope and mandate 
given to the Irani Committee is far wider and more comprehensive as compared to the 
scope of the Narayana Murthy Committee Report. Corporate Governance is one of the 
issues addressed by the Irani Committ ee and the inputs pr ovided by  the Irani 
Committee constitute a component of the broad exercise for a comprehensive revision 
of the Companies Act. 
15.  When the Committee asked the Minist ry to elaborate efforts made by them  
to invite comments/suggestions on the J. J. Irani Committees recommendations, the 
Ministry of Company Affairs informed as under:- 
 
 5

“During the meetings of the Exper t Com mittee, representatives of 
Investors’ fora were given a hear ing by the Committee. The full text 
report and recommendations of J. J. Irani Committee have been 
placed on this Ministry’s web-site. A copy of this report has also been 
circulated, to all the Central Government Ministries and Departments, 
and to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for comments.” 
16. It was further added:- 
“Subsequent to the publication of  the Irani Committee Repor t, a 
number of comments have been ex pressed through the media,  
mostly favouring and commending the recommendations made by  
the Committee. The recommendations  of the Committee have also 
been disc ussed in various seminar s/workshops organized by the 
bodies representing industries and professionals. The r esponse has 
been largely positive and supporting. 
The Ministry has taken up consultation with various regulatory and 
statutory bodies, Ministries/Departments on the proposals for revision 
of the Companies Act. 
The inputs received by the Ministry  on issues relating to Company  
Law are under examination of the Ministry.” 
17.  During the evidence before the Co mmittee, the Secretar y, Ministry of 
Company Affairs further informed as under:- 
“…a comprehensive revision of  the Companies Act  is now 
being proposed and we hope t o bring it to the Par liament very 
shortly. In  this, while intr oducing good corporate governance 
practices, it was felt that some  constraints need to be remov ed. 
Equally, there has to be a clear per ception to have ac countability of 
all stakeholders towards good corpor ate governance, credibility and 
value enhancement through trans parency and accountability wit h 
proper regulatory practices. Therefor e, a substantial review of the 
Companies Act was found to be merit ed which is pres ently at a very 
advanced stage. The process of consultation has been taken up 
already with various Ministries  and Departments and we have good 
 6

response from various Departments and we hope to now bring this  
legislation to the Parliament very shortly. 
…besides this, we also go t int roduced a small Companies  
Amendment Bill. This  was  focused to enable e-gov ernance of  the 
Ministry of Company Affairs keepin g in mind that we have introduced 
new ways of doing busi ness in India. We have introduc ed complete e-
governance in the Department. Meanwhile, the Ministry has introduced 
a limited amendment to  the Companies  Act to enable smooth 
implementation of MCA-21 e-gover nance project. These are required 
to provide clarity and enable di gitizing the support documents 
submitted. The amendment  also provide fo r enabling security to the 
document filed digitally. Further, keeping in view the concerns  
expressed regarding vanishing companies, a provision has been made 
for allotment of a Unique Identity Number for the Directors. The Bill has 
been passed by Rajya Sabha which is expected to c ome before Lok  
Sabha once the Parliament reconvenes.” 
18.  At the behest of the Committee, the Ministry elaborated upon their MCA-21 
project as follows:- 
“The MCA-21 system provides for all filings using digital s ignatures 
(DSCs) with multiple modes of payments including on-line  payments  
through internet Banking and Credit card s. All transactions in the MCA-21 
system are fully secur ed and follow t he industry standards prescribed in 
this behalf. Security issues have also been subjected to independent third 
party audit and certification by STQC in  addition to its validatio n by the 
NISG. 
The main objectives sought to be ac hieved with the implementation of this 
project relate to the ease of doing business in India through facilitation and 
effective complianc e of the law. On ce operational at all locations, the 
system would provide facilities for all services delivered through the offices 
of Registrars of Companies on-line wh ich would facilitate completion of all 
transactions from the comfort of office s or homes of various stakeholders. 
It is intended to introduce ease of us e, speed and transparency in delivery 
of services while strengthening t he complianc e regime. Following are 
 7

some of the benefit s that shall accr ue from the implementation of the 
program: 
(i) Centralised Name Availability and Allocation 
(ii) Expeditious incorporation of companies 
(iii) Simplified and ease of convenience in filing of Forms/ Returns 
(iv) Better compliance management and regulatory monitoring 
(v) Total transparency through e-Governance 
(vi) Customer centric approach 
(vii) Building up a centralised database repository for data mining 
(viii) Enhanced service level fulfilment 
(ix) Inspection of public  documen ts of companies anytime from 
anywhere  
(x) Easy registration and verification of charges    
(xi) Timely redressal of investor grievances 
(xii) Creation of conducive environ ment to promote efficiency and 
effectiveness of employees 
19.  From the information furnished befor e the Committee, they take note of the 
fact that out of the t otal gr ant of Rs 145 crore,  the Ministry have proposed Rs  70.84 
crore towards the implement ation and operation of MCA 21  e-governance project and 
starting work on the second phase to cover the liquidation process. 
20. During oral evidence of  the representatives of the Ministry of Company  
Affairs, the Committee expres sed their dismay ov er the lack of provision in the 
Companies Act on the issue concerning In dependent Directors o f the Companies and 
their liabilities. In this connection, the representative of the Ministry stated the following:- 
“…at the present point of time, t he Companies Act  does not specify 
Independent Directors. This is a requirement which has come as a result of 
the list of conditions prescribed by SEBI.” 
They further inter-alia stated as follows: 
“This is an issue which needs to be examined very carefully. It should be 
done in the light of inputs t hat we have and the s olution in terms of how it  
will apply t o the corporates across t he board, how to c ome out through the 
amendment to the Companies Act. We ar e looking at various proposals for 
a comprehensive revision of  the Companies  Act. So, th is will be one of the 
 8

areas whic h needs c areful examination. I think some of the suggestion s 
made and concerns expressed during the discussion will be taken note of.” 
 9

21. It is w idely known that the Companies Act, in its present form, is quite  
unweildly and complicated. In this connection, reduci ng the number of 
sections/provisions alone w ill not help  in simplify ing, rationalizing an d 
modernizing the la w. What is needed is that the new  law must provide a flexible 
framework for proper grow th of compani es, have d ynamic orientation and take 
into account the ne w developments that h ave taken place in the corporate world. 
The Committee recall in this regard, their earlier recommend ation as contained in 
the 5 th Report on Demands f or Grants (2004- 05) w herein they have urged th e 
Government to expedite the matter relating the Comprehensive Review  of the 
Companies Act, 1956. From the response of the Government, the y gather t he 
impression that the  Comprehensive Bill amending provisions of Companies Act 
may be Tabled on the floor of the House shortly. They  expect that this long 
awaited piece of legislation will soon see the light of the day and many provisions 
of the Co mpanies Act needi ng reforms, as per the requirements of modern day  
corporate governance practices as well as investors protection, may be amended 
suitably. The Committee would also find it equally necessary to ensure the use of 
simple and understandable language as compar ed to the existing complicated 
structure of provisions, expl anations and multiple cross references in the 
Companies Act. Moreover, Company  law  s hould not be view ed in is olation and 
must be in harmony  w ith other economic legislations. In this connection, the 
Committee note that the Expert Committ ee to advise the Government on new 
Company Law, under the Chairmanship of Sh ri J.J. Irani, have already submitted 
their Report on 31 st May , 2005 an d subsequ ently the Government is in the 
process of consultation and approval on the recommendations of the same. 
22. In the course of examin ation of Budget Proposals for the year 2006-07, 
another issue concerning Independent Di rectors of Compani es came up befor e 
the Committee. As the existing Compani es Act is silent on this issue, the 
Committee note that this requirement was prescribed b y SEBI (Securities and  
Exchange Board of India) as one of the listing conditions. The Committee feel that 
absence of a relevant provision in the Co mpanies Act has contributed in further 
ambiguity in so f ar as th e respon sibilities of Independent Directors ar e 
concerned.  
 10

23. The Committee further note that the Government have introduced a 
limited amendment to the Companies Act to enable ‘smooth implementation of 
MCA-21 e-governance project’.  This project aims at providing clarity and security 
and enabling the digitization of support doc uments submitted by the companies. 
The Committee also note that once operational at all locations, this system would 
provide facilities for all servic es deliver ed through the offices of Registrars of 
Companies on-line and facilitate completion of all transactions from the comfor t 
of homes/offices of stakehold ers. In this regard, the Committee endorse the vie w 
that there is an urgent need for such e-governance project taking into account the 
internationally accepted best practices in  the ever evolving corporate w orld, and 
hope that the operationalisation of the pr oject would be done expeditiously. They 
also desire to be kept apprised of the concrete measures taken in this direction. 
 11

FUNCTIONING OF SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE 
 
24. The Serious Fraud Investigation Offi ce was set up by the Government in 
2003 in pursuance of the recommendation by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on 
Stock Scam. The organization  is a multid isciplinary investig ating agency, wherein 
experts from the banking s ector, capital mark et, company law, f orensic audit, taxation, 
investigation, income tax etc ., carry out inv estigation of serious corporate frauds. This  
organization has completed more than two years of its functioning. In the current year, 5 
cases wer e handed over to the SFIO for inve stigation. So far 31 cases  have been 
referred to the SFIO for investigation. T he SFIO has already su bmitted investigation 
reports in 11 cases. 
25. The Ministry, in reply to a query, furnished the following details of the 
mandate under which SFIO was set up:- 
“The Serious Frauds Investigation Offi ce (SFIO) is fun ctioning as an 
administrative organiz ation attac hed to th e Ministry of Company  Affairs. It 
has als o been dec ided that SFIO woul d bring to bear multi-disciplin ary 
teams to investigate complex corporate frauds and enable adequate 
infrastructure and funds to carry out in vestigations into alleged fraud under  
the existing legal framework. 
It was proposed to set up SFIO under MCA in two stages. 
• The first stage involv ed putting toget her a multi-disciplinary team 
and providing it with infrastructure and funds to carry out 
investigations into alleged fraud.  The SFIO, at this stage, would 
function within the existing legal framework of the Companies Act  
1956. Largely, this would involv e carrying out investigations u/s  
209A and 235 to 247 of the Act. 
• In the sec ond stage,  it was en visaged that legislative changes 
could be contemplated, if necessa ry, to  invest th e office with 
adequate powers and reach.  To examine issues related to thi s 
aspect, a Committee has been constituted on 23.02.2006.  
 
 12

Investigations into Corporat e Fraud: The SFIO is intended to 
investigate corporate frauds co mmitted by companies, firms or 
individuals who indulge in fr auds, concealments, deceptions,  
misstatements etc.; companies that do not act in good f aith, who cheat 
or deceiv e creditors, shareholders,  or depositors; and companies 
which carr y out fraudulent purc hase/sales, insolvencies, conveyance 
or transfer of property, especially  in the course of carrying out a fraud 
or committing breach of trust. It has also been stated that the proposed 
SFIO would primarily  cover frauds on, or cheating of, shareholders,  
investors and depos itors. In the course of this investigation, it could 
cover such institutions that migh t have been involved in the fraud on 
creditors, statutory aut horities, mutual funds, collective invest ment 
schemes, etc. 
Presently, this involves carrying out investigation u/s 235 to 247 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter called as ‘the Act’). More 
specifically, the SFIO is to take up investigation of frauds characterized 
by: 
a) Complexity, and having inter-depar tmental and multi-disciplinar y 
ramifications. 
b) Substantial involvement of public  interest to be judged by siz e, 
either in terms of monetary mis appropriation, or in terms of the 
persons affected. 
c) The possibility of investigations leading to, or contributing to wards 
a clear improvement in systems, laws or procedures. 
SFIO not intended for routine investigations: The SFIO is 
conceived as a professional unit, in the business of investigating white-
collar crime. It is not, therefore, to be burdened with routine complaints  
or inspections. That work will continue  to be done by MCA’s  
Directorate of Investigations.” 
26. Elaborating on the bas is of referring the cases to SFIO, the Ministry of 
Company Affairs, in a written reply, informed as under:- 
“Under section 235 of  the Companies  Act t he Central Government, on a 
report being received from the Registrar in pursuance of section 234 of the 
 13

Act may appoint one or more compet ent persons  as inspectors to 
investigate the affairs of a company and to report thereon in such manner 
as the Central Government may direc t.  Similarly, u/s 237 the Central 
Government may have the investigat ion carried out likewis e if the 
company it self by special resolution,  or Court/CLB, acting under  section 
237 of the Act, by order declares  that the affairs of the company ought to 
be investigated.   
 
The investigation of companies under sections 235/237 of the  Companies 
Act, 1956 is assigned by the Central Government to Inspectors drawn 
from the SFIO on the following basis : 
(i) where the size of the alleged fr aud is estimated to be at least Rs. 
50 crore or more, or; 
(ii) such companies which are listed or where the paid up capital of the 
company is more than Rs. Fiv e crores, and 20% or m ore capital is 
subscribed by the public; or 
(iii) when the  alleged fraud invo lves wide spread pu blic c oncern 
estimated to affect at least more than 5000 persons; or 
(iv) where investigation requires specialized skills and multi-disciplinary 
approach.” 
 
27.  When asked t o explain the me chanism of  SFIO investigation and 
subsequent procedure for prosecution and other  action over the reports of SFIO, the 
Ministry, in their written reply, have stated as under:- 
“The SFIO has a team of experts drawn from the various disc iplines like 
finance, Income Tax,  CBI, SEBI etc w ho assist the inspector drawn from 
SFIO, appointed to investigate the companies by the Central Government.  
In carrying out the investigation the Inspector and his team apply  various 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, relating to inspections and 
investigations, and including investi gations into affairs of related 
companies or of managing agents or  associates, production of documents 
and evidence, seizure of documents by  the Inspector, submi ssion of 
Inspector’s report and prosecution etc.  
 14

The reports received from SFIO ar e considered in the Ministry and 
instructions issued for prosecut ion under the Companies Act, 1956 and 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860.   Where violations/offences relating to other 
agencies/organizations/regulators such as  Income Tax, RBI, SEBI, etc  
come to note, copies of the invest igation reports are forwarded to the 
concerned agenc ies for necessary action at their end under their  
respective statutes.   
So far the Ministry has received inve stigation reports of eleven companies 
from SFIO. Out of the se, instructions for prosecuti ons have al ready been 
issued in respect of nine companies.  Reports in respect of two companies 
are under examination.” 
28. The Committee further sought to know  about the vacancies in the SFIO, 
which may be hampering the effective func tioining of the organiz ation. Ministry, in their 
response submitted the following details: 
 
“The vacancy position in SFIO as on  dat e is c ontained in the following  
statement: 
 
S/ 
No. 
Designation of 
Post 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Officers in 
Position 
Vacancies 
01. Director  01 01 - 
02. Addl / Joint Directors 12 11 01 
03 Dy Director ( Admn) 01 - 01 
03 Sr ADs/ ADs 27 25 02 
04. Private Secretary 01 01 - 
05. Personal Assistants 13 13 -- 
06 Assistants 02 02 - 
 
Regional Office Mumbai 
 
S/ 
No. 
Designation of 
Post 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Officers in 
Position 
Vacancies 
01 Addl / Joint Director 01 01 Selection 
has been 
made, yet to 
join. 
02 Assistant Directors 02 02 -- 
03 Personal Assistants 02 -- 02 
 Total   06 
 
 15

As per the Ministry, the process to fill up these vacancies is already on. 
 
29.  The Ministry of Company Affairs also informed the Committee that an Expert 
Committee has been constituted to adv ise t he Government on is sues conc erning t he 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office under the Chairmanship of Shri Vepa Kamesam, Ex-
Deputy- Governor, RBI. The Terms of Reference of the Expert Committee are:- 
To make recommendations to the Government on:- 
(a) Assessment of the need for the det ails of a separa te Statute to 
govern the constitution and functioning of SFIO; 
(b) The nature and details of the legislative changes as  may be 
required in existing laws, to enabl e effective functioning of SFIO 
including prosecution of offences detected by it; 
(c) The mechanism for referral of cases to SF IO and coordination 
of activities of SFIO with other agencies/ organizations of the 
Central and State Governments, including investigation; 
(d) Powers of SFIO and its investigating officers; 
(e) Specification of offences and penalties to enable effective 
conduct of  investigation agenc ies and the  need for Special 
Courts for trial of corporate fraud cases; and 
(f) Other matters consequential to or in pursuance of the above. 
  
30. During oral evidence of the repres entatives of the Ministry, the Committee 
expressed concern over the functioning of the SFIO. In th is connection, the J.J. Irani 
Committee have also in their recommendations inter-alia stated that investigation and 
prosecution procedures need to be simplified to enable SFIO  to move swiftly and 
purposefully for successful prosecution of the guilty. They have also recommended that 
a separate statute mi ght be framed to regul ate and guide the f unctioning of the SFIO 
and to address such issues to enable successful investigation and prosecution of cases 
of corporate fraud. They have recommended that SFIO should serve as a Nodal Agency 
for unveiling corporate frauds. 
31. During the evidence also, s imilar views were conveyed by Director, SFIO as 
follows:- 
 16

“We are thinking of a separate Act for the SFIO…. It was  
asked whether we are functioning the way we ought to be functioning 
as mandated. Yes, we are functioning.  In the first phase, we were to 
cobble up a team of expe rts drawn from various dis ciplines and to 
start working within the given legal  framework of the Company Law.  
In the sec ond stage,  we have to go for a separate legislation  for 
SFIO.”  
 17

32. The Committee note that SFIO has been functioning since October, 
2003 as  a multi-disciplinary administrative organization attached to the Ministry 
of Company Affairs to investigate complex corpor ate frauds and enable adequate 
infrastructure and funds to carr y out investigation into alleged fraud under the 
existing legal framew ork. The Committee note that till now  31 cases have be en 
referred to the SFIO for investigation. Out of these, SFIO has already submitted  
inspection reports in 11 cases and out of  these instructions for prosecution s 
have alread y been  issued in respect  of  nine companies. From the replies 
furnished by the Government, the Committ ee note that in most of the cases th e 
investigation of SFIO is sub-judice. The Committee are dismayed to learn that 
despite being in existence for more than two y ears, certain crucial posts e.g. 
Additional/Joint Director//De puty Director (Admn.), Sr . ADs/ADs etc. are l ying 
vacant in SFIO. Alth ough the Government is stat ed to be in the process of fillin g 
up the posts, the Committee are not su re as to how much time will it take before 
these posts are act ually filled up. The Co mmittee feel that w ith the passing of 
time, more and mor e cases w ill be referred  to the SFIO, w ith the result that its  
work w ill be increased enormousl y. Keep ing this in vie w, they recommend that 
apart from filling the vacan t posts imme diately, additional posts in various 
categories may  be created so that th e cases referred to SFIO are disposed of  
expeditiously and the purpose for w hich it came into existence is fulfilled. Since 
SFIO, conceived as a professional unit re quiring specialized skill and multi-
disciplinary approach, is intended to in vestigate corporate frauds, the personnel 
for this prestigious office may be drawn from finance, income tax, SEBI, CBI etc.  
33. The Committee also feel that officers of SFIO should be suitably  trained 
for this purpose. T hey also recommend th at, in  this regard, the tr aining and 
investigation mechanism of SFIO should be of international standard yet keeping 
in mind the trends and peculiarities of the Indian Corporate World. 
34. The Committee further tak e note of the fact that in pursuance of J.J. 
Irani Committee recommendation, an expe rt Committee namel y Vepa Kamesam 
Committee has been constituted to assess th e need for and  details of a separat e 
statute to govern the constitution and functioning of the SFIO. In this regard, they 
feel that there is a need to strengthen SFIO w ith adequate po wers to act as a 
nodal agency in unveiling intricate and complex corporate frauds, in coordination 
 18

with other agencies/ organizations at the Ce ntre and State levels and,  therefore,  
recommend that a separate Statute to regu late and guide the functioning of SFIO 
may be framed.  
 19

VANISHING COMPANIES 
35.  The Capital market had witne ssed a boom during 1993-94 and 1994-95 
when many new companies tapped the c apital mark et and collected funds from the 
public through issue of shares/debentures. Some of these companies defaulted in their  
commitments made to the public while mobili sing funds. The Secu rities and Excha nge 
Board of India (SEBI) had originally identif ied 229 lis ted companies as “vanished”. A 
High Powered Central Coordination and M onitoring Committee (CMC) co-chaired by  
Secretary, Department of Company Affairs (DCA) an d chairman , SEBI wa s set up to 
monitor the action taken against the vanish ing companies, and unscrupulous promoters 
who misused the funds raised from the pub lic. It was decided b y this Committee that 
seven Tas k Forces be set up at Mumbai , Delhi Chennai, Kolkata, Ahmedabad,  
Bangalore, Hyderabad with RDs/ROCs of respective regions as convenor, and Regional 
Offices of SEBI and Stock Ex changes as Members. Subsequently, the number of Task 
Forces was reorganized from 7 to 4 co rresponding to the Regions fallin g under the 
jurisdiction of the four Regi onal Directors of DCA. T he main task of these T ask Forces 
was to identify the companies, which have disappeared, or which have misutilised their 
funds mobiliz ed from the inves tors, and suggest a ppropriate action in  terms of 
Companies Act or SEBI Act. 
36. As a result of concerted efforts made by these Task Forces, prosecutions  
had been launched against the promoters of the van ishing companies  under Section 
63/68/628 of the Companies Act, 1956.  
(i) “63. Criminal liability of mis-statement in prospectus. 
(ii) 68. Penalty for fraudulently inducing persons to invest money and  
(iii) 628. Penalty for false statements. 
37.  Besides an effort was also made to bri ng to the notice of the public, at large, 
the list of vanishing c ompanies, names and addresses of their directors against whom  
prosecution proceedings have been launched under section 62/68/ 628 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, along with the names  of the Lead Manager, Merchant Bankers, 
Underwriters to the issue etc. who helped these companies in raising the funds. 
38.  The Committee desired to know the r easons while referring to the fact that 
SEBI ha d issued n otices to only 22 Merchant  Bank ers who h ad hand led the pub lic 
issues of 15 companies that  had subsequently vanished after raising money, instead of 
 20

all merchant bankers who may have handled public issues of all companies identified to 
have vanished. The Ministry,  in their written reply, stated as follows:- 
(a) SEBI issue d Sho w Cause Notic es (SCNs)  to 22 mer chant bank ers who  
handled the public  is sues of 15 com panies, whic h were subs equently 
identified as “Vanis hing Companies” by Coordination an d Monitoring 
Committee (CMC) after following a proc ess explained in the following 
paragraphs.  
(b) Early in 20 00-02, SEBI started the exercis e of taking action against the  
Merchant Bankers (MBs) by collecti ng information from various sources  
like Merchant Bankers, Bankers to the Issue, Registrar to the Issue etc. 
The information so collected was  verified with the information giv en in the 
prospectus and instances indicating t he probable lack of due diligence on 
the part of Merchant Bankers were not ed. Based on above, charges could 
be framed in the c ase of public issues of 15 su ch “Vanishing Companies” 
and, therefore, Show Cause Notices were issued to 22 Merchant Bankers  
only, which had handled public issues of these companies.   
 
(c)  During this process, SEBI has stat ed that they faced various operationa l 
constraints such as (i) expiry of regi stration of most of such MBs (ii) SEBI  
not having any infor mation, what soever, about the present wher eabouts 
and / or activities of such MBs (iii) MBs not having the relevant  records 
pertaining to the issue as regulati ons mandate preserving records for a 
minimum period of five years only etc. 
 
(d) Further, as per SEBI, they faced cert ain legal constraints which include (i) 
a company can not be a “vanishing compan y” at the time of initial public 
issue as the act of vanishing is s ubsequent to the public offering process  
(ii)  MB is appointed by the issuer company at t he time of Initi al public  
Offer (IPO) and its responsibil ities are to ensure veracity and adequacy of 
disclosures in the offer documents and to exercise due care and dilige nce 
in carrying out the activities related to  the issue. Hence initiating actions  
against MBs who had handled IPOs of companies which are subsequently  
 21

identified as “vanishing c ompanies” as  an accomplice in the ”act of  
vanishing” by such companies, becomes legally unviable.   
  
(iii) SEBI invoked its powers u/s 11b of SEBI Act and has so far passed orders 
against 100 vanishing companies (whi ch include companies which were 
subsequently put on watch list by CMC and 378  promoters/directors 
thereby debarring them from accessing the capital market for a period of 
five years.”   
 
39. During oral evidence, the Committee de sired to know whether there exist a 
confusing state of affairs among the regulators as to who and at what time action would 
be taken against ‘Vanishing Companies’. I t was informed by the representative of the 
Ministry that a company cannot be a vanishing company at the time of IPO, as the act of 
vanishing is subsequent to the public offe ring process and, initiating action against MBs 
(responsible to ensur e veracity of disclos ures) as acc omplice in the act of vanishing is 
legally unviable. The Ministry , in their post evidenc e written reply, further i nformed as 
under:- 
“The phenomenon of companies vanishing after mobilizing funds from the 
investors through IPOs has been viewed very seriously by the Government. As a matter 
of fact, the decis ion to set-up a Coordi nation and Monitoring  Committee (CMC) to  
initiate and  monitor action against these co mpanies has resulted in a consis tent follow-
up in the matter. It i s with the intervention from the CMC that pr osecutions have been 
filed under various provisions  of the Companies Act, FIRs have been regist ered under 
the IPC against the promoters of a number of vanishing co mpanies and det ails of the 
vanishing companies along with their promoters/directors have been published for wid e 
dissemination to the public. Further, four Task Forces have been as signed th e 
responsibility of identifying companies whic h might h ave vanished during t he period 
1998-2001. 
40. It may be further submitted that th e scrutiny of prospec tus, conduct of 
Merchant Bankers a nd other in termediaries vests in t he domain of SEBI a nd the SEBI  
has been t aking action to the extent poss ible within their regulati ons. As t he fact of 
vanishing of a company is always after mobilizing funds from the public, the Ministry has 
taken a decision to take up t echnical s crutiny of the Balanc e Sheets of all suc h 
 22

companies which co me out with IPOs so as to monitor the utilisation of funds raise d 
from the public. It is expected that this meas ure should help in early detection of any 
attempt to mis-use/divert the funds raised from the public.  
41. Asked about the present st atus of taking penal ac tion against the companies 
reported to have vanished, th e Ministry of Company Affairs in their written reply  
informed that SEBI invoked its  powers u/ s 116 of SEBI Act a nd has so  far passed 
orders against 100 vanishing companies (w hich include companies which wer e 
subsequently put on watch list by CMC and  378 promoters/direct ors thereby debarring 
them from accessing the capital market for a period of five years. 
42.  Referring to some media reports st ating that about 10 vanishing compan ies 
have been i dentified for speci al scrutin y, the Committee desired to know the 
components of the s pecial scr utiny and why was it limit ed t o only  10 vanishing 
companies. To this, the Ministry, have inter-alia replied as follows:- 
“While reviewing action taken ag ainst vanishing companies, it 
was d ecided that the  feasib ility of  taking a ppropriate action a gainst 
the Chartered Accountants (CAs) associated with the public iss ue of 
securities made by Vanishing Com panies should be explored. It was 
observed that there were 10 s uch vanis hing companies which had 
mobilized funds in e xcess of Rs . 10.00 crore from the market. 
Accordingly, it was decided to concentrate the available resources on 
following action against these top 10 co mpanies in the first instance 
(in relation to the quantum of f unds mobilized from the market 
through public issues) and to examine the role played by the auditors 
of such companies.” 
43.  When asked about the details of  the action taken or planned against  
auditors/auditors firms, which may have been found to be guilt y of wrong doing 
while audit ing the ac counts of companies , the Minis try of Company affairs 
furnished the following information in their written reply:- 
a) The details of firms of Chartered Accountants/Auditors involv ed 
in these companies have been pr ovided to the offi ce of the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of  India so t hat the C&AG may 
exercise due caution while appoi nting these firms as statutory 
auditors for conducting the audit of public sector companies. 
 23

b) Approval has been accorded to the c oncerned Registrar of 
Companies for legal action u/s 2 33 of the Companies  Act after 
going through the process as laid  down u/s  234 of the Act 
against the Auditors of such companies. Reports justifying action 
u/s 233 have since been receiv ed in respect of three companies  
against whom prosecution has  been approved. Evidence in 
respect of the remaining seven companies is being gathered and 
examined. 
c) Further, the Ministry is also in  the process of making a reference 
to the Institute of Chartered A ccountants of India for initiating 
disciplinary proceedings  against the audit ors of the three 
companies referred to at (b) above.” 
44. Elaborating t he definition of a ‘Vanished Company’, the Committee were 
apprised by the Ministry that one of the criteria for identifying a company as ‘vanished’ is 
that ‘no correspondence has been received by the Exchange from the company for a 
long time’.  When ask ed to specify as to what  is meant by ‘long time ’ in the criteria and 
whether this meant that only listed companies cou ld be categoriz ed as ‘vanishing ’ as 
per the criteria applicable, the Ministry, in a written reply, inter-alia stated as under:- 
“For identifying a company as  vani shed, following Criteria has been 
adopted by the CMC: 
 
(i) Companies, which h ave not co mplied wit h listin g re quirements/filing 
requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC  respectively for a period of 2 
years;  
(ii) No corres pondence has been rece ived by the Exc hange from the 
company for a long time;  
(iii) No office of the company is  located at the mentioned re gistered office 
address at the time of Stock Exchange inspection. 
 
45. All the prescribed conditions have to be met for treating a c ompany as 
a vanishing company and companies satisfying one or more but not all conditions 
are not to be considered as vanishing. Though the expression ‘long time’ has not 
been specifically defined in t he criteria, the Task Forces , in practice, take any  
period between 2 to 3 years as  long time.  The criteria is applic able only t o the 
 24

public limited companies, which rais ed public money through issue of 
prospectus.” 
46. As informed by the Ministry, about 115 “vanishing” companies h ad 
since been traced back. A watch on th ese companies was being kept  and 
inspection of books of account  etc. of  most of these companies had been 
ordered. In this connection, the Committee desired to know whether this will bring 
these defaulting companies to book and ult imately fetch desired results in favour  
of the investors. The Ministry, in a written reply submitted as under:- 
“Inspection of Books  of Accounts of companies s erve two-fold 
purpose i.e. to enhance the supervision a nd scrutiny of the activities of  
these companies and, secondly, to ensure compliance of the provisions of 
Companies Act. Compliance of various provisions of the Act results in 
bringing about transparency in the wo rking of the company which takes  
care against any fraudulent activities such as siph oning of funds . A clos e 
watch is being k ept to ensure t hat these companies do not indulge in any  
fraudulent activities again after re-sur facing. Further, the ins pections may 
bring out substantial evidenc e on reco rd for establis hing the allegations  
made against these companies  to enable successful prosecution under  
provisions of companies Act, 1956 against the defaulting companies.  
There are f our Task F orces, one eac h corresponding to a Region, falling 
under the jurisdiction of f our Regional Directors of Mi nistry of C ompany 
Affairs (MCA). Other members of thes e Task Forces are representatives  
of SEBI, Regional Stock Excha nge and conc erned Registrars of  
Companies. Representatives from  the State Governments (from 
Home/Police Department) are also invi ted to the Task Force meetings for 
monitoring action under the Indi an Penal Code (IPC). The main 
responsibility of these Task For ces is to identify the companies whic h 
have vanished after mobiliz ing funds from the investors, to  suggest/take 
appropriate action in t erms of  Compani es Act or SEBI Act or any other 
law applicable, and monitor the action initiated in different cases.  
The system of allotment of a Director Identification Number (DIN) to 
all the Dir ectors has been brought in under the MC A21 e-governance 
project. This Number is generated el ectronically and a database of all the 
 25

Directors of all the Companies regi stered with the ROC will be maintained 
by the system. With this system in pl ace, it would be easier t o track a  
Director’s whereabouts.” 
47.  As  per the information furn ished to the Committee by the 
Government, the Samir Bi swas Committee on safeguardi ng the interests of the 
depositors/investors had inter-alia recomm ended for setting up of a coordina tion 
mechanism involv ing Ministry of Com pany Affairs, Departm ent of Economic 
Affairs and SEBI. When asked whether t he existing coordinatio n mechanism 
involving  Ministry of Company  Affa irs and SEBI for the purpose of keeping a  
track on the “Vanishing Compani es” could  also involv e the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affair s), the Mini stry in a written reply  stated that the 
matter is to be considered by the Ministry of Finance. 
 26

48.  The Committee note th at the Go vernment have so f ar traced back 
about 115 vanishing compan ies. How ever, it re mains to be seen w hether the 
investors duped by  these companies, w ill ultimately  get some relief. The 
Committee are con vinced that the issue of vanishing com panies is inextricably 
linked w ith the issue of ‘Vanishing funds ’, w hich first of all implies that the 
investors w ho have been  lured into inv esting in a compan y th at has  vanished  
must get back his/her legitimate dues. The y, ther efore, feel that the matter of 
vanishing companies does not onl y rest with just tracing out the vanishi ng 
companies and their inspection of books of accounts etc, but equal attention 
should be paid to the prosecution mechanism so that the investors could get 
their money back. Equall y i mportant is to keep a w atch on the vanishing 
companies so that they do not resurface in a different name to dupe the investors 
again. The Committee feel that utmost vigilance is required to prevent efforts by a 
‘vanishing company’ or a defa ulting company to restart its operations in anothe r 
name or disguise.  
49. The Committee also recommend that  special care should be taken at 
the time of registration of a compan y as this marks its arrival and possibility  of 
raising capital. Therefore, the Committe e recommend that Government should be  
more alert during the process  of registering the co mpanies so as to assess their 
potential viabilit y to survive in the co mpetitive environment and benefit their 
investors. 
50. The Committee feel that  the auditors/auditing firms who either fail in 
their duties to audit the companies/properl y or know ingly shut their ey es to an y 
impending misfortune for the investors shoul d also be held equall y responsible. 
The Committee desire that the Governmen t should, w ithin the extant provisions 
of the la w, try  to pi npoint erring auditors and their firms equall y responsible, 
otherwise the ver y idea of the auditors  acting as w histleblowers w ould be 
defeated. The Committee find that the Go vernment are toothless in this regard as 
they gather the impression, from the repli es of the Govern ment, that all they  can 
do is to ask CAG to exercise due caution w hile appointing the ‘guilty ’ firms as 
statutory auditors for conducting the audit of public sector companies, while they 
are free to operate in the private sector. The  Committee, in this regard, would like 
 27

to see the ‘guilty’ auditors/auditing firms to be treated as accomplices in the e yes 
of the Government.   
51. The Committee also find that even the definition of van ishing 
companies is ambiguous thereby  leav ing loopholes in the la w. From the 
information furnished to them, they  note that one of the criteria w hich states that 
‘no correspondence has been received b y the Exchange fro m the co mpany for a 
long time ’, is  interpreted b y the Task Forces co ncerned  to impl y a period 
between 2 to 3 years of absence of correspondence betw een the exchange and 
the company . The Committe e feel that   any  company  w hich has duped its 
investors, can continue  to o perate and avoid being classified as ‘vanishing’ just 
by sending a piece of corres pondence, at intervals of 2- 3 years. They, therefore , 
feel that the criteria for identify ing a company  as vanished/vanishing needs 
streamlining and call upon the  Government to have a re-look at the definition, so 
that all such companies, having the s lightest intention of duping investors of 
their hard earned money , could be cl assified as ‘vanishing or potentiall y 
vanishing companies’. 
52. In this regard, the Committee al so note the recommen dations of the 
Samir Biswas Committee that the coor dination mechanism may involve Ministr y 
of Finance (Department of Economic Affair s) in addition to Mi nistry of Company 
Affairs and SEBI. The Com mittee feel  that the present mechanism may  b e 
extended to also incorporate representati ves of Department of Econo mic Affairs, 
as they are primarily responsible to oversee the implementation of Government’s 
policies in regard to regulation of Capital Market. 
53. The Committee note the Government’s efforts to prepare a database of 
all Directors of the companies under the system of allotment of DIN (Director 
identification Number) under the MCA-21 e-governance project and urge the  
Government to expedite completion of th e same. The Com mittee also note the 
Government’s decision to take up a techni cal scrutin y of Balance Sh eets of al l 
such companies, which come out w ith IP Os, so as to monitor the utilization of 
funds raised from the public. The  Committee w hile appreciating the 
Government’s decision, desire that the Go vernment may fix a suitable time limit 
in this direction so that the investor s in the secondar y market may  also b e 
benefited. 
 28

Utilisation of the accruals to the Investor Education and Protection Fund 
  
54. In pursuance of sub-section (1) of  Section 205C of the Companies Act, 
1956, the Government/ established the Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
with effect from, 1st October, 2001 for promotion of in vestor awareness and protection 
of their interests. 
55. Asked to furnish the percentage of  funds under IEPF, whic h have been 
utilized by the Ministry in e ach of the last  three years, the Ministry have info rmed as 
under: - 
 
Amount in Rupees 
Financial Year Budget  Expenditure  Percentage 
 
2002-2003 3,02,00,000 1,79,40,000 59.40% 
2003-2004 3,00,00,000 2,83,55,000 94.52% 
2004-2005 3,00,00,000 1,63,37,684 54.46% 
2005-06 
(up to 31.12.05) 
2,50,00,000 2,16,81,245 86.72% 
 
 
56. As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, the total credit to IEPF in the last  
3 years was as follows:- 
Financial Year   Amount 
2002-03   Rs. 108,69,29,558.18 
2003-04   Rs. 103,85,02,945.05 
2004-05   Rs. 124,43,30,796.51 
 
57.  When asked to ex plain the reasons for inco nsistency in utilizin g the 
proceeds of the funds under IEPF over the years and the action which is being taken by 
the Ministry to ensure that t he funds av ailable under the IE PF could be more fruitfully  
utilized, the Ministry, in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Every year a budgetary allocation is made to IEPF by the Finance 
Ministry. IEPF rules pr escribe well-defined procedure for utilization of the 
allocated funds. Financ ial assist ance is  provided to any 
association/organization only after the pre-sanction scrutiny of its 
 29

proposals. Indian Institute of Capita l Markets (IICM), Mumbai has been 
engaged by this Ministry to conduct Pr e-Sanction scrutiny. IICM examines 
the propos al of the organisatino/associ ation with a view to chec king the 
genuineness of the organization and reason ableness of the proposal. The 
recommendations of the IICM are, thereafter, placed before the Sub-
Committee/ Committee on IEPF  for a final  decision on the approv al of the 
proposal. Financ ial assistance under IEPF  is provided to the extent of  
80% of the total project cost only  and the remaining 20% is requir ed to be 
borne by t he organiz ation itself. In the first instance, only 80% of the 
approved funding is released to the organization. For the release o f 
balance 20% organization is required to su bmit an Utilisation Certificate in 
respect of the grant prov ided under IEPF.  The Uti lisation Certif icate so 
submitted is scrutinized by the IICM.  After its post-sanction scrutiny only,  
the final installment is released. 
The proposals received for funding under IEPF are put through a s trict 
scrutiny with a view to ensuring the genuineness and track records of the 
applicants concerned and the effect iveness of the proposal towards  
achievement of the defined objectives. It may thus be appreciated that the 
actual utiliz ation of funds depend s upon the number of viable proposals 
received during the year, wh ich are approv ed by t he Sub-
Committee/Committee on IEPF.” 
58.  It was further added as under:- 
“Action is  being tak en by the Ministry to spread awareness  and 
educate the investors which inc ludes launching of an aggressiv e media 
campaign through advertisements in the print media and capacity  building 
programmes including training of trainers sessions organized through 
IICM (especially for new organizations which are active at taluka level). As 
a matter of fact, the Ministry organize d a meet of the various VOs/NGOs 
involved in  Investor Educatio n along with the representatives of SEBI, 
NSE, BSE and Mutual Funds Association of India on this subject.” 
59. In view of the fact that all the vanishing companies we re listed companies 
and the pr imary responsib ility f or regulati ng these companies  rest with SEBI, the  
Committee desired to know whether a part of the corpus of the fund could be assigned 
 30

to SEBI in additio n to the Mi nistry of Comp any Affairs or whethe r the Minist ry would 
favour the fund to be placed under the Central Monitoring Committee jointly chaired by 
the Ministry and SEBI. The Ministry, in a written reply, informed as under:- 
“The Ministry do not s upport the idea  of either assigning the funds  
under IEPF under the Compan ies Act, 1956 to SEBI  or placin g the funds 
under the Central Monitoring Committee jointly chaire d by Minis try and 
SEBI since IEPF has been created by the Government after exp ropriating 
the moneys, which belong to investors by exercis ing its sovereign right  
through St atute. The money t hus ex propriated gets credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India and any expenses incurred for meeting the 
cost of Investor Education and Protection activities have to be made out of 
annual appropriations from t he budget alloc ated to it by the Parliament of 
India. This task is entrusted to the Ministry of Company Affairs under the 
Statute. Therefore, under  section 205C of t he Companies Act 1956, the 
funds can be utilized for promotion of investors’ awareness and protection 
of the interests of investors in a ccordance with the rules notified under the 
Act. In any case, SEBI is represented on the IEPF Committee.” 
 
60. Under  IEPF, v arious programmes on inv estor education and 
awareness have been funded and organized through 
NGOs/Societies/Associations/ Institutions etc. As per the Annual Report (2005-
06) of the Ministry, four teen new NGOs/VOs/Institut ions hav e been regis tered 
under IEPF till date during the current  Financial Year. 
61. To make investor s aware, the Mi nistry are also s tated to have been 
launching campaigns  through electronic a nd print m edia. As per their Annual 
Report, 2005-06, it has been s tated that two series  of investors education 
publicity campaign have already been comp leted, which aimed  at educating 
investors on investing in market instru ments, Initial Public Offers (IPOs)  and 
mutual funds. A media campaign was launched in v arious national as well as 
regional language newspapers wherein besides the above said educ ative 
message, NGOs/VOs involved in Investor  Education and Protec tion activities, 
especially those with a rural outreach,  had been invited to apply for financial 
assistance/grants under IEPF schemes. Further, the organizations, which are 
 31

keen to carry out research on investor protection/education-related issues, had 
also been invited to submit their propos als to the IEPF. Investor Education 
message was aired on All India Radio through Prasar Bharti to create awareness 
on the issues concerning investors and about the IEPF. 
62.  When asked by the Committee to furnish details of the ways, by which 
the funds already av ailable under the IEPF  could be  more fruitfully utiliz ed, the 
Ministry have stated as under:- 
“The funds already av ailable under the IEPF, which are available to 
Ministry, could be more fruitfully utilized in the following ways:-  
 
(i) Awareness programmes through Medi a (Electronic as well as print 
media); 
(ii) Registration of voluntary asso ciations or instit utions or other 
organizations engaged in Inv estor Education an d Protection 
activities and by providing financ ial assistance to them for projects 
for Investor’s Education and Protection including research activities; 
(iii) Coordin ating with institutions engage d in Investor educatio n, 
awareness, and protection activiti es and t aking up initiatives in 
close coordination; 
(iv) Under the Capac ity Building prog rammes, conducting “Training of 
Trainers” programme through IICM especia lly for the new 
organizations, preferably those active  at Taluka level, even if such 
organizations had not been registered with the IEPF; 
(v) Expansion of activities under IEPF by taking up the Financ ial 
Literacy Programme in a big way. 
(vi) Engagement of a professi onal agency under the IEPF  to 
conceptualise and implement financial literacy programmes. 
(vii) Strengthening the c oncept an d adoption of good corporate 
governance practices through t he National Foundation f or 
Corporate Governance, including a focus on the Small and Medium 
Enterprises.  
 
63. In this regard, the J.J. Irani Committee have recommended as under:- 
 32

“(The Committee) noted that the Mini stry of Company Affairs, who 
administer the fund, had already invited some schemes in this regard. The 
Committee recommend that the structur e and administration of the fund 
should be r evamped and schemes should be made more comprehensiv e 
and their scope expanded to enable flow of current information to the 
investors as well as  their education in r espect of their rights. Such 
programmes should have special components for education at  
school/college level, on line and distanc e learning, support genuine efforts 
in the Non-Governmental sector, in formation collection, research and 
analysis on matters of small investor concerns, enable capacity building of 
adjudications such as consumer c ourts on issue involve d in legal 
redressal of investor complaints.” 
 
64. Keeping in v iew the fact  that the matter of inve stors’ grievances largely 
related to            co mplaints of investors regarding shares etc. and also  that the funds 
allocated to the IEPF largely r emain und er-utilised, it was sug gested that the funds 
might be given to the SEBI instead of vesting their control  with the Ministry of Company 
Affairs. Asked by the Committee whether a mechanism could be evolved whereby a 
part of the corpus could be ass igned to SEBI in addition to the Ministry of Company 
Affairs, the Ministry stated as under:- 
 “IEPF has been set-up by the Government under the provisions of Section 
205C of the Companies Act. The Cent ral Government carries out the  
mandate provided by  the Statute by expr opriating the money s whic h 
belong to the investors under the c onditions specified in the Act by  
exercising its sovereign powers. The funds so collected under the law for  
the Investor Educati on and Protection Fund ar e credited  to the 
Consolidated Fund of India and a budget ary allocation is made by the 
Parliament for carrying out various ac tivities by the Central Government 
under IEPF every year.  
 
During last three years, on an av erage 69.46% of the budget allocated to 
the IEPF, have been utilized for carrying out various activities un der IEPF.  
A number of new initiatives have been taken under the IEPF.  
 33

It may be mentioned that the interest s of small investors relate to 
corporate actions spanning ov er diffe rent classes of companies e.g. 
payments on div idends, Depos it and D ebenture holders etc. SEBI, as a  
capital market regulator, is required to regulate interrelationships between 
various st akeholders of listed compani es participating in the capita l 
market, including investors, so that t he interests of each are addressed in 
a fair and balanced manner. The interventions by SEBI are to be viewed in 
context of its primary r egulatory role and are not intended to a substitute 
for the duties required to be disc harged by the Central Government under  
the statute.  
However, the Ministry has been making efforts to improve the utilization of 
funds through many  new programmes. Besides, issues r elating to 
appropriately addressing the refund claims  of investors, whose funds are 
expropriated to the IEPF, also need to be addressed for which the Ministry 
is considering legislative proposals.   
It is understood that SEBI is  en couraging certain activities for Investor  
Education through the National Stock Exchange/ Bombay Stock Exchange 
which hav e made provision of funds fo r this purpos e. It is open to the 
Central Government in t he appropriate Ministry to make grants to the 
regulator to fund suc h of its activi ties as are found consistent with the 
provisions of the relevant Act.” 
 
 
 34

65. The Committee note that the utilizati on of the proceeds of the funds 
under IEPF have shown an inconsistent trend. The percentage of expenditure in 
2002-03 w as 59.4 %, in 2003-04 it w as 94.52 %. Ag ain in 2004-05 it plunged to  
54.46% an d in 2005-06 it w as 86.72 %. W hile taking note of the Government’s 
efforts for a more e ffective utilizati on o f the funds available under IEPF, the 
Committee still feel that such efforts are not adequate enough. The Committee  
feel that the Government have not been  able to utilise the amount of fund  
available to their credit. This calls for restructuring of schemes under  IEPF. The 
Committee also take note of the J.J. Ir ani Committee’s recommendations in this 
regard and express agreement over thei r suggestion that the structure and 
administration of the fund should be revamped and schemes should be made 
more co mprehensive and  their scop e expand ed to en able flow of current 
information to the investors about their rights.  
66. Besid es, in view  of the spurt in various scams related to cap ital 
market in the last few years, the Committee feel that the time has come to utilize 
the IEPF on the education of small inve stors, who are more gullible du e to lack 
of proper information.  
67. The Committee note that the Go vernment do not support the idea of 
either assigning the funds under IEPF created under the Companies Act, 1956 to 
SEBI or placing the funds under the Ce ntral Monitoring Committee jointly  
chaired b y th e Ministry and  SEBI o n the groun d that sin ce IEPF  h as been  
created by  the government after expropriating the moneys from the budget  
allocated to it, which belong to invest ors b y exercising its sovereign right 
through Statute. Moreover SEBI is already represented in IEPF committees.  The 
Committee are, however, of the view that the broad issues on which complaints 
from the aggrieved  investors are b eing received relate to refund claims of  
investors, shares/debenture certifi cates, dividend amount, interests etc.  which 
are gener ally looked after by SEBI.  They further feel that  since SEBI is th e 
primary market regulator and cases of  unscrupulous persons duping investors 
is also one of its concerns, it w ould, perhaps, be appropriate if SEBI is  given a 
bigger role not only in preparation and approval of schemes relating to IEPF but 
also in the approval for disbursement of funds. The Committee hope that the 
 35

Government w ill consider the concern exp ressed b y them and w ill administer 
the Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) in coordination with SEBI. 
 
 36

LIQUIDATION OF COMPANIES 
 
68. The Indian system provi des neither an opportunit y for speedy and effective 
rehabilitation nor for an effi cient exit. The process for r ehabilitation, regulated by the 
Sick Indus trial Companies (Special Prov isions) Act 1985 through the institutional 
structure of BIFR is amenable to delays and  does not provide a balanc ed or effective 
framework for all stakeholders. The process of liquidation and winding up is costly, 
inordinately lengthy and results in almost complete erosion of asset value. 
 69. Thus, one of the major problems rela ting to cor porate functioning in the 
country has been identified to be the slow pr ocess of liquidation whereby th e value of 
assets is significantly reduced due to considerable delays.  Asked about the steps taken 
by the Ministry to bring about insolvency reforms and improve upon recovery rate within 
the existing legal sys tem, the Minister of Company Affairs in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“The existing statutory framework to addr ess issues relating to c orporate 
insolvency is prescribed under  the Sick Industrial Companies  (Special 
Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA) in terms of rehabilitation of companies and 
under the Companies Act, 1956 in respect of liquidation and winding up of 
companies.   
Through the Companies (Second Amendm ent) Act, a revised framework 
for rehabilitation and r evival of c ompanies as well as thei r liquidation and 
winding up was provided for, to be adjudic ated by the National Company 
Law Tribunal and t he National Co mpany Law Appe llate Tribunal.  
However, due to legal challenge fac ed to the constitution of the 
NCLT/NCLAT, the other provisions of the above amendment Act are yet to 
be notified.   
As per the Companies (Sec ond Amen dment) Act, 2002 with the 
constitution of the NCLT/NCLAT , SICA would be repealed and the 
functions performed by BIFR and AAI FR for revival and rehabilitation of  
companies would be transferred to  NCLT/NCLAT.  Simultaneously,  
matters relating to liquidation and winding up of companies would be 
transferred from High Courts to NCL T/NCLAT.  As mention ed above,  
 37

these provisions are yet to be noti fied sinc e the NCLT/NCLAT have not  
been constituted.   
At present, under the existing Co mpanies Act, 1956 liquidation and 
winding up of companies and disposal of assets of such liquidated entities 
along with distribution of  proceedings amongst stakeholders is  carried out 
in accordance with a process laid down under the Companies Act, 1956 
as per the directions of the High Courts.” 
70. The Ministry have also delineated the present status  of the NCLT/NCLAT as  
under:- 
“Constitution of the National Company Law Tribunal and the Nationa l 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal was envisaged through the Companies  
(Second Amendment) Act, 2002.  However,  when the provisions relating 
to the constitution of the NCLT /NCLAT were notified, there w as a legal 
challenge to the above enactment in t he Madras High Court.  The Madras  
High Court gave its ruling in April, 2004 whereby some of the provisions of 
the said amendment Act were held to be unconstitutional. The operation of 
the above amendment Act was also stayed  until the suitab le rectification 
was made.  The Central Governm ent filed a Special Leave Petition 
against the above ruling of the Madras High Court in May, 2004.  The SLP 
filed by the Central Government is  under consideration of the Supreme 
Court. This matter was last heard on 5 th October 2005 and was sc heduled 
for further hearing on the 8 th November, 2005. The matter is yet to be re-
listed for which efforts are being made. Thus the final orders of the Cour t 
on the above matter are yet to be rece ived.  Therefore, it has not been 
possible to set up/constitute NCLT/NCLAT.” 
 71. The Irani Panel in th eir recommendation stated that  “a recent surve y by 
World Bank (Doing Business  in 2005-India-  A Regional Profile) has pointed out that it 
took 10 years on an average to wind up/liquidat e a company in Indi a as compared to 1 
to 6 years in other countries. 
 72.  The Ministry have in a written reply informed that 6259 companies wer e 
under liquidation by 31/03/2005. 
 38

 73. When asked specifically  whether the Ministry plans  to take steps within the 
existing laws to expedite and simplify the procedure for the “exit” of companies, they  
have in a written reply stated as under:- 
“Cases of companies  that become def unct are processed for striking of f 
their names from the register of companies under the Companies Act,  
1956 (u/s 560, as per the procedure laid down therein.)   
From time to time, the Ministry brings  about special exit schemes to enable 
exit of defunct companies through spec ial schemes.  In pursuance of this, 
Simplified Exit Schemes (SES) we re launched in 2003 and 2005.  In 
pursuance of SES, 2003, a total of 28, 050 number of companies  applied for 
exit from the companies register.  Out of these, processing in respect of  
21,004 companies has been completed.  In response to SES, 2005, a total of 
26,626 companies have applied for exit fr om the companies register of which 
14,947 have been processed and the remaining case are under process.” 
 
 74. Asked specifically  about the time taken for a company to get liquidat ed in 
India as compared to the Inter national standards in this r egard being followed in selec t 
developed nations of the world,  and the reasons ther efor, t he Ministry have in their  
replies to supplementary list of points furnished as under:- 
“The World Bank Report “Doing Bus iness in 2005” has taken some 
indicators relating to different as pects of doing business to benchmark 
regulatory environment in countries. O ne such indicator is ‘Closing a 
Business’. According to this report, it takes about 10 years in India t o 
conclude insolvency proceedings. As per  the World Bank report, the time 
taken in China, Malaysia and Thailand is between 2-3 years.  
In India, a company can be closed under the Companies Act, 1956 
through a legal process, under the or ders of the High Court. However, a 
company can also be closed voluntarily  or on a petition filed by it s stake 
holders or by the Central Government but in all cases  the closur e is with 
the approval of High Court. 
Pressure of work on the Courts, the nature of judicial procedure,  
multiplicity of Court proceedings, prov ision for rehabilitation of sick  
 39

companies before winding up are some of the factors for delay in the 
process of liquidation of companies. 
Steps are being taken for reforms in this areas, which are as under:- 
 
(a) The Second Amendment Act, 2002 was en acted and provided fo r 
constitution of specialized quasi-judicial tribunal, called the National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) which would inter-alia deal with 
rehabilitation and winding up of companies in a t ime bound 
manner. However, the Act, though enacted, could not be notified 
on account of legal challenge in Madras High Court. The Madras 
High Court ruled that certain pr ovisions of the above Amendment 
Act required modification in order that the same was consistent 
with the Constitutional scheme of division of powers. Subsequently, 
an SLP was filed in S upreme Court by the Central Government 
against the Madras High Court ruli ng, which is under  consideration 
of the Apex Court since May, 2004.   
(b) Ministry has taken an exercise  for comprehensive revision of the 
Companies Act. On the basis of broad-based consultation process, 
a Committee of experts headed by J.J. Irani was also constituted to 
advise the Government on the matter. In view of the 
recommendations made by the Irani  Committee as als o the other 
inputs, a draft Bill for comprehens ive review of the Companies Act, 
is at an advanced stage of preparation. 
 
The framework of speedy liquidati on and wind ing up of companies is  
expected to be available subject  to t he decision of the Supreme Court on 
the SLP referred to above and the revision of the Companies Act, 1956.” 
  
 75. During the briefing m eeting, the representative of  the Ministry of Company 
Affairs informed the Committee about the spec ial sc hemes for exit of companies as  
under:- 
”One part of the question dwelt on those companies whic h are not  
functional.  Those companies h ad been r egistered and had c ome into 
force as legal entities  but they are not carrying on any business.  These 
 40

are defunct companies.  Schemes whic h are taken up are actually for  
weeding out those defunct companies.  When you carry out a special 
scheme, basically during the period of that scheme, you observe the same 
requirement which are there in the la w only you do it as a campaign and 
you do it on a time frame basis.  Therefore, you have got  about 6.75 lakh 
companies on the companies register. It is possible that a large number of 
them may not be functional. Even if t hey are not functi onal, their exit has 
to follow this process.” 
 76. Explaining the reasons for inordinat e delays an d lengthy proc edures for the 
exit of companies, the Committee was briefed as under:- 
“If you are in the companies  register then a host of liabilities are associated 
with the rest of the world whether it is  the financial institution, banks or so on 
and so forth.  There is a host of liabilities s urrounding your presence on th e 
companies register.  Theref ore, the exit from the companies register is a 
carefully monitored process.” 
 77.   Supplementing the replies, it was added:- 
 “Second part of the question dealt with those companies which are there 
in  the register but t hey are not functional. But they are not filing the  
documents. In other words,  we do not kno w whether  they are functional or 
non-functional. They may be functioning but they are not complying with t he 
requirement of filin g the documents. If a company doe s not comp ly with th e 
requirement of filing  the docum ent, t he Companies Act deals  with it in a 
different way. You can f ile documents after the time  which is pr escribed for 
that document. The act of non-filing immediately becomes violation of the Act. 
You can rectify that vi olation on the payment of an ad ditional fee. Therefore,  
the act of non-filin g b y itself do es not  aut omatically lead to pro secution. If 
there is persistent default for more than one year even after time allotted  for  
payment of additional fee and s o and so f orth, you do not file it , then the 
prosecution becomes  a poss ibility. Ther efore, the prosecut ion figures wh ich 
relate to non-filing will not reflect a large number of cases where these 
violations have been rectified on the payment of addit ional fee. Now the logic 
in this is that in the operation of  a corporate, there will be a large number of 
 41

procedural issues are involv ed. On t he payment of additional fee or the 
additional charges, opportunity is given to the corporate to rectify it.”  
 78.  Coming to the query of the serious problem of inordinate delay and lengthy 
procedure it was further submitted:- 
 “Now the third aspect of the ques tion which is much more serious  
problem and which we encountered comes up. We are talking of exit from 
the companies regist er of non-functi oning companies.  We can do it in 
certain circumstances. The second par t relates to in solvency which a  
number of Hon. Members have ment ioned and which is a common iss ue 
also. Insolvency also refers  to ex it which is in  different set of 
circumstances where the exit from the companies r egister takes plac e 
under specific section and the pr ocedure laid down under that section of  
the Companies Act. A company wanting to exit, can m ake an application 
under Sect ion 560 and start the exit proceedings. In insolv ency which 
comes under the liquidation or winding up, there is a different kind of 
procedure. The administrativ e and judicia l or stat utory process which is  
there under section 560 will not be open or available to the company 
under liquidation or winding up. The winding up of that company has to 
take place under the strict guidance t he High Court on all stages. As you 
know, ins olvency and liquidation in India take a long time.  The 
amendment was brought out about it in 2002 to provide a special and 
specific forum which,  in add ition to other things will also take over the  
function of liquidation and winding up fr om the High Courts. So, this forum  
called the National Company  Law Tribunal ( NCLT) was thought of and it 
also provided for an Appellate Tri bunal called the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal. Incr easingly the world  over, the insolv ency is being 
recognized as semi-judicial or se mi-economic or  semi-commercial 
process. It is not purel y and entirely a judicial exercise.  There has to be a 
way out so that it could become functional and return to the economy. “ 
 79. Subs equent to the brie fing, the Ministry have in their post-evidence wr itten 
reply informed as under:- 
“Companies can be st ruck off from the register of companies  pursuant to 
provisions of section 560 of the Com panies Act, 1956  (Act). The Ministry 
 42

of Company Affairs (MCA), however, has  introduced from time to time, 
special sc hemes for allowing defunct  companies, on t heir own 
applications, to exit from the C ompanies Act, 1956. Recently, two such 
schemes namely, Simplified Exit Scheme (SES) 2003  and Simplified Exit 
Scheme (SES), 200 5 were operated by the Ministry. SES 200 3 was in  
operation from 25.3.2003 to 31.3. 2004 an d SES 20 05 was in operation  
from 1.2.2005 to 31.8.2005.  
The ROC have also been instructed during November, 2005 to detect and 
strike out the names  of defunct com panies i.e. companies whic h had not 
filed their Balance Sheets or Annual Returns for three consecutive years,  
pursuant to ‘suo moto’ powers vested with them u/s 560 of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
However, it is to be noted that the process of exit of a company from 
Register of Companies has m any le gal implications for the creditors, 
members, employees  and other stakeholders of the company. For this 
reason, the Law prescribes a procedur e that provides opportunity to be 
given to all concerned. Such pr ocedure therefore needs to be followed 
fully. 
As for the liquidation and winding-up of companies, it is done under the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 through a Court driven process. 
Revival and rehabilitation of sick  industrial companies is done pursuant to 
the provisions of the Sick Indust rial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 
1985 (SICA) through Board for Industrial and Financial Rec onstruction 
(BIFR) and Appellate Authority for I ndustrial and Financial Rec onstruction 
(AAIFR).” 
 
 43

 80. The Committee note that the J.J. Irani Committee have already taken up 
the issue of exit or liquidati on of companies in detail in  vie w of the inordinate 
delays and lengthy  procedure for compan ies to exit.   The Committee also note 
from the r eply of the government refer ring to the observati on in a World Bank 
Report that the time taken for a compani es to exit is between  2-3 years in China, 
Malaysia and Thailand w hereas it is about 10 years in India.  They  further note 
that the Government have attributed this de lay to the lengthy na ture o f judicial 
process. The Com mittee are of  the view  that it is essen tial to provide a soun d 
framework for w inding up and liquidation of companies. In this connection,  the 
Committee recomm end that in the exta nt legal provisions, the Government 
should strive w ork in such  a t ime-bound manner t hat, excluding the time taken  
for obtaining the approval of the High C ourt, all other formalities  could be 
completed w ithin a period of 2-3 years.   Moreov er, the Committee hope that  
efforts by the Government to get the NCLT second Amendment Act, 2002 passe d 
at the earliest in their favour b y th e Supreme Court, w ould pave w ay for its 
establishment ultimately.  This, the Commi ttee hope will help in reducing time  for 
getting required judicial approval for exit of companies overall, the Committe e 
opine that simplify ing the existing liquidation process an d speedin g up the 
winding up of sick companies having no  chance of revival would be steps in the 
right dire ction. Besides the modified framework should seek to pr eserve the 
estate and maximize the value of assets of  the existing compan y so that those 
could be redeployed suitably. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                        MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  May, 2006                                                                         Chairman, 
29 Vaisakha, 1928 (SAKA)                     STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 44

ANNEXURE-I 
 
Major recommendations of Dr. Irani Committee 
 
 
(a) Small and Private Co mpanies should be provided greater flexibility and  
freedom of operation while enablin g compliance at low cost. Law sh ould 
recognize One Person Company (OPC). Such companies should be provided 
with a simpler legal regime through exemptions; 
 
(b) Special dispensations for Produc er Companies and  Public Financial 
Institutions (PFIs) need not be provided through the Companies Act; 
 
(c) Limited liability partnerships sh ould be facilitated thr ough a separate  
enactment; 
 
(d) Law should provide for only the minimum nu mber of directo rs necessary for 
various classes of companies. The re need not be any li mit to maximum 
number of directors. Government should not intervene in the process of 
appointment and removal of directors in non-Government companies. No age 
limit for directors need  be specifie d in the Act other than procedures for 
appointments to be followed by prescribed co mpanies for appointment of  
directors above a particular age; 
  
(e) Every company to have at least one director resident in India;  
 
(f) Presence of independ ent director  on the boards of companies having  
significant public interest would im prove corporate governance.  Law should  
recognize the principle of independent directors; 
 
(g) Decision on remuneration of directors should not be based on a “Government 
approval based system” but should be left to the company; 
 
(h) Certain co mmittees such as Re muneration Committee , Audit Committee,  
Stake Holder’s Relationship Committee  to be constituted wit h participation of 
independent directors should be  mandated  for certain categorie s of 
companies where the requirement of independent directors is mandated; 
   
(i) Every comp any should be required to appoin t, a Chief Executive Officer, 
Chief Finan cial Officer  and Company Secretary as its Key Man agerial 
Personnel whose app ointment and removal  shall be by the Board of  
Directors;  
 
(j) Law should impose a duty on every director to disclo se to the company the  
contracts in which he has any int erest or co ncern. Tran sactions in which 
directors ar e interested  should take place sub ject to appr oval of Boa rd of  
directors and beyond a limit subject to approval of shareholders;  
 45

  
(k) ‘Minority’ and ‘Minority Interest’ should be defined in the substantive Law;   
 
(l) Law should  prescribe a  regime in which minority rights ar e fairly protected  
without enabling any int erest group to obstruct corporate processes.  There 
should be  recognitio n of principle of valu ation of shares throu gh an 
independent valuer wh enever company cau ses an exercise of merger/ 
restructuring etc.; 
 
(m) A separate enactment for investo r protection is not req uired. Corporate 
processes should recognize the investors as a stakeholder;  
 
(n) Monitoring the end use of funds collect ed from public should be  the 
responsibility of the sh areholders of the com pany. The insurance o ption 
should be e xplored for deposits wit h the companies.  Cre dit rating ne ed not 
be mandated except for companies seeking deposits; 
 
(o) An effective investors grievance redressal mechanism by way of recourse to  
consumer courts and capital markets ombudsman should be provided for 
safeguarding interests of investors; 
 
(p) Rights of in vestors in respect of u nclaimed dividends etc. to be recognized 
even after 7 years period; 
   
(q) Timeframes prescribed for processe s of issue of capital be rationalized t o be 
at par with international practices; 
 
(r) Concept of  Shelf Prospectus may be exten ded to other class(es) of 
companies who access capital market more  frequently as Well Known 
Seasoned Issuers (WKSI), in a manner to be prescribed by the capital market  
regulator;  
  
(s) Enabling provisions for Tracking Stock and Treasury Stocks could be made in 
the new Law;  
 
(t) Companies should be permitted to issue perpetual/longer duration preference 
shares;  
  
(u) The regime of acceptan ce and invit ation of Pub lic Deposits should be made 
stricter; 
 
(v) Non-cash consideration  for allotme nt of shares should b e valued th rough 
independent valuers. Provisions relating to  inter-corp orate loans and 
investments should be strengthene d to ensure that there i s no mis-use of  
these provisions for price rigging or by diversio n of funds. Penalties to  be 
increased in case of non-compliance; 
 
 46

(w) In case of unlisted public companies, preferential allotment should be made 
on the basis of valuation by an independent valuer; 
 
(x) Nidhi Companies to be regulated by RBI; 
  
(y) Consolidation of financial state ments should be made mand atory. 
Requirement of attaching financia l statements of subsidiary compan y(ies) 
with the holding company to be done away with; 
  
(z) Small Companies sho uld be given ex emptions/relaxations in respect of 
disclosures relating to financial statements; 
 
 
(aa) The financial statements should b e signed by MD/ CEO/  CFO/ Co mpany 
Secretary, wherever applicable, even if they were not present in the meeting 
which appr oved the financial statements. All directors p resent in  re levant 
meeting to sign finan cial statements. Dissent ing director also to sign  with  
dissent note;  
  
(bb) Listed companies should put full financial statements on their websites; 
 
(cc) The Compa nies (Transfer of Profits to Reserves) Rules, 1975 and Th e 
Companies (Declaration  of Dividend out of Re serves) Rules, 1975 may be 
done away with. Pro visions relating to payment of Interest out of capital 
[existing section 208] may be deleted;  
 
(dd) Rotation of auditors not be mandated in Law. Auditor to b e prohibited fro m 
performing certain non- audit functions/services to be specif ied in Law/rules.  
Disqualification of auditors to be suitably mentioned in the Law/rules;  
 
(ee) Enabling provisions for empowering Central Government to  order Cost audit 
in certain cases should be retained. Government approval for appointment of 
Cost Auditor for carrying  out such audit is not necessary. Special Audit need 
not be continued;   
  
(ff) A single  for um for approval of mergers and a cquisition schemes in a  time 
bound manner to be provided. 
  
(gg) concept of  “ Deemed approval” concept to be  provided in cases wher e the 
different regulators do not intimate their comments timely;  
 
(hh) Valuation of shares of companies involved i n schemes of mergers and  
acquisition by independent registe red valuers (rather than court appointed  
valuers) should be made mandatory; 
 
 47

(ii) The concep t of Electronic registry should be evolved. Juri sdictional issues 
vis-à-vis stamp duty should be resolved to enable single registry;  
 
(jj) ‘Contractual mergers’ and  ‘Cross Border mergers and acquisition ’ may be  
suitably addressed in the new Act;  
 
(kk) Instead of separate provisions for both inspection and investigation un der the 
Act, a single comprehensive proce ss of investigation, may be provided for, 
including powers to inspect; 
  
(ll) The Govern ment ma y appoint an of ficer of the  Government or any private 
professional as inspector to carry out investigation; 
 
(mm) The Serious Frauds Inv estigation Office (SFIO) should  be strengthened.  A 
separate statute may be framed for SFIO;  
 
(nn) There is ne ed for a regime of penalties com mensurate with the offences.  
Penalties re gime for co rporates sh ould be in  the nature of monetary fine 
since company being an artificial economic person can not be imprisoned;  
(oo) The liability of the Board of directors to be clear and absolute. A clear regime 
for identification of Officers-in-default also to be necessary. Specific rule s for 
fixing criminal liability in  appropriate cases should be framed. The liab ility of 
CEOs/CFOs/Company Secretaries as well as o ther officers of the com pany 
who are in default to be specifica lly provided for.  The pro fessionals advising 
the companies on various matters also to be held liable if found not to be 
diligent or law compliant; 
 
(pp) The Compa ny Law to provide for an in-hou se structure  for levying non  
discretionary monetary penalties only (i.e. in respect of offences not involving 
imprisonment); 
 
(qq) The penalties may be classified in the form of t wo self-contained schedules –
one for monetary penalties and  th e other for t hose involving imprison ment, 
with or without fine;  The Law to lay  down the maximum as well as minimum 
quantum of penalty fo r each of fence.  Th e Law to pro vide for suitable 
deliverance in respect of repeat offences; 
 
(rr) In case of fraudulent activities/ actions, pr ovisions for recovery and 
disgorgement to be suit ably provided for.  The issue of “Phoenix problem” to  
be suitably addressed  through a combination of disclo sures, inso lvency 
processes and disqualification of delinquent dire ctors. The Law to provid e for 
lifting of the corporate veil to check any fraudulent activity;  
 
(ss) A definitive and predictable time frame is needed for rehabilitati on and 
liquidation process; 
 
(tt) Both debtors and creditors should  have fair access to insolvency system.  
Rather than net worth e rosion principle, test for insolvency should be default  
in payment of matured debt on demand within a prescrib ed time [liquidity 
 48

test].  Debtors seeking rehabilitation should be able to approach Tribunal only 
with a draft  scheme.  Creditors b eing at lea st 3/4 th in value may also file 
scheme; 
 
(uu) Provisions should be made for setting up of Committee of secured cre ditors 
to safeguard their interest and provide a suitable platfor m for credi tors’ 
participation in the process.  T he law should also provide f or mechanism to 
recognize and record claims of unsecured creditors; 
 
(vv) A Panel of Administrators and liquidators should be prepared and maintained 
by an independent body out of experienced a nd knowledgeable Insolvency 
Practitioners.  Private professionals s hould play a meaningful role in all 
aspects o f insolvency process.  Th e law should encourag e and reco gnize 
concept of Insolvency Practitioners; 
 
(ww) The law should prescribe a flexible but transparent system for disp osal of  
assets eff iciently and at maxi mum value.  Secured credito rs’ cla im should  
rank pari passu with wo rkmen.  Public interests, Government claims should 
not get precedence over private rights.  Revival p lan should be required to be 
approved by secured cr editors holding 3/4th of total value to be binding on all 
creditors; 
 
(xx) Provisions relating to rehabilitation cess should be replaced by the concept of 
“Insolvency Fund” [Fund] with optional contributions by companies; 
   
(yy) A suitable framework for Cross Bord er Insolvency which pro vides for rules of 
jurisdiction, recognitions of foreign judgments, co-operation  and assist ance 
among courts in different countrie s and cho ice of law is required.  The 
Government may consider adoption of UNCITRAL Mod el Law on Cross 
Border Insolvency with suitable modifications at an appropriate time. 
 
----------- 
 49

 STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE IN THE FORTIETH REPORT (2006-07) 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para No. Ministry/Department 
Concerned 
Conclusions/Recommendations 
1 2 3 4 
1. 21,22,23 Ministry of Company Affairs It is widely known that the Compa nies Act, in its p
form, is quite unweildly and complicated. In t his conn e
reducing the number of sections/provisions alone will not h
simplifying, rationalizin g and mod ernizing th e law. W
needed is that the new law must provide a flexible framewo
proper growth of companies, have dynamic orientation an
into account the new developments that have taken place
corporate world. The Committee recall in t his regard
earlier reco mmendation as con tained in the  5 th Repo
Demands for Grants (2004-05) wherein they have urg e
Government to expedite  the matter relating the Compreh e
Review of t he Companies Act, 1956. From the response 
Government, they gather the impression that 
Comprehensive Bill amending provisions of Companies Ac
be Tabled o n the floor of the House shortly. They expe c
this long aw aited piece of legislat ion will soon see the l
the day and many pro visions of t he Compan ies Act n e
reforms, as per the requirements of modern day cor
governance practice s a s well a s in vestors prot ection, m
amended suitably. The  Committee  would also  find it  e
necessary to ensure the use of simple and understa n
language as compared to the existin g complicated struct
provisions, explanations and multiple cross references 
Companies Act. Moreover, Compan y law shoul d not be v
in iso lation and must  be in har mony with other ec o
legislations. In this connection, th e Committe e note th
Expert Committee to ad vise the Government o n new Co m
Law, under the Chair manship of Shri J.J.  Ir ani, have a
submitted their Report o n 31st May, 2005 and subsequen
Government is in the process of co nsultation a nd appro
the recommendations of the same. 
In the course of examination of  Budget Proposals f
year 2006-07, another issue concer ning Independent Di r
of Compani es came up before the Committee. As the e x
Companies Act is silent  on this issue, the Co mmittee not
this requirement was prescribed by SEBI ( Securities
Exchange Board of Ind ia) as one  of the listing  conditions
Committee feel that absence of a relevant provision 
Companies Act has contributed in further ambi guity in so 
the responsibilities of Independent Directors are concerned
The Committee further  note that the Govern ment
introduced a limited amendment to the Companies Act to e
‘smooth implementation of MCA-21 e-governance project’
project a ims at providin g clarity an d secur ity and enablin
digitization of support documents submitted by the com p
The Committee also not e that once operational at all loc a
 50

this system would provide facilitie s for all se rvices de l
through the offices of Registrars of Compani es on-lin
facilitate co mpletion of all transa ctions from the com f
homes/offices of stake holders. In this regard,  the Co m
endorse th e view that there is a n urgent n eed for s u
governance project ta king into  account th e internat
accepted b est practice s in the ever evolving corporate 
and hope that the operationalisat ion of the p roject wo u
done expeditiously. They also desire to be kept apprised 
concrete measures taken in this direction. 
 
2. 32,33,34 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note tha t SFIO has been functioning
October, 2003 as  a mu lti-disciplinary ad minis
organization attached  t o the Ministry of Company Aff a
investigate complex corporate frauds and en able ad e
infrastructure and funds to carry o ut investigation into a
fraud under the existing legal framework. The Committee
that till now 31 cases have been referred to the SF
investigation. Out of these, SFI O has alr eady su b
inspection reports in 11 cases and out of the se instructio
prosecutions have already been issued in  respect o f
companies. From the replies furn ished by the Governme n
Committee note that in  most of th e cases the  investiga t
SFIO is sub-judice. The Committee are dismayed to lea r
despite being in existence for more than two years, c
crucial posts e.g. Additional/Jo int Director//Deputy D
(Admn.), Sr.  ADs/ADs etc. are lying vacant in SFIO. Al t
the Government is stat ed to be in the process of filli ng u
posts, the Committee are not sure as to how much tim e
take before  these post s are actually filled up. The Co m
feel that wit h the passin g of time, more and more cases w
referred to  the SFIO, with the r esult that  its work w
increased e normously. Keeping this in view, t hey reco m
that apart from filling the vacant posts immediately, ad d
posts in  various categ ories may be created so  that the 
referred to SFIO are disposed of expeditiously and the p u
for which it came into existence is fulfilled . Since 
conceived as a professional unit re quiring specialized sk
multi-disciplinary approach, is intend ed to investigate cor
frauds, the personnel f or this pre stigious of fice may be 
from finance, income tax, SEBI, CBI etc.  
The Commi ttee also feel that officers of SFIO sho u
suitably trained for this purpose. They also recommend t
this regard,  the training  and investigation mechanism o f
should be of internatio nal standar d yet keeping in mi n
trends and peculiarities of the Indian Corporate World. 
The Commit tee further t ake note of  the fact t hat in 
pursuance of J.J. Irani Committee recommen dation, an 
expert Committee namely Vepa Kamesam Committee  
has been constituted to  assess the need for and details 
of a separate statute to govern  the constitution and 
functioning of the SFI O. In this r egard, they feel that 
there is a  need to strengthen SFIO with ade quate 
 51

powers to a ct as a nod al agency i n unveiling intricate 
and complex corporate frauds, in coordination with other 
agencies/organizations at the Ce ntre and St ate levels 
and, therefo re, recommend that a  separate St atute to 
regulate and guide the functionin g of SFIO ma y be  
framed. 
3. 48,49,50,
51,52,53 
Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note that the Government have 
traced back about 1 15 vanishing companies. Howe v
remains to be seen whether the investors duped by 
companies, will ultimately get so me relief. The Committ e
convinced that the issu e of vanishing companies is inextr
linked with  the issue of ‘Vanishin g funds’, which first 
implies that the investors who have  been lured into inve s
a company that has vanished must  get back h is/her legi
dues. They, therefore, feel that the matte r of va n
companies does not only rest with j ust tracing out the van
companies and their in spection of books of accounts e t
equal attention should be paid to the prosecution mechani
that the investors could get their money back. Equally im p
is to keep a watch on  the vanishing companies so that t h
not resurface in a d ifferent name to dupe the investors 
The Committee feel that  utmost vigilance is req uired to p
efforts by a  ‘vanishing company’ o r a defaulting comp a
restart its operations in another name or disguise.  
The Committee also recommend that special care s
be taken at the time of r egistration of a company as this 
its arrival and possib ility of raising capital.  Therefor e
Committee recommend that Govern ment should be mor e
during the process of registering the companies so as to a
their potential viability to survive in t he competitive enviro
and benefit their investors. 
The Commi ttee feel tha t the audito rs/auditing f irm
either fail in their duties to audit  the companies/prop e
knowingly shut their eyes to any i mpending misfortune f
investors should also  be held  equally r esponsible.
Committee desire that the Government should, within the 
provisions o f the law, tr y to pinpoint erring aud itors an d
firms equally responsible, otherwise the very idea of the au
acting as whistleblower s would be defeated. The Co m
find that th e Govern ment are toot hless in this regard a s
gather the impression, f rom the replies of t he Governmen
all they can do is to a sk CAG to  exercise due caution
appointing the ‘guilty’ firms as statutory auditors for con d
the audit of  public se ctor companies, while th ey are f
operate in the private sector. The  Committee, in this r
would like to see the ‘guilty’ auditors/auditing fir ms to be t
as accomplices in the eyes of the Government.   
The Committee also find that even the definit
vanishing companies is ambiguous thereby leaving loopho
the law. Fro m the information furnished to them, the y not
one of the criteria which states th at ‘no corre spondenc
been received by the Exchange from the company for a
time’, is inter preted by the Task Forces concer ned  to i m
 52

period between 2 to 3  years of absence of correspon
between the exchange and the co mpany. The  Committ e
that  any company which has duped its investors, can c o
to operate and avoid being cla ssified as ‘vanishing’ j u
sending a p iece of corr espondence, at intervals of 2-3 
They, therefore, feel that the criteria  for identifying a co m
as vanished/vanishing  needs stre amlining and call up o
Government to have a re-look at th e definition, so that a l
companies, having the s lightest intention of duping inves t
their hard earned money, could be classified as ‘vanis h
potentially vanishing companies’. 
52. In this regard, the Committee also n ot
recommendations of t he Samir Biswas Committee th a
coordination mechanism ma y in volve Ministry of F i
(Department of Econo mic Affairs)  in add ition to Mini s
Company Affairs and SEBI. The Committee feel that the p
mechanism may b e extended to also incor
representatives of Depa rtment of Ec onomic Affairs, as th e
primarily responsible  to oversee the implementati o
Government’s policies in regard to regulation of Capital Ma
53. The Committee not e the Gove rnment’s effo
prepare a d atabase of all Directors of the companies un d
system of allotment of DIN (Dire ctor identif ication N u
under the MCA-21 e-governance project and urg e
Government to exped ite completion of the same .
Committee also note the Govern ment’s decision to tak e
technical scrutiny of Balance Sheets of all such com p
which come out with IPOs, so as to monitor the utiliza t
funds raised from the public. The  Committee whi le apprec
the Government’s decision, desire that the Government m
a suitable time limit in t his direction so that the investors 
secondary market may also be benefited. 
 
4. 65,66,67 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note that the utilizati on of the proc e
of the funds under IEPF have  shown an inconsistent t r
The percen tage of expenditure in 2002-03 was 59.4 %
2003-04 it was 94.52%. Again in 2004-05 it plunge d
54.46% and in 2005-06  it was 86.7 2%. While t aking no t
the Government’s efforts for a more effective utilization o f
funds available under IEPF, the Committee still feel that s
efforts are not adequate enough. The Committee feel tha
Government have not b een able to  utilise the a mount of 
available to their credit. This calls for restructuring of sche
under IEPF. The Committee also take note of the J.J. 
Committee’s recommen dations in  t his regard and ex p
agreement over their suggestion  that the structure 
administration of the fu nd should be revamped and sch e
should be  made mo re comprehensive an d their s c
expanded to enable flow of current information to the inves
about their rights.  
Besides, in view of the spurt in various scams relate
capital market in the last few years, the Committee feel 
the time has come to utilize the I EPF on the educati o
 53

small investors, who are more gullible due to l ack of p r
information.  
The Committee note tha t the Government do not su p
the idea of  either assigning the f unds under  IEPF cre
under the Companies Act, 1956 to SEBI or placing the f u
under the Central Monitoring Committee joint ly chaired by
Ministry and SEBI on t he ground that since I EPF has b
created by the government after expropriating the mo n
from the budget allocat ed to it, which belong t o investo r
exercising its sovereign right through Statute. Moreover S
is already represented in IEPF committees.  The Com m
are, however, of the view that th e broad issues on w
complaints f rom the aggrieved investors are  being rec e
relate to refund claims of investors, sha res/deben
certificates, dividend amount, interests e tc. which 
generally looked after by SEBI. T hey further feel that s
SEBI is the primary market regulator and case s
unscrupulous person s duping inve stors is a lso one o
concerns, it would, perhaps, be app ropriate if S EBI is giv
bigger role  not only in  preparation and approval of sche
relating to I EPF but also in the ap proval for disburseme n
funds. The Committee hope that the Government will cons
the concer n expressed by them and will administer 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) in coordina
with SEBI. 
 
5. 80 Ministry of Company Affairs The Commi ttee note th at the J.J.  Irani Committe e
already taken up the issue of exit or liquidation of compan
detail in view of the ino rdinate delays and lengthy proced u
companies to exit.   The  Committee also note fr om the r e
the government referring to the o bservation in a World
Report that the time taken for a companies to exit is betwe
3 years in China, Malaysia and Thailand whereas it is ab o
years in India.  They further note that the Governmen t
attributed th is delay to the lengthy nature of judicial pr o
The Committee are of t he view that  it is essential to pro
sound framework for winding up and liquidatio n of com p
In this connection,  the Committee recommend that in the 
legal provisions, the Government s hould strive work in s
time-bound manner that, excluding t he time taken for ob t
the approval of the Hig h Court, all other formalities cou
completed within a p eriod of 2- 3 years.   Moreov e
Committee hope that efforts by the Government to get the 
second Amendment Act, 2002 passed at the earliest i n
favour by the Supreme Court,  would pa ve way f
establishment ultimately.  This,  the Committee hope will h
reducing time for getting required  judicia l ap proval for e
companies overall, the Committee opine that simplifyi n
existing liquidation process and speeding up the windin g
sick companies having  no chan ce of revival would be st
the right direction. Besides the modified framework shoul d
to preserve the estate a nd maximize the value of assets 
existing company so that those could be redeployed suitab
 54

 
 
 55

Minutes of the Twenty- second sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19th April, 2006 from 1030 to 1315 hrs and 1430 to 1630 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Maj. Gen.(Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
6. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.   Dr. Smt. P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary  
2.   Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay - Joint Secretary   
3. Shri S.B. Arora  -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda -  Under Secretary 
 
Part – I 
(1030 to 1145 hrs.) 
 
Witnesses 
Ministry of Company Affairs 
 
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Secretary 
2. Shri M. Deendayalan, JS & Financial Adviser 
3. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri O.P. Arya, Director, SFIO 
6. Dr. Joseph Abraham, Economic Adviser 
7. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Adviser, Cost 
8. Shri Ajay Nath, Director General (DGIR) 
9. Shri R.K. Arora, Director, MRTP Commission 
10. Shri Vyas Ji, Secretary CCI 
11. Shri L.M. Gupta, Director (Inspn. & Investigation) 
12. Shri B.M. Anand, Director (Inspn. & Investigation) 
13. Smt. Vibha Pandey, Chief Controller of Accounts 
 
 56

 
2.  At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs to the sitting of the Co mmittee and inv ited their attention to the 
provisions contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. The Committee then took or al evidence of  representatives of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs  on issues aris ing out of Budget Proposals ( 2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs and other related matters. 
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry of 
Company Affairs to furnish notes on certai n points raised by the Members to which 
replies were not readily available with them during the discussion. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
               The witnesses then withdrew 
 
Part – II 
(1200 to 1315 hrs.) 
 
7.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
Part – III 
(1430 to 1630 hrs.) 
 
8.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
                     
 57

Minutes of the Twenty-sixth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 May, 2006 from 0930 to 1030 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. ri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Rupchand Pal 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Additional Secretary  
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -   Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri S.B. Arora  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
5.  Smt. Anita B. Panda            -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outs et, the Chai rman welcomed the  Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3.   XX   XX   XX   XX 
  
 
4. The Committee then took for consider ation draft Reports on the Demands for 
Grants (2006-07) of the following Ministries/Depart ments and adopted t he sam e 
subject to the modification as shown in Annexure-I in respect of the draft Report at Sl. 
No. (v) :- 
(i)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(iii)   XX  XX  XX  XX 
(iv)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(v)    Ministry of  Company Affairs 
 58

 59
 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to  finalise the Reports in the light 
of modification as also to make verbal an d other consequential changes arising out of 
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 60
ANNEXURE 
 
[MODIFICATION/AMENDMENT MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN 
THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF COMPANY AFFAIRS AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 19 MAY, 2006] 
 
 
Page No. 28 
Para No. 53 
Line 4 from below 
 
 
For The Committee while appreciating the 
Government’s decision, desire that the 
Government may fix a suitable time limit in this 
direction so that the inve stors, in the secondary 
market may also be benefited. 
 
Substitute The Committee desired that in view of the current 
developments in the IPO Market, the Government 
may expedite the same within a specific time 
frame so that the interests of the investors may be 
safeguarded. 
 