CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in their Sixty-Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & Disinvestment) which was laid
in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008 and presented to Lok Sabha on
16  April, 2008.
2. The Report contained 12 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations pertaining to Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment contained in the
Report. These have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 3,5,6,7,10 and 11
(Total 6)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 12
(Total 1)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 4, 8 and 9
(Total 5)
(Chapter IV)
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
(Nil)
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies of the observations
contained in Chapter-I be furnished to them expeditiously.
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Surrender of funds by the Department of Economic Affairs
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
5. The Committee had observed that there was huge shortfall
year after year in utilization of budgetary allocation made by the
Ministry of Finance to certain items of expenditure.  The fact that there
was huge shortfall in expenditure year after year raised doubt
whether the criteria of determining the Budget figures on the basis of
extent of utilization of the allocation in the preceding year was followed
at all.  The Committee expressed hope that corrective steps would be taken
to ensure that budget estimates were realistic and on sound basis in
future.
6. The Government in their action taken reply have, inter alia,
explained the reasons for underutilization of  budget allocations in
respect of two schemes viz., Indian Development Economic Assistance
Scheme and Viability Gap Funding which reads inter-alia as under:
Indian Development Economic Assistance Scheme:
“…..Indian Development Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) had
several components under it which required suitable provisioning
of funds.  However, due to some difference over the contents of the
scheme, the scheme could take off only partially due to which
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

provision kept had to be surrendered or remained unutilized.
Anticipating the huge requirement of funds in the event of full
operationalisation of the scheme in subsequent year, sharp increase
in budgetary allocation was effected.  Very often, due to unforeseen
circumstances, budget allocation is not utilized satisfactorily.
However, efforts are always made to project realistic budgetary
estimate.
Viability Gap Funding:
FY 2005-06:
In 2005-06, a provision of Rs.100 crore and Rs.1400 crore was
made for Infrastructure Development under two heads.  The amount
of Rs.1500 crore was surrendered due to following reasons:
The Scheme “Financial Support to Public Private Partnerships
in Infrastructure” under the Viability Gap Funding Scheme was
introduced in March, 2005 and   Budget Provision were made in
the Demand of Department of Economic Affairs.   The CCEA note
was prepared after incorporating the comments of Ministries/
Department and was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 23rd March,
2005.  On 15th April, 2005, Cabinet Secretariat returned the CCEA
note with the remarks that the scheme be first placed before the
Committee of Infrastructure serviced by Planning Commission.
Committee of Infra-structure approved the scheme in its meeting
on 30th June, 2005.  Thereafter, the revised CCEA note was sent to
Cabinet Secretariat and CCEA note was approved in August, 2005.
After approval notification was issued on 8.8.2005 regarding
constitution of Empowered Committee and Empowered Institution.
The first meeting of Empowered Institution was held in September,
2005 where rules, procedure etc. were discussed.  After that the
guidelines were framed and notified in January, 2006.  Finance
Minister had written to Chief Ministers of States to popularise the
scheme and broad-basing the proposals.  No amount was disbursed
in 2005-06 and the entire amount was surrendered.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

FY 2006-07:
A Budget Estimate of Rs. 500 crore was made in MH 5475-
Assistance for Infrastructure Development.  The allocation was
reduced to Nil during RE stage due to following reasons :
The Scheme was notified in January, 2006. As per the scheme the
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) would be disbursed only after the
Private Sector Company has subscribed and expended the equity
contribution required for the project and will be released in
proportion to debt disbursement remaining to be disbursed
thereafter.  No disbursement took place during 2006-07 since there
is a time lag between initial approval and disbursement of fund
and disbursement can only take place once the private party is
selected through competitive bidding and it has invested its share
of equity.  The total budget allocation of Rs. 500 crore in BE 2006-
07 was restricted to NIL  in RE 2006-07.”
7. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) have explained that budget allocation under “Indian
Development Economic Assistance Scheme” (IDEAS) very often is
not utilized satisfactorily due to unforeseen circumstances.  It is
observed that budgetary allocation for the activities under the
IDEAS is to meet international obligation and to honour those
commitments.  It is not clear as to what were the unforeseen
circumstances, which led to under-utilization of funds meant for
meeting the international commitments.  The Committee would
await details in this regard.
8.    The Government’s reply reveals that though the Scheme
“Financial Support to Public Private Partnerships in Infrastructure”
under the Viability Gap Funding Scheme was introduced in March,
2005, the entire allocation of Rs. 1500 crore for the year 2005-06
was surrendered due to time lag in implementation of the scheme.
Similarly, nothing was utilized from Rs. 500 crore allocated for the
year 2006-07 due to time lag in disbursement of funds.  All this
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

is indicative of the lackadaisical approach in implementation of the
development oriented scheme.  It is obvious that huge budgetary
allocations have been made without proper assessment of the pace
of implementation of the scheme.  The Committee would like to
know the current status of the Viability Gap Funding Scheme and
the extent of utilization of the budget allocations for the scheme
during 2007-08.  The Committee reiterate that corrective steps should
be taken to ensure that budget estimates are realistic and on sound
basis.
B. Portrayal of Fiscal and Revenue Deficits
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
9. It transpired during the examination of Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Finance that transactions on account of bonds/securities
issued by the Government each year to finance subsidies on food,
fertilizer and petroleum were not usually reflected in the fiscal and
revenue deficits since there was no cash outgo due to matching receipts
taken in lieu of issue of securities/bonds.  The Finance Secretary had
promised to get on to a path of transparency.  The Committee hoped that
steps would be taken in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India to reflect these transactions appropriately in the Fiscal
and Revenue deficits in future.
10.   The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“As a first step, securities issued in lieu of subsidies on food,
fertilizer and petroleum during 2007-08, upto the time of
presentation of the Budget 2008-09, have been clearly indicated in
the ‘Budget at a Glance’ 2008-09.
The Finance Minister has also indicated in para 122 of his budget
2008-09 speech that he intends to request the Thirteenth Finance
Commission to revisit the road map for fiscal adjustment and
suggest a suitably revised road map.”
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

11.Display of information in the ‘Budget at a Glance’ does
not set right the deficiencies in the figures of fiscal and revenue
deficits shown in the budget.  The Committee feel that the Finance
Commission which is concerned with the question of devolution of
finances between the Union and the States has nothing to do with
how deficits in the Union Budget should be reflected.  The
Committee, therefore, stress that as promised by the Finance
Secretary, and in line  with the Committee’s recommendation, action
should be taken, without any further delay, to reflect the fiscal and
revenue deficits appropriately in the Budget taking into account the
securities issued in lieu of the subsidies.
C. Critical review of procedures regarding appointment of
independent directors on the Boards of PSUs
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
12.There were five public sector undertakings (PSUs) against
which adjudication proceedings were initiated by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India for non-compliance of the provisions of Clause
49 1(A) of the Listing Agreement, due to non appointment of independent
directors by the Government, on which the PSUs  had no role as such.
Observing that it was the responsibility of the Government to ensure
timely appointment of Independent Directors so that PSUs could comply
with the requirements of regulatory authorities, the Committee desired
that the matter should be referred to the Department of Public Enterprises
for a critical review of the existing procedures and issue of appropriate
guidelines to address these problems.
13.   The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has initiated
adjudication proceedings against the  five PSUs for non compliance
of the provisions of Clause 49 1(A) of the Listing Agreement. As
desired by the Committee, the matter had been referred to the
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Department of Public Enterprises for a critical review of existing
procedures and issue of appropriate guidelines  to address these
problems.”
14.The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
seemed to have derived satisfaction by simply making a reference
to the Department of Public Enterprises about review of the existing
procedure governing appointment of independent directors in the
context of the Listing Agreement prescribed by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI).  The Department of Economic
Affairs have not bothered to ascertain from the Department of Public
Enterprises whether the recommended review has been undertaken
and if so, what was the outcome.  These are matters on which the
Department ought to take suo-motu action and be pro-active to
apprise the Committee of the developments. The Committee would
await information in this regard. As Public Sector Undertakings are
subjected to scrutiny of C&AG, CVC, CBI and also parliamentary
Committees, the concept of independent Directors, their need, role,
competence and professionalism need to be defined.  Even in the
context of level playing field, the unique role, social obligations and
autonomy of CPSUs should have to be kept in mind.
D. Credit Flow to Priority Sector
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
15.Shortfall in lending to agriculture as at the end of March, 2007
(provisional) was 2.40 percent in the case of public sector banks and
5.18 per cent in the case of private sector banks as against the target of
18% prescribed by Reserve Bank of India.  Similarly, the shortfall in
lending to weaker sections was 2.80 per cent in the case of public sector
banks and 8.45 per cent in the case of private sector banks as against
the target of 10 per cent of net bank credit.  Despite the disincentive of
compensating the shortfall in lending by a proportional funding to the
Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), where the rate of interest
is comparatively very low, there has been considerable shortfall in
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

lending to agriculture every year. The Committee, therefore, observed that
the situation warranted an effective mechanism to ensure that the targeted
percentage of credit is lent to agriculture and priority sector.
16.The Government, in their action taken reply have stated,
inter-alia, as under:
“Considering the amount of shortfall in lending to priority
sector (including agriculture), creation of four additional funds
have been announced in the Budget Speech 2008-09.  These
funds, which are to be governed by the general guidelines that
are now applicable to RIDF with some modifications, are as
under:
(i) A Fund of Rs. 5,000 crore is to be created in National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to enhance its
re-finance operations to short term cooperative credit institu-
tions.
(ii) Two funds of Rs. 2,000 crore each are to be created in Small
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) – one for risk
capital financing and other for enhancing refinance capability
to the small and medium enterprises sector.
(iii) A Fund of Rs. 1,200 crore is to be created in National Housing
Bank (NHB) to enhance its re-finance operations in the rural
housing sector.
With the announcement and constitution of these funds, the
banks with shortfall in lending to priority sector, including
agriculture and weaker section, would have to contribute higher
amounts.
RBI has recently informed that the total shortfall of the scheduled
commercial banks on account of non-achievement of overall priority
sector lending target (40%) is Rs. 838.44 crore while the shortfall
of the domestic commercial banks on account of non-achievement
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

of agricultural lending target (18%) (after netting of priority sector
shortfall) is Rs. 21,818.27 crore.  Thus, the total shortfall of these
banks under the priority sector during the year 2007-08 amounts
to Rs. 22,656.71 crore and the banks would be required to deposit
the whole amount in these funds”.
17.The Committee are distressed to note that the shortfall in
agricultural lending target was as much as over Rs. 21,818 crore
during 2007-08.  There is nothing in the reply to indicate whether
any effective mechanism has been envisaged to ensure that the
targeted percentage of credit flows to agriculture and priority sector.
The corpus of the four additional funds proposed to be created works
out to just Rs. 10,200 crore which is less than half of the shortfall
in agricultural lending.  Even going by the assertion of the Ministry
of Finance that the banks would be required to deposit the whole
amount of shortfall in priority sector credit, in these funds, there
will be over Rs. 12,456 crore left uncoreded. It is also not clear
whether the proposed funds have already been created and if not,
how soon they will be set up.  Inadequate bank credit being one
of the major reasons for the slow and tardy agriculture growth, the
Committee, once again, reiterate the need to evolve an effective
mechanism to ensure that the targeted percentage of credit is lent
to agriculture and priority sector.
E. One Time Settlement Scheme for medium, small and tiny
enterprises.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
18.In view of globalization and consequent changes in
Government policy the Committee were of the view that operations of
a number of medium, small and tiny enterprises had became unviable.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that these entities should be
extended the facility of one time settlement for further five years to reduce
their burden and enable them to be competitive in the changed
circumstances.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

19.The Government, in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“As per Reserve Bank of India (RBI) circular No. RPCD.PLNFS.BC.
No. 39/06/02.31/2005-06, dtd. 3rd September, 2005, regarding
‘guidelines on One-Time Settlement Scheme (OTS Scheme) for SME
Accounts’, the last date for receipt of applications from borrowers
was 31st March, 2006.  This was a one-time measure.
The matter was again taken up with RBI for their views on the issue
of opening of the OTS Scheme for Micro and Small Industries and
other small Loanees.  RBI has opined that RPCD Department of RBI
issued guidelines vide its circular, dtd. 3rd September, 2005 on OTS
Scheme for SME Sector, as part of the “Policy Package for stepping
up credit to SME Sector” announced by the Union Finance Minister
in the Parliament on August 10, 2005. The circular under reference
was applicable to Public Sector Banks and this was a one time-
measure.  RBI has further reported that apart from the above
scheme, every bank formulates its own policy for waiver/write off/
compromise settlement of loans duly approved by their Board of
Directors.  Any borrower facing genuine hardship can always
approach his banker for suitable remedy under its approved loan
policy.
RBI has further reported that it had recently constituted a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Dr. K.C. Chakraborty, CMD, Punjab
National Bank to study the reasons for sickness of SSI/SME units
and also suggest remedial measures so that potentially viable sick
units can be rehabilitated at the earliest. The Committee has
submitted its Report in the month of April, 2008 and has suggested
wide ranging measures including exit route for sick SMEs.  The
report has been put by RBI on its website for wider dissemination
and comments”.
20.The Committee regret to note that no concrete steps have
been taken on their recommendation for extending the One Time
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Settlement (OTS) Scheme to support unviable/sick medium, small
and tiny enterprises for a further period of five years.  For enabling
these entities to compete successfully in the changed circumstances,
the Committee feel that it is essential to extend the facility of OTS
for a further period of five years.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the recommendations made by the Dr. K.C. Chakraborty
Committee appointed by the RBI to study the reasons for sickness
of SSI/SME units and the action taken thereon by the Government/
Reserve Bank.
F. RTGS and NEFT Facility
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
21.The Committee learnt that one of the reasons for recent volatility
in the stock market was the failure of the banking payment system to
synchronise with the payment requirements of stock exchanges as the
existing facility of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) was only for high
value transactions and the absence of RTGS in large number of bank
branches.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that measures be
taken to extend RTGS facility to the entire branch network of banks
within a specified time frame.
22.   The Government, in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reported that as on date the total
coverage of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)/Net Electronic
Funds Transfer (NEFT) branch network is around 44,000 as against
the total network of branches at 71,000.  The coverage of the total
branch network would require additional infrastructural facilities
at all the places where bank branches are located. It may not be
possible to cover the entire network of branches until infrastructure
like power, communication etc. is created.  Further, there are
branches of banks which are not part of RTGS and NEFT due to
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

their ineligibility to participate in it.  Every effort is being made to
cover all the eligible bank branches under NEFT/RTGS.
Bringing down the threshold limit for RTGS (now at Rs. 1 lakh)
may, no doubt ensure its availability for covering more number of
transactions.  However, in order to ensure, that the system is
available for time critical and large value transactions, the threshold
limit has been imposed.  Further, in order to meet the needs of retail
users, another net electronic clearing facility called NEFT is already
in place.  RTGS and NEFT systems complement each other.  Banks
have already been advised to create awareness among their staff
as well as clientele.  RBI is also writing to CEOs of banks as also
to other institutions in this regard. They are also going for a
concerted propaganda in this regard”.
23.It is observed from the reply of the Ministry of Finance
that around 27,000 branches of banks are still left out of the ambit
of RTGS/NEFT facility due to absence of infrastructure like power,
communication, ineligibility of some branches to participate in RTGS/
NEFT etc.  Absence of the facility of RTGS/NEFT in all branches
of banks leads to problems in synchronization in the settlement
system of stock exchanges and banks which is stated to be a major
factor in precipitating crisis, at times of volatility in the stock market.
The Committee would, therefore, like to know in this context, how
many branches of banks do not have requisite infrastructure and
among the rest, how many are ineligible to participate in RTGS/
NEFT and for what reasons.  The Committee also desire to be
apprised of the time frame for extending the RTGS/NEFT facility
in respect of those branches which are eligible and are with adequate
infrastructure.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Appointment of independent Directors of PSUs
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
There were five public sector undertakings(PSUs) against which
adjudication proceedings had reportedly been initiated by the Securities
and Exchange Board of India for non-compliance of the provisions of
Clause 49 1(A) of the Listing Agreement as at the end of quarter ended
31st March, 2007.  Non-compliance was on account of delay in
appointment of independent directors by the Government.  It is strange
that PSUs  have to face adjudication proceedings on a matter on which
they have no control.  It is the responsibility of the Government to be
alive to the changed realities owing to shared ownership of listed PSUs
and ensure timely appointment of independent directors so that the PSUs
could comply with the requirements of regulatory authorities. The
Committee desired that the matter should be referred to the Department
of Public Enterprises for a critical review of existing procedures and issue
of appropriate guidelines to address these problems.
Reply of the Government
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has initiated
adjudication proceedings against the  five PSUs for non compliance of
the provisions of Clause 49 1(A) of the Listing Agreement. As desired
by the Committee, the matter had been referred to the Department of
Public Enterprises for a critical review of existing procedures  and issue
of appropriate guidelines  to address these problems.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Scheme of debt waiver and debt relief
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5, 6 and 7)
The Scheme of debt waiver and debt relief for farmers
announced in the Budget proposals 2008-09 involving Rs. 60,000 crore
was estimated to  benefit 4 crore farmers who had availed
institutional loans.  The estimates were reportedly based on provisional
figures and trends.  Doubts had, however, been raised as to how in the
absence of exact data, which were presently being collected, the
quantum of fund and the number of beneficiaries were estimated.
Further the Scheme was announced without making adequate budgetary
provisions.  Therefore, the Committee recommended that adequate
provisions be provided for implementation of this scheme in the Budget
itself.
The Committee were of the view that farming community was
grappling with  several constraints viz. imperfect market conditions, lack
of backward and forward linkages, lack of assured and remunerative
marketing opportunities and lack of remunerative prices and stagnating
productivity resulting in declining profitability and lower income for
farmers.  The National Commission on Farmers seemed to have
addressed all these issues, however, no effective steps had so far been
taken to remove these constraints which had ultimately perpetuated the
indebtedness of farmers.  Therefore, farmers were forced to take extreme
measures as suicides.
The Committee were of the view that the loan waiver scheme
appeared to address the symptoms and not the root cause of the malady
as rural indebtedness was deep rooted in the Indian agrarian society
requiring concerted efforts and multipronged approach.  Therefore, the
Committee felt that a holistic approach needed to be taken to resolve all
the problems confronted by farmers.  Besides, the rate of interest for
agricultural credit needed to be brought down further and a mechanism
be evolved to facilitate swapping of non-institutional credit with
institutional credit. Further, there should not be any categorization/
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

segregation of farmers and debt waiver scheme might be made applicable
to all the farmers uniformly.  The Committee also urged that there should
be a long term comprehensive plan of action, on the basis of available
inputs/studies for mitigating the hardships of the agriculture sector in
general and farmers in particular for implementation over a specific
period of time.
Reply of the Government
The Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief (ADWDR)
Scheme, 2008 for Farmers was announced by the Hon’ble Finance
Minister in his Budget Speech 2008-09.  Preliminary estimates showed
the total financial implication at Rs.60,000 crore. These estimates are
based on provisional figures and trends based on published/available
figures with Reserve Bank of India/NABARD.  Based on these
provisional estimates, a Farmer’s Debt Relief Fund with an initial
corpus of Rs. 10,000 crore was created in the Financial Year 2007-08.  The
Fund is to be augmented as required, for reimbursing the claims of
Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Banks and Cooperative Credit
Institutions against the amount of debt waiver/relief granted by them
as per the approved Scheme.  An additional Rs. 15,000 crore is to be
provisioned during the First Supplementary for the Demands for Grants
2008-09.
The Guidelines for implementation of ADWDR Scheme 2008 have
been issued.
The broader issues on constraints faced by the farming community
and the issues/recommendations of the National Commission on
Farmers are dealt with by Ministry of Agriculture (MoA).  The constraints
faced by the farming community such as market conditions, lack of
assured and remunerative marketing opportunities remain critical and
important.  To address the constraints of the farming community, the
Government have formulated the ‘National Policy for Farmers 2007’ on
the basis of the recommendations of the National Commission on
Farmers.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Reserve Bank has taken a number of steps to reduce the plight of
indebted farmers.  Banks have been allowed in November 2006 to frame
transparent One Time Settlement (OTS) policies for assisting distressed
farmers and also farmers defaulting on their loans, due to circumstances
beyond their control.  Also, each State Level Banker’s Committee (SLBC)
convener bank has been advised to start financial literacy and credit
counseling centre in their State, to help stressed farmers in making
prudent use of banking facilities.  As on May 10, 2006, 96 credit
counseling centres have been opened by banks.
Some of the important schemes being implemented by the
Government are indicated here:
a. Providing remunerative prices:
With a view to providing remunerative price for the agriculture
produce, the Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices
(CACP) recommends the Minimum Support Price (MSP) for
24 important crops. While fixing the MSP, the cost of
production (which includes the cost of paid out inputs),
imputed value of family labour, and rentals for the own land
are taken into consideration.  The MSP is usually higher than
the cost of production and makes the produce remunerative
to the farmers.  The MSP is normally announced upfront
before the commencement of the sowing operations and thus
acts as an impetus to the farmers to go for that crop.  Increase
in the MSP, for paddy, wheat, moong, toor, arhar, jute in
2007-08, over the MSP for 2004-05 was 33%, 56.3%, 23.4%,
14.4% and 18.5% respectively. (Source: Economic Survey,
2007-08).
b. Incentive to State Government to increase their share of
investment in agriculture:
The Government has launched a programme named Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) to incentivise the States to
increase their share of investment in agriculture in their State
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

plans.  An allocation of Rs.25,000 crore has been made in the
11th Five Year plan under RKVY.   RKVY will be a State Plan
Scheme and the eligibility for credit under the scheme would
depend upon the amount provided in the State budgets for
agriculture and allied sectors, over and above the base line
percentage expenditure incurred on agriculture & allied
sectors.
c. Making the credit for agriculture affordable to farmers:
From Kharif 2006-07, the farmers are being provided with
short term/crop loans upto a principal amount of Rs. 3 lakh
@ 7% per annum rate of interest.  For this, the Government
is providing interest subvention @ 2% per annum to the Public
Sector Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Cooperative
Credit Institutions (CCIs) on their own involvement of funds
and concessional refinance is being extended by National
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to
RRBs and CCIs for this purpose.
d. Introduction of Kisan Credit Cards (KCC):
The Kisan Credit Card Scheme, launched in the year 1998,
addresses the needs of timely and affordable short and
medium term loans of farmers.  As on 30.04.2008, commercial
banks, RRBs and CCIs have issued 7,15,24,772 KCCs to the
farmers.  NABARD has advised banks to extend coverage
through expanding their outreach by lending to more farmers
including non-willful defaulters, oral lessees, tenant farmers,
share croppers, who may have been outside the fold of the
scheme as also new farmers.
e.  Agriculture Insurance:
The National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) for crops
has been implemented from Rabi 1999-2000 season with the
objective of providing insurance coverage in the event of
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

failure of any of the notified crops as a result of natural
calamities, pests and diseases.  The scheme is available to all
the farmers (both loanee and non-loanee) irrespective of their
size of holding and operates on the basis of area approach.
At present, 10% subsidy in premium is available to small and
marginal farmers, which is shared equally by the Central and
State Government.  Since inception of the scheme and until
Rabi 2006-07, about 971 lakh farmers were covered under the
scheme.
f.  Agricultural Marketing — Reform through APMC Act:
The MoA circulated a model APMC Act, 2003 and suggested
amendments to the State Agriculture Produce Marketing
Committee Act (APMC Act) so as to promote investment in
marketing infrastructure, motivating corporate sector to
undertake direct marketing and to facilitate a material
integrated market.  As of now, 15 States have amended the
APMC Acts.
g. Promoting Organic Farming:
Reduction in the farmers margin on account of higher
input costs and un-remunerative prices has affected the
financial position of the farmers adversely. Taking the
same into view, efforts are being made by GoI as well as
NABARD to promote Organic Farming. For this purpose,
awareness among the farmers is being created and financial
support through subsidy for practising organic farming is
provided.
h. Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF):
Through RIDF, operationalised by NABARD, it is ensured that
State Governments are being financed at subsidized rates of
interest so that they can develop and maintain agricultural and
rural infrastructure for the benefit of rural masses.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

The Government is conscious of the dimension of the
problems and is sensitive to the difficulties of the farming
community, especially the small and marginal farmers.
Therefore, after weighing the pros and cons of debt waiver and
loaning and taking into account the resource position, the
Government announced the Agricultural Debt Waiver and
Debt Relief Scheme(ADWDRS) 2008, which will, among other
things :
a. De-clog the choked line of credit to farmers, as a sizeable
number of indebted farmers who were otherwise unable
to access formal financial sector will now get access to
fresh loans. Such farmers otherwise, had to depend on
the informal sector to meet their immediate credit needs
at a usurious rate of interest;
b. Strengthen the financial health of the rural financial
institutions, particularly, the Cooperative Credit Institu-
tions (CCIs) and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), whose
financial position was adversely affected due to defaults
by a substantial number of farmers, so that these banks
can meet the credit needs of the farmers, particularly, the
small farmers, marginal and tenant farmers, in a more
effective manner.
The ADWDR Scheme, 2008 does not cover the loans taken from the
money lenders and other non-institutional sources as they have been
found to be unacceptable for obvious reasons.  There is usually no record
of such loans, neither of the lenders nor borrowers, and it would be near
impossible to examine the correctness of claims in this behalf.
From Kharif 2006-07, the farmers are being provided with short
term/crop loans upto a principal amount of Rs. 3 lakh @ 7% per annum
rate of interest.  For this, the Government is providing interest subvention
@ 2% per annum to the Public Sector Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)
and Cooperative Credit Institutions (CCIs) on their own involvement of
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

funds and concessional refinance is being extended by National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to RRBs and CCIs
for this purpose.  As of now there is no scheme before the Government
to further reduce the rate of interest.
In 2004, the banks were advised to provide loans to farmers for
swapping non-institutional debts (including that taken from money
lenders) against appropriate collateral and group security.  Under this
Scheme, the banks have provided Rs. 307.30 crore (data provisional)
of credit to farmers against 71,103 accounts.  From the year 2008-09,
banks have been advised to earmark around 3% of the target for
agriculture credit in 2008-09 for giving loans under the Debt Swap
Scheme.
As regards the view of the Committee that there should be no
categorisation or segregation of farmers in the implementation of Debt
Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme and that it should be made applicable
to all farmers uniformly, the Government is of the view that unlike big
farmers, small/marginal/tenant farmers are not in a position to absorb
the shocks arising out of natural calamities/other events beyond their
control, because of which they become non-willful defaulters to the
banking system.  Besides, the inclusion of other farmers (farm holding
more than 2 hectares) in the Debt Waiver Scheme as against the Debt
Relief Scheme would highly inflate the financial implication of the
Scheme, which under the current fiscal situation of the country is not
advisable.
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee regreted to note that even after two years, Utilization
Certificates (UCs) in respect of over 45 percent cases involving an amount
of Rs. 9904 crore were yet to be received as on 1.1.08 in  respect of grants
released upto March, 2006. As per Rule 212(1) of GFR, 2005, Utilisation
Certificates for grants released have to be submitted within 12 months
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

of the closure of the financial year. Majority of these outstanding UCs
fell in the jurisdiction of eight Ministries viz. Ministry of Environment
and Forest (7546 UCs involving an amount of Rs.922 crores), Health and
Family Welfare (3384 UCs involving an amount of Rs. 2990 crores),
Higher Education (2641 UCs involving an amount of Rs. 344 crores),
Elementary Education (1501 UCs involving Rs. 2322 crores), Women &
Child Development (5823 UCs involving an amount of Rs. 328 crores),
Youth Affairs & Sports (8305 UCs involving Rs. 273 crores), Social Justice
and Empowerment (1262 UCs involving Rs. 850 crores), Culture (9295
UCs involving Rs. 273 crores).  It is the responsibility of the Department
of Expenditure to ensure that financial rules are strictly complied with
and financial discipline is maintained.  The Committee hoped that the
Department of Expenditure will not be found wanting in this respect in
future.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation regarding obtaining of outstanding Utilisation
Certificates are noted for compliance. Vigorous efforts are being made
with the major defaulting Ministries so that outstanding Utilisation
Certificates are brought to the minimum. Letters have been sent to the
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments urging them to make concerted
efforts for obtaining outstanding Utilisation Certificates from grantee
institutions at the earliest. The observation of the Committee has also been
communicated to these Ministries/Departments for necessary follow up
action. Department of Expenditure will continue to pursue with
defaulting Ministries/Departments for minimizing the outstanding
Utilisation Certificates. However, it may be pointed out that it is for the
concerned Ministry/Department to ensure that the provision of the GFRs
are strictly complied with, before releasing grants to organization/
statutory bodies/institutions. Department of Expenditure has been
advising administrative Ministries/Departments from time-to-time to
ensure that no fresh grants are released, unless Utilisation Certificates
in respect of  previous grants have been obtained.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Under-utilisation of the grants/funds in the Ministries
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee were concerned to note that a number of Ministries
had surrendered considerable amount of allotted funds thereby depriving
funds for a score of approved developmental programmes.  For instance,
during 2006-07, the Ministry of Rural Development had unspent amount
of as much as over Rs. 2,622 crore and the Ministry of Textiles over
Rs. 640 crore.  There were eight other Ministries which had surrendered
more than Rs. 100 crore each during that year.  Scrutiny of figures in
this regard during two previous years also reflected the same
phenomenon.  All this called for closer scrutiny by the Department of
Expenditure before approval of projected expenditure by the Ministries.
The Committee hoped that concerted efforts would be made to ensure
that resources were allocated judiciously among Ministries so that  such
underutilization do not recur in future.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry accepts the Committee’s Recommendation for
compliance.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S
REPLIES
Professional Services
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee noted that under the head ‘Professional Services’ in
Department of Disinvestment, budgetary allocation was revised upwards
by more than two times from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 6.1 crore during the year
2007-08. However, the actual expenditure at the end of March, 2008 was
about Rs. 1.16 crore, a little more than one sixth of the revised allocation.
It was seen in this connection that 80% of the funds under this head
had been surrendered during 2006-07. The Committee desired to know
what was the justification for revising the allocation so steeply during
2007-08 and the reasons for failure to achieve the objective.  The
Committee hoped that due care will be exercised in future to avoid
recurrence of such instances.
Reply of the Government
The requirements under the Budget Head Payment for Professional
and Special Services for the year 2006-07 had, in October, 2005, been
projected on the basis of the anticipated disinvestment activities in 2006-
07.  The Government had decided for disinvestment of small portions
of equity through ‘Offer for Sale’ in Power Finance Corporation (PFC),
along with the company’s fresh issue and ‘Offer for Sale’ of small
portions of equity in National Mineral Development Corporation
(NMDC), National Aluminum Company Limited (NALCO) and Neyveli
Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC).  The process of disinvestment in each
of these cases had been taken up.  However, on 6th July, 2006, the
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Government decided to keep all disinvestment decisions and proposals
on hold, pending further review.  Consequently, the process of
disinvestment of small portions of equity in the aforesaid companies was
not carried forward.
In October, 2006, at the time of estimating the RE 2006-07 and BE
2007-08, the requirement was scaled down to Rs.2.00 crore in RE
2006-07 and the BE for 2007-08 was also projected at the same level of
Rs.2.00 crore. Subsequently, during November-December, 2006,
Government approved the proposals of Initial Public Offerings consisting
of fresh issue of equity by three power sector companies namely Power
Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL), Rural Electrification
Corporation Limited (REC) and National Hydro-electric Power
Corporation Limited.  Thereafter, on 8th February, 2007, Government
decided in conjunction to give an ‘Offer for Sale’ of 10%, 5% and 5%
of pre-issue paid up equity capital of REC, PGCIL and NHPC
respectively.
In order to provide for payment of the apportionable expenditure
for these transactions, the provisions under the head ‘Professional and
Special Services’ for 2007-08 was enhanced to Rs.6.01 crore in RE 2007-
08.  The additional requirement of Rs. 4.00 crore was projected in the
Third and final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants 2007-08
and the concerned Appropriation Bill received assent of the President only
on 25th March, 2008.  While expenditure under the head ‘Professional
& Special Services’ was Rs.1.16 crore as on 19/3/2008, but the actual
expenditure, after the provision was augmented through the Third and
final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants, was Rs. 5.80 crores
in 2007-08.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Under-utilization of funds
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
There had been huge shortfall year after year in utilization of
budgetary allocation made by the Ministry of Finance to certain items
of expenditure.  For instance, the shortfall in utilization of funds under
the head ‘Grants-in-aid’ was as much as Rs. 54.59 crore (50%) in 2005-
06, Rs. 211.47 crore (95%) in 2006-07 and Rs. 43.44 crore (92%) in 2007-
08.  Similarly, under the head “Investment Commission – Office
expenses”, the under-utilization of funds was to the tune of Rs. 0.15 crore
(75%) in 2005-06, Rs. 0.19 crore (95%) in 2006-07 and Rs. 0.10 crore (67%)
in 2007-08.  One of the criteria for determining allocations is the extent
of utilization in the preceding year.  The fact that there had been huge
shortfall in expenditure year after year raised doubt whether this criterion
was applied at all in determining the budget figures.  The Committee
hoped that corrective steps would be taken to ensure that budget
estimates were realistic and on sound basis in future.
Reply of the Government
It is reiterated that the Scheme “Indian Development Economic
Assistance Scheme” (IDEAS) for which allocations were made under the
Major Head – 3605, Minor Head – 00.101, Detailed Head: 30.00.31—
Grants-in-aid, was a new scheme with several  components under it.
All these components required suitable provisioning of funds.  However,
due to some difference over the contents of the scheme, the scheme could
take off only partially due to which provision kept had to be surrendered
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

or remained un-utilized. Reasons for huge allocation in the subsequent
year was that efforts to make the scheme fully operational were on.
Anticipating the huge requirement of funds in the event of full
operationalisation of the scheme in subsequent year, sharp increase in
budgetary allocation was effected. Very often, due to unforeseen
circumstances, budget allocation is not utilized satisfactorily.  However,
efforts are always made to project realistic budgetary estimate.
Viability Gap Funding:
FY 2005-06:
In 2005-06, a provision of Rs.100 crore and Rs.1400 crore was
made for Infrastructure Development under two heads.  The amount
of Rs.1500 crore was surrendered due to following reasons:
The Scheme “Financial Support to Public Private-Partnerships
In Infrastructure” under the Viability Gap Funding Scheme was
introduced in March, 2005 and   Budget Provision were made in
the Demand of Department of Economic Affairs.   The CCEA note
was prepared after incorporating the comments of Ministries/
Department and was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 23rd March,
2005.  On 15th April, 2005, Cabinet Secretariat returned the CCEA
note with the remarks that the scheme be first placed before the
Committee of Infrastructure serviced by Planning Commission.
Committee of Infrastructure approved the scheme in its meeting of
30th June, 2005.  Thereafter, the revised CCEA note was sent to
Cabinet Secretariat and CCEA note was approved in August, 2005.
After approval notification was issued on 8.8.2005 regarding
constitution of Empowered Committee and Empowered Institution.
The first meeting of Empowered Institution was held in September,
2005 where rules, procedure etc. were discussed.  After that the
guidelines were framed and notified in January, 2006.  Finance
Minister had written to Chief Ministers of States to popularise the
scheme and broad-basing the proposals.  No amount was disbursed
in 2005-06 and the entire amount was surrendered.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

FY 2006-07:
A Budget Estimate of Rs. 500 crore was made in MH 5475-
Assistance for Infrastructure Development.  The allocation was
reduced to Nil during RE stage due to following reasons :
The Scheme was notified in January, 2006. As per the scheme
the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) would be disbursed only after the
Private Sector Company has subscribed and expended the equity
contribution required for the project and will be released in
proportion to debt disbursement remaining to be disbursed
thereafter.  No disbursement took place during 2006-07 since there
is a time lag between initial approval and disbursement of fund
and disbursement can only take place once the private party is
selected through competitive bidding and it has invested its share
of equity.  The total budget allocation of Rs. 500 crore in BE 2006-
07 was restricted to NIL in RE 2006-07.
Minor Head 13.01:31—‘Grants-in-aid’ under Major Head
2075—Miscellanious General Services 00.800 – Other Expenditure
13 – Creating Institutional Strengthening and Capacity building of
Aid, Accounts & Audit Division 13.01 External Aided Component.
The allocation and utilization of funds during the period 2005-06
to 2007-08 is shown below:—
(Rs. In crores)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Variation/ Percentage
Exp. saving(-)/ Utilization
Excess (+) of R.E.
(i.e. between BE
and Actual)
2005-06 0.80 0.80 0.72 (-) 0.08 90%
2006-07 0.80 0.80 0.80 — 100%
2007-08 0.48 0.75 0.60 (+) 0.12 80%
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

It would be seen from the above table that the entire budget grant
for the year was fully utilized in the years 2006-07 & 2007-08.   The Budget
Allocations are made on the basis of rigorous examination of Demands
made by each units preceded by discussions with the Secretary
(Expenditure) in September of the previous year.  After allocations,
constant monitoring mechanism monthly/quarterly expenditure
progress has been put in place.  Revised Estimates are prepared based
upon the trend of expenditure and mandatory cuts imposed by the
Department of Expenditure.  The grant controlling authorities are
constantly reminded and directed to project the requirement on near
realistic basis.
(ii) Investment Commission is a body consisting of eminent
persons.  The expenditure booked by the Commission mostly pertains
to the costs incurred by them in engaging consultants to prepare reports/
give tour reports and in publication.  The Budgetary Allocation is made
on the basis of request of the Commission.  The savings pointed out under
“Office Expenses” were against the RE provisions of Rs.20 lakh (2005-
06), Rs.12 lakh (2006-07) and Rs.15 lakh (2007-08).  As the expenses were
mostly met by the Commission and did not seek reimbursement  the
small portions were underutilized. It is to be noted with appreciation that
the Commission did not book any expenditure on establishment matters
like office rent, regular office staff, etc.  If in future such expenditure
becomes necessary there would be better utilization of the budgeted
amount.
Transparency in Revenue and Fiscal Deficits
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
It had transpired during the examination of Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Finance that transactions on account of bonds/
securities issued by the Government each year to finance subsidies on
food, fertilizer and petroleum were not usually reflected in the Fiscal and
Revenue deficits since there was no cash outgo due to matching receipts
taken in lieu of issue of securities/bonds.  The Finance Secretary was
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

candid enough to admit to this lack of transparency and had promised
to get on to a path of transparency.  The Committee hoped that steps
would be taken in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India to reflect the above transactions appropriately in the
Fiscal and Revenue deficits in future.
Reply of the Government
As a first step, securities issued in lieu of subsidies on food,
fertilizer and petroleum during 2007-08, upto the time of presentation of
the Budget 2008-09, have been clearly indicated in the ‘Budget at a Glance’
2008-09.
The Finance Minister has also indicated in para 122 of his budget
2008-09 speech that he intends to request the Thirteenth Finance
Commission to revisit the road map for fiscal adjustment and suggest
a suitably revised road map.
Credit Flow to Priority Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee found that the shortfall in lending to agriculture as
at the end of March, 2007 (provisional) was 2.40 per cent  in the case
of public sector banks and 5.18 per cent in the case of private sector banks
as against the target of 18% prescribed by RBI.  Similarly, the shortfall
in lending to weaker sections was 2.80 per cent in the case of public sector
banks and 8.45 per cent in the case of private sector banks as against
the target of 10 per cent of net bank credit.  Shortfall in lending to
agriculture and priority sector is required to be compensated by a
proportional funding to the Rural Infrastructure Development
Fund (RIDF) where the rate of interest is comparatively very low.  That
despite this disincentive, there had been considerable shortfall in
lending to agriculture every year, warranted an effective mechanism to
ensure that the targeted percentage of credit was lent to agriculture  and
priority sector.  The Committee awaited the Ministry’s response in this
regard.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Reply of the Government
Outstanding credit to agriculture by public sector banks has gone
up from Rs. 70,501 crore in March 2004 to Rs. 2,02,614 crore in March
2007, showing a robust compounded annual rate of growth of over
30 per cent.  Lending to agriculture as a percentage of net bank credit
has also improved from 14.5 per cent to 15.4 per cent during the same
period.  However, it has been lower than the target of 18% of net bank
credit prescribed by Reserve Bank.  This is partly due to lower growth
rate of agriculture sector compared to industry and services sectors.   As
regards lending to weaker sections, the shortfall in achievement of this
target would be taken into account for allocation of Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) contributions with effect from April 2009.   An
announcement of this effect has been made in the Annual Policy
Statement of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for the year 2008-09 and the
banks have been informed accordingly.  This is expected to lead to better
performance by banks as far as lending to the weaker sections sub-target
of 10% is concerned.
Besides above, from April 30, 2007, the base on which the priority
sector target is calculated has been modified.  Accordingly, banks are
now required to lend to priority sector at 40% of adjusted net bank credit
(ANBC).  ANBC represents net bank credit plus investments made by
banks in non-Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) bonds under Held to
Maturity category or credit equivalent amount of Off-Balance Sheet
Exposures (OBE), whichever is higher, as on March 31 of the preceding
accounting year.  The outstanding Foreign Currency Non-Resident
(Banks) (FCNR) (B) and Non-Resident Non-Repatriable Term Deposit
Accounts (NRNR) deposits balances would no longer be deducted for
computation of ANBC for priority sector lending purposes.  This change
may increase the priority sector lending obligations of banks in absolute
terms.
Considering the amount of shortfall in lending to priority sector
(including agriculture), creation of four additional funds have been
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

announced in the Budget Speech 2008-09.  These funds, which are to be
governed by the general guidelines that are now applicable to RIDF with
some modifications, are as under:—
(i) A Fund of Rs. 5,000 crore is to be created in National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to enhance
its re-finance operations to short term cooperative credit
institutions.
(ii) Two funds of Rs. 2,000 crore each are to be created in Small
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) — one for risk
capital financing and other for enhancing refinance capability
to the small and medium enterprises sector.
(iii) A Fund of Rs.1,200 crore is to be created in National Housing
Bank (NHB) to enhance its re-finance operations in the rural
housing sector.
With the announcement and constitution of these funds, the banks
with shortfall in lending to priority sector, including agriculture and
weaker section, would have to contribute higher amounts.
RBI has recently informed that the total shortfall of the scheduled
commercial banks on account of non-achievement of overall priority
sector lending target (40%) is Rs. 838.44 crore while the shortfall of the
domestic commercial banks on account of non-achievement of agricul-
tural lending target (18%) (after netting of priority sector shortfall) is
Rs. 21,818.27 crore.  Thus, the total shortfall of these banks under the
priority sector during the year 2007 - 08 amounts to Rs. 22,656.71 crore
and the banks would be required to deposit the whole amount in these
funds.
One Time Settlement Scheme for medium, small and tiny enterprises
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
In view of recent globalization and consequential changes in
Government policy, the Committee were of the view that the operations
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

of a number of  medium, small and tiny enterprises had become
unviable.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that these entities
should  be extended the facility of One Time Settlement Scheme for
further five years to reduce their burden and enable them to be
competitive in the changed circumstances.
Reply of the Government
As per Reserve Bank of India (RBI) circular No. RPCD.PLNFS.BC.
No. 39/06/02.31/2005-06, dtd. 3rd September, 2005, regarding ‘guidelines
on One-Time Settlement Scheme (OTS Scheme) for SME Accounts’, the
last date for receipt of applications from borrowers was 31st March, 2006.
This was a one-time measure.
The matter was again taken up with RBI for their views on the issue
of opening of the OTS Scheme for Micro and Small Industries and other
small Loanees.  RBI has opined that RPCD Department of RBI issued
guidelines vide its circular, dtd. 3rd September, 2005 on OTS Scheme for
SME Sector, as part of the “Policy Package for stepping up credit to SME
Sector” announced by the Union Finance Minister in the Parliament on
August 10, 2005. The circular under reference was applicable to Public
Sector Banks and this was a one time-measure.  RBI has further reported
that apart from the above scheme, every bank formulates its own policy
for waiver/write off /compromise settlement of loans duly approved by
their Board of Directors.  Any borrower facing genuine hardship can
always approach his banker for suitable remedy under its approved loan
policy.
RBI has further reported that it had recently constituted a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Dr. K.C. Chakraborty, CMD, Punjab National
Bank to study the reasons for sickness of SSI/SME units and also suggest
remedial measures so that potentially viable sick units can be
rehabilitated at the earliest. The Committee has submitted its Report in
the month of April, 2008 and has suggested wide ranging measures
including exit route for sick SMEs.  The report has been put by RBI on
its website for wider dissemination and comments.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) facility in Banks
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS), operationalised in
March, 2004 for facilitating inter bank funds transfer and customer
transactions on real time basis is currently available in 40,600 branches
of commercial banks for  transaction of minimum Rs. 1 lakh and above.
The Committee learnt that one of the reasons for recent volatility in the
stock market was the failure of the banking payment system to
synchronise with the payment requirements of stock exchanges as the
existing facility of RTGS is only for high value transactions and the
absence of RTGS in large number of branches.  The Committee
recommended that measures be taken to extend RTGS facility to the entire
branch network within a specified timeframe.  The question of bringing
down the threshold limit to enable large number of users to avail the
facility should also be examined.  The Committee also felt that there was
a need for launching an awareness programme to educate people about
benefits of this system for facilitating speedy transactions.
Reply of the Government
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reported that as on date the total
coverage of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) / Net Electronic Funds
Transfer (NEFT) branch network is around 44,000 as against the total
network of branches at 71,000.  The coverage of the total branch network
would require additional infrastructural facilities at all the places where
bank branches are located. It may not be possible to cover the entire
network of branches until infrastructure like power, communication
etc. is created.  Further, there are branches of banks which are not part
of RTGS and NEFT due to their ineligibility to participate in it.  Every
effort is being made to cover all the eligible bank branches under NEFT/
RTGS.
Bringing down the threshold limit for RTGS (now at Rs. 1 lakh)
may, no doubt ensure its availability for covering more number of
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

transactions.  However, in order to ensure, that the system is available
for time critical and large value transactions, the threshold limit has been
imposed.  Further, in order to meet the needs of retail users, another net
electronic clearing facility called NEFT is already in place.  RTGS and
NEFT systems complement each other.  Banks have already been advised
to create awareness among their staff as well as clientele.  RBI is also
writing to CEOs of banks as also to other institutions in this regard. They
are also going for a concerted propaganda in this regard.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
 NEW DELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 11th December, 2008 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
14. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
15. Shri Vijoy Krishna
16. Shri Rupchand Pal
17. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri Mahendra Mohan
19. Shri Vijay J. Darda
10. Shri Moinul Hassan
11. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
12. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan— Deputy Secretary-II
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3.  The Committee, then took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration :-
(i) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 67th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and
Disinvestment);
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 68th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue).
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 69th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Planning.
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 70th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 71st Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The Committee adopted the Report at (iii) above without any
amendment and the Reports at (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) with modifications
as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these
Reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
5. The Committee decided to defer consideration of the two Draft
Reports on (i) ‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’; and (ii) ‘Counterfeit
Currency Notes in Circulation’, to a subsequent sitting.
The Committee then adjourned.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

ANNEXURE
(a) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 67th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment);
Para Line Modification
10 8 After
“…..action should be taken”,
Insert
“without any further delay,”
13 – Insert the following sentence at the end of the
Para:
“As Public Sector Undertakings are subjected to
scrutiny of C&AG, CVC, CBI and also Parliamen-
tary Committees, the concept of independent
Directors, their need, role, competence and
professionalism need to be defined.  Even in the
context of level playing field, the unique role,
social obligations and autonomy of CPSUs
should have to be kept in mind”.
(b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 68th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue).
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

(c) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 70th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 71st Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY-SEVENTH
REPORT OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,
FINANCIAL SERVICES AND DISINVESTMENT)
(i) Total number of Recommendations
(ii) Recommendations/observations
which have been accepted by the
Government
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 6,
7, 10 & 11)
(iii) Recommendations/observations
which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendation No. 12)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in
respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4,
8 & 9)
(v) (Recommendation/observation in
respect of which final reply of the
Government is still awaited
(Nil)
Total % of total
12
6 50.00%
1 08.33%
5 41.67%
00.00%
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-09)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Sixty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

C.O.F. No. 73
Price : Rs. 45.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
13
23
25
35
36
40
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .........................................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
CHAPTER IReport...............................................................................................
CHAPTER IIRecommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government.................................................
CHAPTER IIIRecommendations/observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies...............................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee...............................................................................
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited........
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
11 December, 2008....................................................................
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixty-Seventh
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment.....
PAGE
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2008-2009)
Shri Ananth Kumar—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3.Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4.Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5.Shri Vijoy Krishna
6.Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7.Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8.Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9.Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10.Shri Rupchand Pal
11.Shri P.S. Gadhavi
12.Shri R. Prabhu
13.Shri K.S. Rao
14.Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15.Shri Lakshman Seth
16.Shri A.R. Shaheen
17.Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18.Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
19.Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
20.Shri Ramakrishna Badiga*
21.Vacant#
(iii)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008
#Vacant w.e.f. 14.11.2008 on nomination of Shri Brajesh Pathak to Rajya Sabha.
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22.Shri Raashid Alvi
23.Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
24.Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
25.Shri Mahendra Mohan
26.Shri C. Ramachandraiah
27.Shri Vijay J. Darda
28.Shri S. Anbalagan
29.Shri Moinul Hassan
30.Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
31.Shri Shivanand Tiwari
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present
this Seventy-Third Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment).
2. The Sixty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16
April, 2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008.  Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 30 July, 2008.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 11 December, 2008.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommen-
dations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report of the Committee is given
in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report..
 NEW DELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
73
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Sixty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment)]
SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

73
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Sixty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment)]
SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮

STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
偬敡獥⁰畲捨慳攠偄䙣慭瀠偲楮瑥爠潮⁨瑴瀺⼯睷眮癥特灤昮捯洯⁴漠牥浯癥⁴桩猠睡瑥牭慲欮