CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Forty-third Report on the subject ‘Efficacy on Reform
Process in the Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’ which was presented
to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th November, 2006.
2. The Report contained 36 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14,
16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 & 34
 (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. No. 35
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 12 & 36
 (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 7, 8, 15, 18, 23 & 27
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapters I & V may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

2
A. Result of investigation
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 and 23, Para Nos. 22 and 76)
5. In view of the total failure of DPs and banks to adhere to KYC
norms while opening the demat/bank A/Cs resulting in fictitious
demat/bank A/Cs, the committee recommended that the role of such
entities (intermediaries, financiers, etc.) should be investigated
thoroughly and deterrent punishment awarded befitting the
irregularities committed.
6. The Government in their action taken reply have sated, inter-
alia, that the banks were asked to fix staff accountability and look into
the criminality in this regard. As required by RBI, 9 banks involved in
the IPO related irregularities have already examined the criminality
against officials/employees in the matter. One bank is still investigating
the matter and the final report is awaited.
7. The inordinate delay in completing investigation and giving
deterrent punishment leave room for suspicion regarding involvement
of the important officials of the banks and other agencies in fathering
the IPO scam. Though nine banks are stated to have already
examined the criminality against officials, nothing has been
mentioned in the reply about the outcome of the examination and
the nature of action taken against those found guilty. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the same at the earliest. The Committee
also like to be informed of the outcome of the investigation and
action taken thereon in respect of one bank, with respect of which,
investigation was reported to be still in progress at the earliest.
B. Proceedings against Internal auditors
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 23)
8. As the internal auditors of Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. failed to
check or report the multiple account opening by the brokerage, the
Committee desired that ICAI must take up the matter seriously and
take stringent action against the internal auditor.
9. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“Ministry of Finance has conveyed this recommendation of the
Committee to ICAI on 29th December, 2006. The ICAI has informed
that it had received the comments/clarification from the Chartered
Accountants concerned in the matter and would complete the
examination of the same by 15th March, 2007. Thereafter, it would

3
follow the procedure prescribed in the Chartered Accountants Act,
1949. Ministry of Finance has advised ICAI to complete the
proceedings expeditiously and in any case not later than 30th June,
2007.”
10. The Committee hope that ICAI has completed the proceedings
against the internal auditors of Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. within the
deadline of 30th June, 2007. The Committee would await the outcome
of the examination and action taken thereon.
C. Probe into IPOs floated since 1999
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 12 and 36, Para Nos. 39 and 114)
11. The Committee had recommended that a complete investigation
of all the IPOs floated since 1999 should be carried out so that exact
number and other details of the IPOs where irregularities have taken
place in the past could come out and appropriate action taken.
12. The Government in their action taken reply have stated,
inter-alia, as under:
“RBI has informed that all banks have completed the review of
their IPO finance portfolio for past three years. It has advised, vide
its letter dated January 12, 2007, all banks to take a similar review
for the earlier period starting from 1999 and forward the findings
together with comments of their audit committees to RBI within
2 months. Appropriate action would be taken on the irregularities.
CBDT has sought information in respect of IPOs, floated since
1999 and where irregularities have taken place so that appropriate
action can be taken from the income tax angle.
SEBI has stated that IDFC was the IPO in which the largest number
of afferent demat accounts were used. It was found that the earliest
period during which these afferent accounts were opened was
during the year 2003, accordingly. It has examined the IPOs during
2003 to 2005. Besides, it feels that the available resources and time
of SEBI would be better employed for finalizing follow-up actions
(such as enquiries, adjudication, passing of final orders against
key operators and financiers, etc.) rather than in conducting probe
into IPOs since 1999 which in all probability is unlikely to reveal
involvement of any entity other than those already identified by
SEBI. It also feels that this view is reinforced by the fact that in
the subsequent IPOs no such irregularities have come to their
notice.”

4
13. The Committee would like to be informed of the findings of
(i) banks regarding the review of IPO finance portfolio from the
period starting from 1999 and the nature of action, if any, taken for
flouting the laid down norms and (ii) CBDT in respect of IPOs
floated since 1999 and the action taken, if any, for violating the
provision of Income Tax Act, 1961.
14. The Committee would not like SEBI to prejudge that
conducting probe into IPOs since 1999 is unlikely to reveal
involvement of any entity other then those already identified. Since
Income Tax Department have in their submission to the Committee
hinted the possibility of the prevalence of similar IPO irregularities
since 1999 and RBI and CBDT have taken action for review of IPOs
since 1999, the Committee desire that SEBI should also undertake
the exercise in this regard as already recommended by the Committee
and the Committee be informed of the steps taken in this regard.

5
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Indian Capital Market has come a long way owing to several
reforms over the years particularly with regard to disclosure norms
and emergence of SEBI as the statutory body to regulate the market.
Nonetheless, the Committee regret to note that the capital market has
been witnessing one scam after the other. The recent IPO scam has
once again highlighted the fact that in the present scenario,
unscrupulous people can still hold the system to ransom. Unless the
authorities regulating the capital market are alert to keep their vigil
whenever there is a boom time, ‘scamsters’ will continue to operate
without any fear of punishment. Enough evidence is available to show
that the past scams namely the ‘Harshad Mehta scam’ and the ‘Ketan
Parekh scam’ had accompanied the boom in the capital market.
Therefore, the need of the hour is to remain alert and increase vigil,
every time there is a bull-run.
Reply of the Government
The irregularities noticed in a few IPOs made during 2003-05 relate
to cornering of shares meant for retail individual investors by some
unscrupulous elements. This happened primarily because a few
intermediaries failed to exercise due diligence and opened numerous
demat and bank accounts in fictitious/benami names without adhering
to KYC norms.
As rightly stated by the Committee, the markets have witnessed
several reforms over the years. These have made the markets more
safe. However, it may be noted that no regulatory system can be fool
proof or completely immue from misuse by unscrupulous elements.
For example, an elaborate criminal law system cannot eliminate crimes
completely from the society. However, there is a system which is able
to detect the irregularities, penalise the miscreants and take corrective
measures to reduce the possibility of recurrence of the same kind of
irregularity.
SEBI has informed that it is of the considered view that the
irregularities in IPOs noticed during the course of SEBI investigations

6
include the abuse of allotment process relating to IPOs by certain
market participants and was not in the nature of “IPO scam”. It has
also informed that it maintains strict vigil on the goings on in the
securities market irrespective of wither it is boom time or otherwise.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee note that the present scam has witnessed a different
modus operandi by the ‘scamsters’ as compared to the previous scams,
in the sense that this time it has struck the primary market instead of
the secondary market. The Committee also note that the ‘scamsters’
this time acted in the garb of investors. Almost all the policies and
directions of SEBI are basically directed at protecting the interests of
the investors. The Committee are, however, at a loss to find that despite
all the safeguards and regulations, the scamsters managed to penetrate
into the system and, with the connivance of key operators or
intermediaries, DPs and banks cornered a sizable chunk of shares meant
for Retail Individual Investors (RIIs).
Reply of the Government
The irregularities noticed in a few IPOs made during 2003-05 relate
to cornering of shares meant for retail individual investors by some
unscrupulous elements. This happened primarily because a few
intermediaries failed to exercise due diligence and opened numerous
demat and bank accounts in fictitious/benami names without adhering
to KYC norms.
It may be noted that no regulatory system can be fool proof or
completely immune from misuse by unscrupulous elements. For
example, an elaborate criminal law system cannot eliminate crimes
completely from the society. However, there is a regulatory system
which is able to detect the irregularities, penalise the miscreants and
take corrective measures to reduce the possibility of recurrence of the
same kind of irregularity .
The measures taken by RBI in this regard include:
• Penalties ranging between Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 30 lakh have
been levied on 10 banks under the Banking Regulations
Act, 1949 for their acts of omission and commission.

7
•V arious internal controls failures observed in the 10 banks
involved in the IPO irregularity have been taken up with
them for corrective action and also circulated among all
other commercial banks to sensitise them on the issue.
• All banks have been advised on January 5, 2006 to take a
review of their IPO portfolio and put up a report in this
regard to their audit committee. All banks have reported
completion of action in this regard.
• Banks have been impressed upon to revisit their internal
control systems, processes and procedures and take
corrective action wherever required and place a report in
this regard before that Audit Committee of the Board. Action
has been completed by all banks in this regard.
•A  directive has been issued on January 23, 2006, prohibiting
the banks from crediting ‘account payee’ cheques to account
of any person other than the payee named therein.
In this regard SEBI has:
• issued interim directions prohibiting all the entities found
involved from dealing in securities market,
• issued a Circular directing the depositories to activate the
ISINs only on the date of commencement of trading on the
stock exchanges,
• completed investigation into the irregularities in IPOs made
during 2003-05,
• initiated quasi-judicial proceedings including enquiry and
adjudication against the entities found involved,
• launched prosecution proceedings against the entities found
involved with a high degree of culpability , and
• issued directions to disgorge the ill-gotten gains.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
According to the information furnished to the Committee by the
Ministry of Finance, Yes Bank Ltd. and IDFC Ltd. came out with their
IPOs in June and July, 2005 respectively. The Committee have been
informed that as per SEBI, certain entities had cornered IPO shares of

8
these two companies reserved for retail applicants, by making
applications in retail category through thousands of fictitious/benami
IPO applicants.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action other than
those stated in reply to Paragraph 18. (Recommendations Sl. No. 2)
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
The Committee also note that during the bull-run there is an
incentive in applying for IPOs, as generally IPOs open on a price
higher than the offer price and the aim of the ‘scamsters’ was to
illegally procure maximum profits which would have otherwise gone
to genuine retail investors. For this, the entire scam was meticulously
pre-planned. It started with an innocent looking advertisement in
newspapers to the public by certain entities offering them photographs
free of cost, which were later used to open several benami/fake bank/
demat accounts.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action other than
those stated in reply to Paragraph 18. ( i.e. reply to Recommendations
Sl. No. 2)
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee also note that the SEBI (DIP) guidelines on IPO
allotment process reserve a 35% of the issue size for RIIs, who can
apply for securities of not more than Rs. 1,00,000. In view of the
limitation on the number of shares a RII can apply, the ‘scamsters’
applied for the maximum possible number of shares per applicant by
making thousands of fake/benami applications, and managed to get
shares allotted under the 35% quota meant for RIIs. The Committee
further note that applications of these fictitious/benami ‘persons’, after
allotment, had also been transferred as shares to their principals namely
Ms. Roopalben Panchal, M/s Sugandh Estates & Investment Pvt. Ltd.

9
etc. and their associates who, in turn, transferred these shares to the
‘financiers’ who had originally made available the funds. The financiers
sold most of these shares on the first day of listing at a price higher
than the offer price, thereby earning huge amount as profit. Thus, the
modus operandi of the ‘scamsters’ shows that there were some ‘master-
minds”, behind Roopalben Panchal and Sugandh Estates and
Investments Pvt. ltd. etc. who were merely the intermediaries or the
“key operators”. These master minds were quite possibly the
‘financiers’.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action other than
those stated in reply to Paragraph 18.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
From the submission made by SEBI, the Committee find that the
Banks and DPs had opened demat accounts without adherence to
prescribed procedure e.g. KYC. Besides forged documents were used
as proofs of identity and address to open these accounts. They,
therefore, strongly believe that there was an active collusion of some
officials from banks and the Depository Participants (DPs) coupled
with the fact that Depositories, DPs, and Banks failed to exercise due
diligence in observing the KYC norms and other guidelines. The
Committee recommend that the role of such entities (intermediaries,
financiers etc.) should be investigated thoroughly and deterrent
punishment awarded befitting the irregularities committed.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has:
a. completed investigation into the irregularities in IPOs made
during 2003-2005,
b. issued appropriate directions against the key operators and
financiers and the DPs and depositories,
c. initiated quasi-judicial proceedings including enquiry and
adjudication against the entities found involved,
d. launched prosecution proceedings against the, entities found
involved with a high degree of culpability,

10
e. initiated adjudication proceedings against merchant bankers
for irregularities in discharge of their post issue obligations,
and
f. issued directions to disgorge the ill-gotten gains.
RBI has informed that it has:
a. levied penalties ranging between Rs. 5 lakh to Rs. 30 lakh
10 banks under the Banking Regulations Act, 1949 for their
acts of omission and commission,
b. kept pending the applications received from them for
opening of branches, currency chests etc. due to regulatory
discomfort arising out of the involvement of these banks in
the IPO related issues, and
c. asked the banks concerned to fix staff accountability and
look into the criminality in this regard. Banks have examined
these aspects and wherever necessary, initiated appropriate
disciplinary action against the officers/employees for their
lapses/negligence and or acts of collusion.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
As to how the scam was brought to light, the Committee note
SEBI’s claim that as a part of their ongoing weekly surveillance activity,
they passed on the ‘off-market transactions’ data obtained from
depositories to the stock exchanges, which, in their preliminary
observations on the IPO of Yes Bank Ltd., hinted at the possibility of
large scale ‘off market transactions’ immediately prior to the listing on
the stock exchanges. During subsequent examination, the Surveillance
Wing of SEBI claimed to have detected large scale multiple demat
accounts with common addresses by a few entities.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
In this regard, the Committee also take note of the submission
made by SEBI that out of 105 IPOs made in 2003-2005, irregularities

11
were detected in 21 IPOs. On the other hand, CBDT had informed the
Committee that during their search and seizure operation in October,
2005 on Shri Puroshottam Budhwani, (alleged to be one of the ‘key
operators’ involved in the scam), it was found that he was maintaining
more than 11,000 demat accounts in the names of various benami
entities, which were utilised for making multiple applications in various
IPOs since 1999. The Committee further note that during the period
2003-05, as per CBDT, Shri Purshottam Budhwani had utilised benami
demat accounts to make applications in around 30 IPOs.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
This discrepancy in the number of IPOs that had irregularities
during 2003-05 as projected by SEBI and CBDT, was clarified by the
Ministry of Finance as occurring due to the difference in parameters
in short listing the IPOs by SEBI based on a set of criteria, i.e. by
adopting the floor level of 500 or more dematerialised account holders
for determining the suspect multiple demat accounts in typical samples.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
The Committee observe from the investigative findings of SEBI’s
Interim Order that certain financiers and key operators connived with
some DPs and banks in opening demat accounts and bank accounts in
fictitious/benami names in utter disregard of KYC norms. The
Committee also note that the depositories have carried out the
inspections of DPs in a casual and perfunctory manner. From the
information made available to them, the Committee find that SEBI has
initiated enquiry/adjudication/prosecution proceedings keeping in view
the status of its findings against various entities, such as financiers,
key operators, DPs etc. who were found involved in the IPO scam.

12
The Committee recommend that concerted efforts should be made by
SEBI and Ministry of Finance to detect and bring to light the real
culprits, establish the personal and institutional inter-linkages among
the beneficiaries, key operators and financiers, establish irrefutable
evidence against them and bring them to book. The Committee also
feel that the irregularity should not be played down by stating that it
occurred mainly due to the failure of KYC norms/guidelines. Since
scores of benami multple demat accounts were opened and a linkage
between key operators and financiers, who had craftily planned this
manipulation was evident, the Committee strongly feel that this
manipulation/irregularity is nothing but a scam in the primary market.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has concluded investigations in the matter
and various quasi-judicial proceedings against the concerned entities
are in progress. It has also launched prosecution proceedings against
the entities found involved with a high degree of culpability.
It has further stated that without detracting from the gravity of
the offence, it is of the considered view that the irregularities in IPOs
noticed during the course of SEBI investigations represented abuse of
IPO process of Key Operators/Financiers etc. and were not in the
nature of “a scam in the Primary Market”.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
In this connection, however, the Committee note that SEBI during
their course of investigation had found that 24 master accountholders
or key operators had made off-market transfers to financiers, which
were stated to be 85 in number. The Committee further note that SEBI
had issued appropriate directions against these financiers. However,
during the study tour of the Committee at Mumbai, the Status Report
on IPO investigations by SEBI on 4th July, 2006 was made available
which stated that the number of financiers was 82. Therefore, the
Committee cannot but conclude that there is a discrepancy in the
number of financiers involved as per the records of SEBI, which affects
the credibility of its investigation and therefore needs to be rectified
immediately. They urge the Government to resole the matter and come
out with a definite figure about the number of financiers indicted.

13
Reply of the Government
SEBI has clarified that the difference in the number of financiers
is due to a clerical/typographical error. Three financiers were counted
twice which inflated the number of financiers from the actual 82 to
the erroneous 85. The error has since been rectified and the correct
figure of financiers is 82.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
The Committee take serious note of the fact that as per the findings
of SEBI an intermediary, namely, Karvy DP managed to prevail upon
a bank i.e. BhOB to such an extent that the bank was lulled into
complacence in utter disregard to the KYC norms. In this context, the
Committee were dismayed to note that in the IPO of Yes Bank, Karvy
Registrar to the Issue (RTI) had issued a single refund under no. 400002
favouring BhOB for Rs. 53.89 crores in respect of 12,676 IPO applicants
and in the IPO of IDFC, it had issued single refund order no. 610003
for Rs. 27.35 crores favouring BhOB in respect of 6878 IPO applicants.
The fact that Karvy RTI had made consolidated refund favouring BhOB
in respect of thousands of IPO applicants and that the Karvy Group
was directing the investment of funds in respect of IPO applications
are real eye openers. The Committee also note that Karvy had very
conveniently issued an idea paper to BhOB certifying that the
applications received for the IPO offer were valid, which shows the
extent to which Karvy could prevail upon the Bank. They feel that the
discreet arrangement for mutual benefit of BhOB and Karvy would
have gone further ahead had there been no unearthing of the IPO
scam.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that some banks had credited the proceeds of
individual account payee cheques to third party accounts instead of
accounts of respective payees on the request of the associates of the
DPs. This had resulted in the manipulation of the payment system
and facilitated the perpatration of irregularities. This manipulation
would not have taken place but for the banks deviating from the
procedure for collection of account payee cheques. Accordingly, a
directive has been issued on January 23, 2006, prohibiting the banks
from crediting ‘account payee’ cheques to account of any person other
than the payee named therein.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)
The Committee are convinced that the role of Karvy Group of
Companies in the IPO Scam was questionable right from the beginning.
They find that SEBI has indicated Karvy in the Directions contained
in their interim order dated 27.4.2006. Subsequent to that, Karvy had
submitted their position to SEBI which has been refuted by SEBI in its
another interim order dated 26.5.2005 wherein the latter has analysed
the role of Karvy Group of Companies. The Committee, therefore,
expect SEBI to conduct through investigation in all areas of
manipulation allegedly done by the Karvy Group and take stringent
action against them and also present a strong case in the Court of
Law.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that the role and activities of Karvy group
including Karvy DP have been examined in detail and the findings
are narrated in the SEBI interim order dated April 27, 2006. The SEBI
order dated May 26, 2006 was a post decisional order after considering
the submissions of Karvy group in response to the ex-parte interim
order. Karvy DP has filed an appeal before the Hon’ble Securities
Appellate Tribunal which has heard the matter and the order of SAT
is awaited.
SEBI has further informed that investigations have been completed
and quasi judicial proceedings including Enquiries and Adjudications
have been initiated against Karvy group. Prosecution proceeding have
also been launched against Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. and its directors.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
From the investigations to the activities of certain banks in the
IPO scam by RBI, the Committee note that so far, the following ten
banks, namely (i) Bharat Overseas Bank Ltd. (BhOB), (ii) Vijaya Bank,
(iii) Indian Overseas Bank, (iv) HDFC Bank, (v) ICICI Bank,
(vi) Citibank, (vii) Standard Chartered Bank, (viii) ING Vysya Bank,
(ix) IDBI Ltd. and (x) Centurian Bank of Punjab were found to have
violated RBI directives, guidelines and instructions relating to opening
of accounts, KYC norms, AML Standards, IPO financing and sanction
of loans against shares. This facilitated manipulation of IPO process
by certain unscrupulous individuals/entities for cornering the retail

15
portion of shares. It is clear beyond doubt that either these banks
allowed their system to be misutilised by the scamsters or fell prey to
the traps of ‘key operators’ of this scam. The Committee find that
now RBI has advised all scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs)
to: (i) take a review of IPO financing and related matters, (ii) adhere
to KYC/AML guidelines and RBI’s instructions on IPO financing etc.
RBI has also taken up examination of the internal control systems of
some banks to assess weaknesses with regard to the IPO financing etc.
While noting that the inspection of RBI is limited to certain select
banks only to detect irregularities, the Committee are also convinced
that the primary responsibility lies with the internal control system of
the banks which proved to be a complete failure in the wake of IPO
scam.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that it has taken the following steps to strengthen
the internal control systems in banks:—
• Study of the internal control systems in the banks found
involved in the scam.
• Circulation of the findings among all scheduled commercial
banks (excluding RRBs) as part of the effort to disseminate
information on lessons learnt as also to impress upon the
banks to revisit their internal control systems, processes and
procedures and take corrective action, wherever required
and place before their Audit Committee of their Board a
report in this regard. All banks have completed the review.
• As a part of strengthening the inspection process conducted
by RBI, the entire inspection methodology of branch
inspection was revisited and detailed format prescribed for
conducting branch inspection, which lay special emphasis
on the adherence to KYC/AML transactions.
• RBI appointed a group to look into the system of concurrent
audit process in the banks and to suggest ways to improve
the system. The group is in the process of finalizing their
report.
• Detailed instructions have been issued to Regional offices
of RBI, impressing upon the need to closely examine KYC/
AML angle during inspection.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

16
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
The Committee are particularly dismayed at the irresponsible role
played by some of the branches of the Bharat Overseas Bank in favour
in Karvy DP . The Committee are also surprised to note that serious
revelations have come up during the course of investigation by RBI as
it has alleged that the then Chairman and CEO of the Bharat Overseas
Bank was reportedly aware of the unhealthy practices indulged in by
M/s Karvy. The Committee have been informed that the bank has
initiated major penalty proceedings against him. The Committee also
find in this connection that the Board of Directors of the bank has
charged him with certain irregularities such as concealing material
information from the Board/Audit Committee of the Board, wrong
reporting etc. and RBI has brought this fact to the notice of CBI which
is investigating the case. The Committee are shocked as to how an
official, who is at the helm of affairs, can afford to flout the norms so
conveniently. They, therefore, urge RBI to issue strict directives to the
management/Boards of Directors of all Banks to ensure that prudential
norms/instructions/directives/guidelines issued by RBI from time to
time are scrupulously followed by all the banks.
Reply of the Government
RBI has issued a circular to the banks on January 12, 2007 that
prudential norms/instructions/directives/guidelines issued by RBI from
time to time should be scrupulously followed by all banks and non-
observance to the same would invite stringent action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21)
It was also observed by the Committee, during their study visit at
Mumbai that one more bank, namely the Tamil Nadu Mercantile Bank
Ltd. has been found to be involved in the irregularities by RBI. RBI
has concluded its investigations in respect of the bank and is yet to
initiate action based on the findings of the investigation. Moreover,
the Committee feel that there may be more banks or the same banks
that may have been frequently involved in the irregularities prior to
this period. The Committee, therefore, feel that further investigation
must be conducted in this respect and appropriate action taken.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that in addition to the 10 banks where penalty
was imposed for IPO related irregularities, investigations were also

17
taken up at Tamil Nadu Mercantile Bank Ltd. The irregularities
observed in the bank were found to be mainly limited to non-
compliance with the KYC guidelines. Violation in regard to IPO
financing was observed only in two accounts and that too on a very
small scale.
As regards the other banks, earlier inspections had not revealed
any PIO related irregularities. However, inspecting officers have been
advised to be on the look out for any such deficiency both at the time
of inspection of head offices of the banks and at the time of branch
inspection. Wherever irregularities are noticed, suitable action would
be taken.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22)
The Committee note the submission made by RBI that there was
no pecuniary benefits to the Banks in the scam. However, on the other
hand SEBI’s position about informal arrangement between Karvy DP
& DhOB, that both came together on commercial considerations and
not for any altruistic purposes sounds more convincing to the
Committee. The Committee would, at the same time, like to believe
that some of the Banks have fallen into the trap rather unwittingly
and opine that they could have been saved from this, had they
diligently followed KYC norms prescribed by RBI.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24)
The Committee further recommend that the RBI should periodically
monitor the stipulated exposure of banks to the capital market.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that the exposure of banks in the capital market
is being monitored on a monthly basis and at shorter intervals during
the period of volatility in the market. This is reported to the technical
Committee as well as the High Level Co-ordination Committee (HLC)

18
consisting of RBI, SEBI, IRDA and PFRDA. A detailed revised circular
on capital market exposure has been issued to banks on December 15,
2006.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25)
The Committee note that as per the Depositories Act, 1996, the
Depository is deemed to be the registered owner for the purposes of
effecting transfer of ownership of security on behalf of a beneficial
owner. They also find that SEBI has full regulatory control over the
Depositories.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26)
In regard to the role of the depositories in the IPO scam, the
Committee have been informed that SEBI had in its interim order
indicted both the depositories, namely NSDL and CDSL for turning a
blind eye to the deficiencies in the functioning of DPs and thereby
facilitating the irregularities in the IPO Scam of 2005. The Committee
also find it very disturbing that NSDL was aware of the irregularities
in connection with opening of accounts from the year 2003, which is
evident from the inspection report of HDFC Bank, KSBL etc. and that
SEBI had accused them of failing to take prompt action against the
DPs. The Committee find that NSDL has approached SAT to contest
these allegations.
Reply of the Government
This observation does not require any specific action.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28)
The Committee have been given to understand that NSDL Board
has delegated certain powers and responsibilities in accordance with

19
the provisions of the bye-laws regarding suspensions/expulsions/
freezing the accounts of a DP as well as conducting inspections,
investigation, inquiries etc., to a Disciplinary Action Committee (DAC).
However, as per SEBI’s interim order, inspite of repeated violations by
DPS, no reference was ever made to the DAC by NSDL. Moreover,
the Committee are shocked that even in this scenario the DAC of
NSDL had not met since its inception. They wonder as for what
purpose  the DAC was constituted in NSDL as no reference was ever
made to it despite violations of the bye-laws by DPs, being noticed
repeatedly by it (NSDL). This puts a question mark over the seriousness
with which DPs are being inspected by the NSDL. In case of any such
error noticed in future, the matter should invariably be referred to
DAC so that exemplary punishment is given to them.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that subsequent to inspection by SEBI in April/
May 2005, the DAC has met 6 times.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29)
The Committee find that as per CDSL, they conduct inspections of
all DPs and their ‘live connected’ branches every year, either by their
own officials or by empanelled auditors. In this regard, the Committee
are of the view that the depositories should streamline their system of
inspection with a view to make it a continuous process rather than an
‘annual ritual’. Further, the Committee desire that the Depositories
should not remain oblivious of what is transpiring below and therefore
should have a system of inspection which could actually detect the
irregularities/manipulations. In line with their above recommendation,
the Committee desire that the depositories should direct the Depository
participants to introduce ‘concurrent audit’, which should also be a
continuous process.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that:
a. NSDL, vide circular dated June 24, 2006, has made concurrent
audit mandatory to verify the process of opening of demat
accounts and execution and verification of delivery
instruction slips.

20
b. CDSL, vide communique dated July 11, 2006, has made
concurrent audit mandatory to examine the various risk
prone areas, including demat account opening, maintenance,
issuance and the execution of the instruction slips, etc.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30)
The Committee find that in the recent IPO scam several rules/
guidelines prescribed by SEBI, as well as some provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 have been blatantly violated as is evident from
the conclusions following the investigations carried out by RBI and
SEBI. They note that adherence to KYC/AML guidelines was almost
nil both by the banks as well as the DPs. As per the action taken by
SEBI, the Committee note that so far SEBI has passed Interim Orders
restraining some entities, (who were responsible for the irregularities
in the case of Yes Bank & IDFC IPOs) from participating in all future
IPOs and have directed the Depositories to activate International
Securities Identification Numbers (ISINs) only on the date of
commencement of trading on stock exchanges. They feel that this
measure would be helpful in restraining off-market transactions, which
have been grossly abused in the present case to corner the benefits by
the ‘scamasters’, and recommend the Government to explore the option
of making it a permanent feature. The Committee also expect that
investigations will be finalized at the earliest so that SEBI comes out
with a final report on the IPO scam.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has issued a Circular directing the
depositories to activate the ISINs only on the date of commencement
of trading on the stock exchanges. It has further informed that it has
already completed investigations into the irregularities in IPOs made
during 2003-2005. Appropriate actions have been taken/are being taken
against the entities found involved in the irregularities. All efforts are
being made to expedite the proceedings.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31)
The Committee note that CBDT is also investigating the matter as
they have detected a number of breaches with respect to income tax.

21
However, the legal position according to CBDT is that the returns
showing the income arising out of profits earned from the unfair
transactions by the beneficiaries of the scam are due in the Financial
year, 2006-07. The Committee further note that as per CBDT, some of
the entities involved in the scam have paid advance tax taking into
account the profits which they would have earned. In this connection,
CBDT has sought to ensure the Committee that the source of money
for making applications by the entities involved is under their
investigation. In this regard, the Committee urge CBDT to select these
particular cases for scrutiny assessment and proceed on the matter
accordingly. The CBDT should ensure that the illegal benefits earned
by the scamasters are retrieved in full.
Reply of the Government
CBDT has informed that it has noted the recommendation for
implementation. The assessment in such cases and recovery of tax
demand shall be carried out as per statutory provisions of the Income
Tax Act, 1961.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32)
The Committee also observe that section 68A of the Companies
Act very clearly lays down that any person who attempts to and
induces to issue a security in a fictitious name, is guilty of violation
of the relevant provision of the Act and can be prosecuted and
imprisoned up to 5 years. The Committee opine that in the instant
case, the stringent implementation of the law has left much to be
desired. They feel that the law regarding fake accounts is quite clear
and recommend that the perpetrators of the opening of fictitious/
benami accounts be prosecuted under this section.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has already launched prosecution against
the concerned entities for making fictitious applications under section
68A. Ministry of Company Affairs has informed that it has issued
instructions for taking legal action under section 68A read with section
621 of the Companies Act in respect of IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

22
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33)
The Committee are concerned to note that the law as such does
not impose any restriction on multiple applications. They note that the
maximum consequence that a person indulging in making multiple
applications, is rejection of all applications. In this regard, they take
note of the suggestion made by CDSL, that the Companies Act must
be amended to make the submission of multiple applications, an
offence. The Committee recall that they had in their 40th Report on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs
emphasized that the Government should expedite the introduction of
the comprehensive amendment to Companies Act. The Committee
recommend that the above submission by CDSL may be examined as
a part of the exercise for comprehensive revision of the Companies
Act, 1956.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Company Affairs has informed that the relevant
provisions of the Companies Act in this regard are being reviewed as
part of the comprehensive revision of the Companies Act presently
being undertaken by the Government.
SEBI has informed that there is no specific legal bar on making
multiple applications. SEBI (DIP) Guidelines, 2000 require the Lead
Merchant Banker to the issue to weed out such applications. However,
multiple applications made through different demat accounts pursuant
to a manipulative or fraudulent or deceptive device to garner allotment
more than the entitlement in the issue and to defraud the investors
are violative of section 12A of the SEBI Act, 1992 and the SEBI
(Prohibition of Fraudulent and Unfair Trade Practice Relating to
Securities Market) Regulations, 2003.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34)
The Committee also recall that the JPC on Stock Market scam, in
their report presented in December, 2002 had recommended the
necessity of a Joint Group of RBI-SEBI on Integrated System of Alerts.
They also observe that accordingly an Integrated Market Surveillance
System has been designed to monitor the market activities across
various stock exchanges and market segments. This, they feel, is
essential so as to detect the irregularities at the initial stages. In this

23
connection, the officials of RBI, BSE, NSE, NSDL and CDSL have stated
to have met and decided that information provided by Stock Exchanges
and Depositories should assist in providing meaningful alerts so as to
enable the RBI to take up the matter. The Committee also note that
SEBI has signed an agreement with a consortium of HCLT and
SMARTS Ply. Ltd., Australia in May , 2005 for implementation of a
Comprehensive Integrated Market Surveillance System for monitoring
market activities in India. The Committee feel that an early action
should be taken by authorities on these matters. The Committee would
also like to place on record their unhappiness over the fact that overall
the Government have failed to impart due seriousness to the
recommendations given by the two JPCs on scams.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has operationalised on December 1, 2006
the Integrated Market Surveillance System for monitoring securities
market activities and to keep an effective oversight on the surveillance
functioning of exchanges and depositories.
MoF, through its various action taken reports, has already indicated
the actions taken on the recommendations/observations of JPCs.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

24
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35)
The modus operandi involved in the IPO scam was to open
multiple or fake accounts. In this regard, the Committee have been
informed by the Depositories that as an interim measure, quoting of
PAN has been made compulsory from April 1, 2006 for new accounts
and mandatory submission of copy of PAN card till October, 2006 for
old demat accounts. Besides, the Committee note that efforts are being
made to introduce a Unique Identification Number (UIN) for investors
and compulsory quoting of the same in financial transactions. For this,
a centralized database of Market Participants and Investors (MAPIN)
for the registration of all the participants is being created. The
Committee find that there has been some progress in allotting a Unique
Identification Number (UIN) as part of the work relating to the creation
of central database of MAPIN for registration of all market participants.
They, however, note that certain concerns and difficulties have been
expressed by the common investors, during the course of
implementation of allotment of a UIN. The Committee are disappointed
with the current scenario of delay and uncertainty in so far as
introduction of UIN and creation of MAPIN is concerned which in
their view, could have contributed substantially in making perpetuation
of this kind of scam difficult. They expect the Ministry of Finance and
SEBI to attend to the difficulties expeditiously with a view to find an
amicable solution and create a comprehensive central database of
MAPIN at the earliest. They feel that this move will impart uniqueness
to natural and juridical persons thereby enabling the regulator to take
adequate risk containment measures which, in turn, will go a long
way in reducing and ultimately eliminating benami transactions in
securities.
Reply of the Government
MOF shares the concerns expressed by the Committee. It has
decided to discontinue the use of various identification numbers
presently in vogue. As an investor friendly measure and in the interest
of enforcement actions, it proposes to mandate use of only one

25
identification number, namely PAN, for all participants in the securities
market. The accounts managers (Depositories, Exchanges, Mutual
Funds, Intermediaries, etc.) will use the PAN as core number and add
a few alpha numeric prefix and/or suffix to this PAN to distinguish
the accounts of a participant with different depositories or banks or
their branches. There will be an obligation on every person not to
have more than one account with one account manager. Similar
opposite obligation will be imposed on the account managers. This
has been proposed in the budget for 2007-08.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

26
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
The Committee are apprehensive that though as per SEBI
irregularities were committed in respect of 21 IPOs during 2003-2005,
yet the scam with such seemingly simple modus operandi may have
been continuing, in a clandestine manner for a long time. In this
connection, the Committee note the submission made by Ministry of
Finance that investigation by SEBI as well as Income Tax Department
seem to indicate that to a limited extent this started in 1999. Although,
the Ministry of Finance were repeatedly asked to furnish information
about IPOs where irregularities were noticed since 1999, the Committee
are disappointed that no such information was furnished to them.
They are of the view that there is enough scope for further probe in
the matter. They, therefore, recommend that a complete investigation
of all the IPOs floated since 1999 should be carried out so that exact
number and other details of the IPOs where irregularities have taken
place in the past, could come out and appropriate action taken. The
Committee further desire that the outcome of such investigations and
action taken thereon may be intimated to them.
Reply of the Government
MoF had repeatedly requested SEBI to furnish a list of IPOs where
irregularities were noticed since 1999. However, SEBI did not respond
on this and hence MoF could not furnish this information to the
Committee. On MoF, vide its letter dated January 25, 2007, specifically
asking the reasons for not submitting the required information, SEBI
has informed vide letter dated February 2, 2007 that such details are
not available with SEBI as no investigation in regard to such IPOs
was conducted.
RBI has informed that all banks have completed the review of
their IPO finance portfolio for past three years. It has advised, vide its
letter dated January 12, 2007, all banks to take a similar review for the
earlier period starting from 1999 and forward the findings together
with the comments of their audit committees to RBI with in 2 months.
Appropriate action would be taken on the irregularities.

27
CBDT has sought information in respect of IPOs, floated since
1999 and where irregularities have taken place so that appropriate
action can be taken from the income tax angle.
SEBI has stated that IDFC was the IPO in which the largest number
of afferent demat accounts was used. It has found that the earliest
period during which these afferent accounts were opened was during
the year 2003. Accordingly. It has examined the IPOs during 2003 to
2005. Besides, it feels that the available resources and time of SEBI
would be better employed for finalizing follow-up actions (such as
enquiries, adjudications, passing of final orders against key operators
and financiers, etc.) rather than in conducting probe into IPOs since
1999 which in all probability is unlikely to reveal involvement of any
entity other than those already identified by SEBI. It also feels that
this view is reinforced by the fact that in the subsequent IPOs no such
irregularities have come to notice.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36)
Though the Committee find that SEBI, RBI and CBDT have taken
action against DPs, Banks, Depositories as well as individual
perpetrators of the scam, it would have been in the fitness of things,
had SEBI acted timely in taking action against the damage that has
already been done by way of irregularities in the IPO process. However,
they are perturbed over the fact that the irregularities in the IPOs are
believed to have been going on since 1999 and the authorities have
not made any effort so far to detect the irregularities in the IPO process
since 1999 to 2003. The Committee, therefore, recommend SEBI to first
expedite its investigations and take suitable action against concerned
entities involved in the IPO scam. In addition, they recommend that
the Government should spare no efforts to investigate and unearth
any kind of manipulations in the IPOs since 1999 without further
delay. Besides, the pace of progress in various areas of market reforms
needs to be speeded up to deal with such scams in future.
Reply of the Government
SEBI is of the view that the available resources and time of SEBI
would be better employed for finalizing follow up actions (such as
enquiries, adjudications, passing of final orders against key operators
and financiers etc.) rather than in conducting probe into IPOs since
1999 which in all probability is unlikely to reveal involvement of any
entity other than those already identified by SEBI.
The reforms in the market are a continuous process.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]

28
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
The Committee are also dismayed at the finding of SEBI, contained
in their Interim Order dated 27.4.2006 that Haribhakti & Co., the
internal auditors of Karvy, failed to check or report the multiple account
opening by the DP , Karvy Stock Broking Ltd. They note that findings
of SEBI have been forwarded by the Ministry of Finance to ICAI for
further necessary action. In this context, the Committee desire that
ICAI must take up the matter seriously and take stringent action against
the internal auditor.
Reply of the Government
MoF has conveyed this recommendation of the Committee to ICAI
on 29th December 2006. The ICAI has informed that it had received
the comments/clarification from the Chartered Accountants concerned
in the matter and would complete the examination of the same by
15th March 2007. Thereafter, it would follow the procedure prescribed
in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
MoF has advised ICAI to complete the proceedings expeditiously
and in any case not later than 30th June 2007.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
As per the preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance, the
Committee note that the profits to the financiers in the manipulated
IPOs of Yes Bank and IDFC, which have been investigated could be
to the tune of Rs. 72.38 crore. The Committee feel that these profits
should have actually gone to the RIIs, whose quota of shares were
illegally cornered by the ‘scamsters’, and therefore, apprehend that
genuine retail investors might lose faith in the regulation of capital
market ultimately, if they continue to remain unprotected from the
‘scamasters’ who craftily design plans to deprive them of their genuine
profits.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has worked out the gains made on
account of cornering of retail portion of IPOs during 2003-05 including

29
those of YES Bank and IDFC. The gains made through all the afferent
demat accounts aggregate to Rs. 115.82 crore. Accordingly, SEBI vide
order dated November 21, 2006 has directed the depositories and the
concerned DPs to disgorge the ill-gotten gains. It has also informed
that in the meantime, the Securities Appellate Tribunal has, vide orders
dated 11th January, 2007, stayed the operation of the said SEBI’s orders
against the depositories and DPs except one DP (Jhaveri Securities
Private Ltd.).
Vide letter dated 21st February, 2006, MoF advised SEBI to,
inter-alia, consider effectively undoing the cornering of the IPO issues
by the manipulators. While responding to a supplementary to the
Starred Question No. 245 on 8th December 2006, FM has stated: “Once
it is disgorged, I have advised SEBI that the next step would be to
reallocate the shares from the persons who did not deserve to be
allocated the shares to the persons who should have been allocated
the shares.” Vide letter dated December 22, 2006, MoF has requested
SEBI to take appropriate action and complete the process of reallocation
of shares within a period of three months.
[Ministry of Finance O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)
The Committee also feel that a mechanism needs to be devised at
the level of SEBI, which could enable detection of any irregularity
taking place at the DP or Depository level at an early stage. Although
actions have been taken by the Ministry of Finance and SEBI, the
Committee are of the considered view that SEBI should play more
proactive and vigilant role in future in monitoring the functioning of
Depositories. Guidelines and ‘standing operating procedure’ should be
prepared and codified by SEBI to minimize the ‘grey’ areas in the
process of ‘monitoring’. The Committee, therefore, desire that a time-
frame not exceeding three months for codifying these be fixed.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has informed that it has put in place a mechanism of
conducting periodic surveillance meetings with depositories wherein
the depositories are required to alert SEBI regarding any abnormalities
which would enable SEBI to detect irregularities, if any, at the
depository level/DP level at an early stage.
It has further informed that it has given careful attention to the
observations and recommendations of the Committee. It has stated
that there does not appear to be any grey area in the process of
monitoring of depositories.
However, in view of the recommendations of the Committee,
Government has advised SEBI to re-examine if there are no grey areas
in monitoring the functioning of the depositories and, therefore, there

30
is no need for preparing and codifying guidelines and standing
operating procedures. SEBI has been requested to complete this
re-examination within three months.
[Ministry of Finance, O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18)
At the same time, the Committee also feel that Government should
review the system of an “integrated Intermediary”. As a major part of
the malfunctioning leading to the scam could be attributed to the role
of the intermediary, the Karvy Group of Companies which performed
multiple functions in all directions, the Committee feel that the role of
such intermediaries should be examined minutely with a view to see
that those operating in multiple capacity are not able to manipulate
the system. The Committee feel that law should be examined with a
view to separating the various functions of the intermediaries so that
not only there is complete separation of functions, but the management
including the Board of Directors of different entities is also not common.
They feel that perhaps similar steps may also be initiated in the case
of intermediaries operating in the primary market, so as to bring the
desired impact and thus urge SEBI to actively examine the possibility
thereof.
Reply of the Government
The development of integrated market intermediaries providing a
one stop shop to investors for the various securities market dealings
is a positive development around the world. It may be out of sync
with the global market development to prescribe a system of function-
specific intermediaries. Instead, effective regulation and monitoring and
control systems, evolved for maintaining a vigil on their activities and
tracing the warning signals will be a feasible and viable option.
SEBI has been advised to identify the conflict of interest if any
entity provides more than one intermediation services and prescribe
appropriate safeguards to address them. SEBI has been requested to
complete this process within three months.
[Ministry of Finance, O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23)
The Committee take note of the monetary penalties imposed by
RBI on erring Banks. They also note the staff accountability fixed by
the respective banks, (which were found involved in irregularities in
IPOs) as well as the examination of criminality on the part of employees
of these banks. RBI has also sought to assure the Committee that
regulatory discomfort, in addition to the penalties would be imposed
on the Banks involved in the IPO Scam. However, the Committee
strongly feel that the transgression from the guidelines/instructions of

31
the RBI has not taken place without the connivance of officials of the
banks, who were found responsible for the irregularities in flouting
KYC norms. Therefore, they should be appropriately punished so as
to serve as an effective deterrent in future. The Committee further feel
that more stringent punishment be meted out to banks which are
found to be repeatedly indulging in malpractices. Besides, whenever
‘grey areas’ in the existing legal provisions are identified, new rules to
clear the ambiguities in such greay areas should be made on an urgent
basis. They also recommend that criminal proceeding be initiated by
these banks against such employees, who were involved in flouting
KYC norms, promptly. Merely causing ‘Regulator Discomfort’ to the
“scamster” banks do not convey necessary ‘message’ to the individuals
who are the real culprits. Hence, a clear cut, strong and prompt
punishment must be provided for in the system, itself so that the fear
of ‘personal punishment’ is there.
Reply of the Government
RBI has informed that:
• Regulatory guidelines/instructions are already in place to
ensure continuous best practices in the RBI regulated entities.
The guidelines/directions etc. are continuously reviewed/
revised to ensure that there are no grey areas in regulation
and supervision of banks. Regulation and supervision being
an ever evolving process, new rules and regulations are
prescribed as and when the situation warrants.
• As required by RBI, the 9 banks involved in the IPO related
irregularities have already examined criminality against
officials/employees in the matter. One bank is still
investigating the matter and the final report is awaited.
• Regulatory discomfort conveys necessary message to the
banks, as it has a bearing on their future plans for expansion
or regulatory approval for various purposes.
[Ministry of Finance, O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27)
The Committee are also disappointed to note SEBI’s observation
that there was recurrence of the same errors by DPs year after year,
relating to account opening and this was noticed by NSDL also in its
various inspections and it had commented on them in its reports year
after year. However, NSDL took no action against DPs. The Committee
view it as a very serious matter that the inspection reports have been
reduced to a mere routine formality and scant regard is paid to the
implementation of the guidelines/regulations prescribed by SEBI as
well as the spirit of the Depositories Act, 1996. The Committee are
also of the opinion that had SEBI been vigilant, the overlooking of the

32
recurrence of same errors year after year by the Depositories would
have been tackled earlier. They feel that the ultimate onus of regulating
the capital market rests with SEBI, which is also vested with the power
to call for information from a Depository as well as DP and make an
enquiry or inspection in relation to the affairs of the Depository or the
DP , as the case may be. That this was not done is nothing but
regrettable. The Committee note the observation by SEBI that NSDL
conducted inspections in a casual, cursory and perfunctory manner.
They recommend that SEBI should introspect to find out the reasons
as to why the matter could not be addressed by SEBI earlier. At the
same time, they prima facie feel that both the Depositories have fared
poorly in conducting their inspection of Depository Participants
registered with them. They, therefore, recommend that both NSDL and
CDSL, should devise in consultation with SEBI, a uniform system of
inspection of the DPs registered with them. This exercise should
incorporate the best practices being followed internationally. The
Depositories must strive to see that their inspection process is capable
of detecting the irregularities/manipulations being done by individuals/
entities rather than being just system-specific. The Committee
recommend that serious thought may be given to the suggestion of
SEBI regarding revamping of management of the Depositories so that
the detection of any possible violation of the KYC norms/guidelines/
various regulations that regulate the conduct of the Depository
Participants is possible at the initial stage.
Reply of the Government
SEBI has stated that since the entire manipulation occurred because
of hoodwinking of the existing system, the same could not have been
captured in routine inspections. Only a focused inspection based on
real time information/alerts etc. could really provide the necessary
insights into the irregularities. It has called both the Depositories for
a discussion to strengthen their inspection process and also to ensure
uniformity in this regard.
SAT has, vide order dated 12.6.2006, stayed the SEBI direction
relating to revamping of management of the depositories.
SEBI has been advised to find out the reasons as to why the
matter could not be addressed by SEBI earlier and to strengthen the
system of inspection of DPs by Depositories. SEBI has been requested
to complete this process within three months.
[Ministry of Finance, O.M. No. 6/7/PM/2006 dated 7.3.2007,
Department of Economic Affairs]
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

33
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:
(i) Draft action Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 51st Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

34
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation;
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and
(vii) above with modifications as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
ANNEXURE
(a) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 52nd Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
(b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 53rd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Planning.
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
(c) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 55th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 43rd Report on “Efficacy of Reform Process
in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam”.
Para Line Amendments/Modifications
71 Insert the following sentence at the beginning of the para:
“The inordinate delay in completing
investigation and giving deterrent punishment
leave room for suspicion regarding involvement
of important officials of the banks and other
agencies in furthering the IPO scam”.
74 After
“…same”
Add
“at the earliest”
77 After
“…in progress”
Add
“at the earliest”
14 7 After
“…by the Committee”
Add
“and the Committee be informed of the steps
taken in this regard”

36
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN THE FORTY - THIRD
REPORT OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘EFFICACY OF REFORM
PROCESS IN CAPITAL MARKET—RECENT IPO SCAM’
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 36 100%
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have 27 75%
been accepted by the Government
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24,
25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 & 34]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 1 02.77%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. No. 35]
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 2 05.55%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 12 & 36]
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect 6 16.66%
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 7, 8, 15,
18, 23 & 27]

SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
[Action taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Forty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
‘Efficacy of Reform Process in the Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


COF No. 65
Price : Rs. 44.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 5
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 24
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 26
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
28th November, 2007............................................................. 33
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Forty-third
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Efficacy of Reform Process
in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’ ............................. 36
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixty-fifth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Forty-third Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Efficacy of Reform Process in Capital
Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
2. The Forty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 28th November, 2006. Replies indicating action taken
on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished
by the Government on 7th March, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Forty-third Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

65
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
[Action taken Report on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Forty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
‘Efficacy of Reform Process in the Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’]
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
