12
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 ( Saka)


TWELFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.2.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 25.2.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)


COF No. 12
Price : Rs. 36.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
6th October, 2004 .................................................................... 21
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
16th November, 2004 ............................................................. 23
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
17th November, 2004 ............................................................. 25
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
5th January, 2005 ..................................................................... 29
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
17th January, 2005 ................................................................... 31
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
18th January, 2005 ................................................................... 33
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
27th January, 2005 ................................................................... 35
APPENDIX
The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill,
2003. ............................................................................................ 39

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2004-2005
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twelfth Report on the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
2. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2003 and was referred
to the Committee on 18th August, 2004 by the Hon’ble Speaker of
Lok Sabha for examination and report thereon.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry
of Company Affairs who also briefed them at their sitting held on 6th
October, 2004.
4. The Committee sought memoranda from the Chambers of
Commerce and the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
on the Bill. They took oral evidence of the representatives of
ASSOCHAM and ICWAI on 16th and 17th November, 2004 respectively.
The Committee at their sitting held on 5th January, 2005 took oral
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Company Affairs on the
provisions contained in the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2003.
5. The Committee thereafter undertook consideration of the Draft
Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 17th, 18th and 27th January,
2005 which was adopted by the Committee on 27th January, 2005.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of (i) Chambers of Commerce viz. CII and ASSOCHAM (ii) the Institute
of Cost and Works Accountants of India and (iii) the officers of the
Ministry of Company Affairs for co-operation extended in placing
before them their considered views and perceptions on the subjects
and for furnishing written notes and information that the Committee
had desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
23 February, 2005 Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

REPORT
Background:
1. The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959, which is in force
for more than forty years requires updation because of the changes
that have taken place during this period and on the basis of experience
by the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India and the
Government while administering and implementing the provisions of
the Act.
2. The Institute is a statutory body, similar to the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India and the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India, created through the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959. In order to incorporate changes arising out of shifts in the
Indian economy as well as shifts in the focus of the Profession, certain
amendments to the existing provisions had become necessary.
3. The changing scenario calls for constantly raising the standards
of education and training, accounting and auditing on the one hand,
and capacity building measures on the other. The disciplinary
mechanism, which was evolved at the relevant time, keeping in view
the then membership strength also needs to be modified in line with
the requirements of effective and expeditious disposal of disciplinary
cases in the present day context.
4. Issues pertaining to corporate governance have been in limelight
in the recent past World over. The role of auditors had been under
attack in recent years world over. After the Enron debacle of 2001,
came other scandals involving large US companies such as WorldCom,
Qwest, Global Crossing; and the auditing lacunae that eventually led
to the collapse of Andersen. These scandals triggered another phase of
reforms in corporate governance, accounting practices and disclosures
this time more comprehensive than ever before. In July 2002, less than
a year from the date when Enron field for bankruptcy, the Sarbanes-
Oxley Bill (popularly called SOX) was enacted. The Act brought with
it fundamental changes in virtually every area of corporate governance.
5. A need was also felt in India that the Auditor-Company
relationship might be clearly defined. Hence, a High Level Committee
under the Chairmanship of Shri Naresh Chandra, former Cabinet

2
Secretary, was constituted, to examine inter alia , the Auditor-Company
relationship and the disciplinary mechanism for the Auditors. The
Naresh Chandra Committee have recommended inter-alia the
establishment of a Quality Review Board and a revision of Disciplinary
Mechanism for all the three Institutes managing the affairs of
professional bodies.
6. In the light of the proposals from the Insitutes and report of the
Naresh Chandra Committee, a Bill viz. the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 incorporating the amendment in the provisions
of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 was introduced in Rajya
Sabha on 23rd December, 2003 which was referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance on 18th August, 2004 by the Hon’ble Speaker
of the Lok Sabha for examination and report thereon.
7. The salient features of the Bill are—
(a) strengthening of Disciplinary Committee and also providing
for constitution of more than one Disciplinary Committee,
as and when deemed fit, which will enable the disposal of
the increased number of disciplinary cases, consequent upon
the huge increase in the membership of the Institute and in
the number of practicing chartered accountants;
(b) appointment of a Prosecution Directorate which will hasten
the disciplinary process and also impart an objectivity;
(c) constitution of an Appellate Authority to be headed by a
person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a judge of
a High Court to deal with the appeals against the orders of
the Council;
(d) setting up a mechanism for review of the quality of audit,
enhancing the owners to the Council to fix fees, increase
the term of the Council from three to four years,
streamlining the election process and prescribing certain
restrictions with regards to eligibility of members for
contesting elections for the Council of the Institute.
8. With a view to have expert opinion on the various provisions
of the Bill, the Committee sought memoranda from Chambers of
Commerce and the Institute. In order to seek clarification with regard
to the provisions contained in the Bill, the Committee also took
evidence of ASSOCHAM, Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of
India (ICWAI) and the representatives of Ministry of Company Affairs.

3
Through the various memoranda received from ASSOCHAM, CII and
the ICWAI, a view has been expressed against the erosion of autonomy
of the Institute because of the provisions contained in the Bill.
9. After having considered the views expressed by all experts,
Institute, and Government for and against the various proposals
contained in the Bill, the Committee recommend the Cost and Works
Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 for enactment subject to certain
modifications/amendments as indicated in the subsequent paragraphs
of this report.
Clause 1—Short title, extent and commencement
10. Clause 1 reads as under:
(1) This Act may be called the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Act, 2003.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
11. The Committee take note of the suggestion of ICWAI
regarding the change in nomenclature of Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India to the Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants of India. The Committee are apprised with the following
justification in favour of the change in nomenclature:
• Positive leverage in Mutual Recognition Agreements
(MRAs) in GATS
• Preserving national interest in Anti-dumping cases
• Image building of Institute in international platform
Strengthening prospects of professional members
•T o promote the case of national interest in having due
share in trade of management Accountancy services in the
world in open competition.
12. The Committee also consider the Government’s reply in this
regard wherein they have stated that another sister organization, ICAI
is opposed to change of nomenclature as the use of world
‘Management’ would create confusion. However, the Committee note
that the Government are not averse to change in nomenclature. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the nomenclature of Institute

4
of Cost and Works Accountants of India should be changed to the
Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India.
Clause 3 - Entry of names in Register — Determination of Fees
13. Clause 3 reads as under:
“In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words
“the prescribed entrance fee, which shall not exceed rupees three
hundred”, the words “such fee, as may be determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior approval of the Central
Government, which shall not exceed rupees three thousand” shall
be substituted.”
14. The Committee take note of the views expressed by ICWAI
in this regard wherein they have submitted that the upper limit of
the fee may be enhanced to rupees 10,000 to avoid frequent
amendments to the Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the
provision for seeking prior permission of the Central Government
with regard to the determination of fees could be dispensed with as
it may amount to interference in the working of the Institute and
affects its autonomy. Hence, they recommend that the Council may
be empowered to determine the fee without prior approval of the
Central Government.
15. Not agreeing to the proposal of ICWAI they further
recommend that the upper limit of the fee should remain unchanged.
However, if the Council seeks to raise the fee beyond the maximum
ceiling i.e. Rs. 3000 then they should seek permission from the
Central Government.
Clause 4 - Fellows and Associates - Determination of Fees
16. Clause 4 reads as under:
“In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words
“the prescribed entrance fee, which shall not exceed rupees two
hundred”, the words “such fee, as may be determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior approval of the Central
Government, which shall not exceed rupees five thousand” shall
be substituted.”
17. The Committee feel that the provision for seeking prior
permission of the Central Government with regard to determination

5
of fees would amount to erosion of autonomy of the Institute and
hence may be deleted. The Committee are of the opinion that this
provision can be dispensed with as it amounts to interference in the
working of the Institute and affects its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
18. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 5000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.
Clause 5 - Certificate of Practice — Determination of Fees
19. Clause 5 reads as under:—
In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), for the word “prescribed”, the words
“determined, by notification, by the Council with the prior
approval of the Central Government, which shall not exceed
rupees three thousand in any case” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
(3) the certificate of practice obtained under sub-section (1)
may be cancelled by the Council under such circumstances as may
be prescribed.”
20. The Committee feel that the provision for seeking prior
permission of the Central Government in respect of determination
of fees would amount to erosion of autonomy of the Institute and
hence may be deleted. The Committee are of the opinion that this
provision can be dispensed with as it amounts to interference in the
working of the Institute and affect its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
21. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 3000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.

6
Clause 6 - Composition of the Council
22. Clause 6 reads as under:
“In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
(2) The Council shall be composed of the following persons,
namely:—
(a) not more than fifteen persons elected in the specified
manner by members of the Institute, from amongst the fellows of
the Institute, and
(b) not more than five persons nominated in the specified
manner by the Central Government.
(3) No person holding an office of profit under the Central
Government or a State Government shall be eligible for election to
the Council under clause (a) of sub-section (2).”
23. The Committee are of the opinion that some qualification
should be prescribed in the Act for Government nominees. This
will bring expertise in the Council. They, therefore, recommend that
the nominees of the Government should be experts in the field of
Corporate Law, Finance, Accountancy and other related fields. They
further take note that the existing Act provides for a reference to
the regional constituencies through which each region currently elects
specified number of members to make the total of elected component
in the composition of the Council but the present Bill does not
contain such a provision. They find that Government have themselves
agreed to the proposal of retention of this reference. Hence, the
Committee recommend that original provision having reference to
the regional constituencies should be retained.
Clause 7 - Mode of Election to the Council
24. Clause 7 reads as under:
“For section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
10. (1) A member of the Council elected under clause (a) of
sub-section (2) of section 9 shall be eligible for re-election but not
for more than three consecutive terms.

7
(2) A Member of the Council who is or has been elected, as
President under sub-section (1) of section 12, shall not be eligible
for re-election as a member of the Council.
10A. In case of any dispute regarding any election under clause
(a) of subsection (2) of section 9, the aggrieved person may make
an application within thirty days from the date of the declaration
of the result of the election to the Council which shall forward the
same forthwith to the Central Government.
10B. (1) On receipt of any application under section 10A, the
Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal
consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other members to decide
such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment,—
(a) as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal unless he has been
a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade I of the service for at least three years;
(b) as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council
for at least one full term; and
(c) as a Member holding the post of a Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central
Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of
a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer
and Members of the Tribunal, their place of meetings, remuneration
and allowances shall be such as may be specified.
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.”
25. The Committee are of the opinion that the proposed
amendment would entitle a member for being elected for a period
of twelve years which they feel is too long. They feel that the tenure
of two consecutive terms i.e. for 8 years would be sufficient. Hence,
they recommend that instead of three consecutive terms a member
should be eligible for re-election for two consecutive terms. At the
same time they recommend that this restriction should be made
applicable to the nominated members also.
26. The Committee note that under the provisions of present
Bill it is not clear as to whether the Council is simply required to
forward/refer the election petition/dispute to the Central Government

8
or to do the same after application of mind. The Committee also
take note of the Government’s response in this regard wherein they
have stated that the Secretary of the Institute, who is non-elected,
could be authorised to forward such petition direct to the Central
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of
Council, the Secretary of the Institute should be authorised to forward
such petition direct to the Central Government.
27. The Committee feel that the provision contained in proposed
sub-clause (2) (b) of the proposed new section 10B in the Bill could
be interpreted to appoint even sitting members of the Council in
the Election Tribunal. They take note of the Government reply in
this regard wherein they have stated that it was not the intention of
the Government to appoint a sitting member on the Election Tribunal.
They, therefore, recommend that it should be specifically provided
in the Bill that no sitting member would be appointed in the Election
Tribunal.
Clause 12—Committees of the Council
28. Clause 12 reads as under:
“In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), clause (ii) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(3) Each of the Standing Committees shall consist of the
President and the Vice-President ex officio,  and minimum of three
and maximum of five members of the Council elected by the
Council, out of which one shall be the member nominated under
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 9.”;
(c) sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) shall be omitted.”
29. The Committee are of the opinion that this provision contains
a drafting lacuna. The reference of nominated member to be
appointed to the Standing Committees out of elected members does
not appear to be the correct position under the scheme of the present
Bill. It should have been provided for clearly. However they find
that the Government have themselves stated that in the context of
the proposed rule based regime envisaged along with powers of the

9
Central Government to issue directions/dissolve the Council,
constitution of these two Committees could be left to the Council.
In view of the Government’s reply the Committee, therefore,
recommend that this clause should be amended accordingly.
Clause 13—Register of Members
30. Clause 13 reads as under:
“In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), the words “on payment of such amount
as may be prescribed” shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the word “prescribed”, the words
“determined, by notification, by the Council with the prior approval
of the Central Government, which shall not exceed rupees five
thousand in any case” shall be substituted.”
31. The Committee feel that the provision for seeking prior
permission of the Central Government with regard to determination
of fees would amount to erosion of autonomy of the Institute and
hence may be deleted. The Committee are of the opinion that this
provision can be dispensed with as it amounts to interference in the
working of the Institute and affects its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
32. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 5000 them they should
seek permission from the Central Government.
Clause 14—Removal from the Register
33. Clause 14 reads as under:
“In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) If the name of any member has been removed from the register
under clause (c) of sub-section (1), on receipt of application, his
name may be entered again in the register on payment of the
arrears of determined annual fee and entrance fee along with such
additional fee, as may be determined, by notification, by the
Council with the prior approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees two thousand in any case.”

10
34. The Committee feel that the provision for seeking prior
permission of the Central Government with regard to determination
of fees would amount to erosion of autonomy of the Institute and
hence may be deleted. The Committee are of the opinion that this
provision can be dispensed with as it amounts to interference in the
working of the Institute and affects its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
35. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 2000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.
Clause 15—Disciplinary Committee
36. Clause 15 reads as under:
“For section 21 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
21. (1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee
consisting of the President or the Vice-President of the Council as
the Presiding Officer and two members of the Council elected by
the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst the persons of eminence having
experience in the field of law, education, economics, business,
finance, accountancy or public administration:
Provided that the Council may constitute more regional Disciplinary
Committees as and when it deems fit.
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under
the provisions of this Act shall follow such procedure and submit
the report to the Council within such time as may be specified.
21A. (1) The Council shall, by notification, appoint a
Prosecution, Director and such other employees for making
inquiries in respect of any information or complaint received by it
under the provisions of this Act.
(2) In order to make inquiries under the provisions of this Act,
the Prosecution Director shall follow such procedures as may be
specified.

11
21B. For the purposes of an inquiry under the provision of
this Act, the Authority, the Council, the Disciplinary Committee
and the Prosecution Director shall have the same powers as are
vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.
21C. (1) On receipt of a report from the Disciplinary Committee,
if the Council is satisfied that the member of the Institute is guilty
of any professional or other misconduct, it shall record its findings
accordingly and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions
of section 21D.
(2) In case of the Council is not satisfied with the report of the
Disciplinary Committee and is of the opinion that it requires further
inquiry, it may refer the report again to the Disciplinary Committee
for such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of
the Council.
(3) If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary
Committee, it may direct the Prosecution Direct to make an appeal
to the Authority .
21D. Where the Council is of the opinion that a member is
guilty of a professional or other misconduct mentioned in the
Schedule, it shall afford to the member a reasonable opportunity
of being heard before making any order against him and may
thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, namely:—
(a) reprimand the member; or
(b) remove the name of the member from the register
permanently or for such period, as it thinks fit.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “member of the
Institute” includes a person who was a member of the Institute on
the date of the alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be
a member of the Institute at the time of the inquiry.”

12
37. The Committee take note that this Clause seeks to insert
new disciplinary mechanism by way of constituting disciplinary
committees and appointment of Prosecution Director. The Committee
find that though a new mechanism has been provided to deal with
the disciplinary cases in the present Bill but the same is also a very
lengthy one since under this, the enquiry will be made first by the
Disciplinary Committee and the report will be placed before the
Council. It further provides that if the Council is not satisfied with
the report of the Disciplinary Committee and is of the opinion that
this requires further inquiry, it may refer the report again to the
Disciplinary Committee for such further enquiry as it may direct
through an order.
38. The Committee find that the Naresh Chandra Committee have
also recommended an entirely new disciplinary procedure, which
will bring about greater speed while ensuring independence and
fair play. They also note that the Government have also during the
course of evidence accepted the suggestion and have agreed to
dispense with the lengthy process which has been provided in the
existing Bill and have stated that the Disciplinary Committee could
be empowered to award punishments in disciplinary cases. The
appeal against the decision of the disciplinary committee could then
lie to the Appellate Authority. This would reduce one time consuming
tier of the disciplinary process. The Committee are in agreement
with such a proposal. They also feel that the existing provisions
with regard to two nominated members from the field of law,
education, business, finance, accountancy and public administration
provided in proposed section 21(1) is too wide which will not serve
any useful purpose. They are of the opinion that representation
should be restricted to only from the areas of law, finance and
accountancy. Hence they recommend that only relevant fields such
as law, finance and accountancy could be retained and the fields of
business, education and public administration may be excluded.
39. The Committee take note that a Prosecution Director has
been proposed for appointment by way of proposed new section
21A who shall have powers of a Civil Court. The function of
Prosecution Director is envisaged for making prima-facie inquiries
in respect of information/complaints received and submission of cases
to Disciplinary Committee for their consideration and to ensure that
the proceedings are conducted as per rules and statute. Disciplinary
Committee is to deliberate on the subject matter, along with inquiry
reports, if any, of the Prosecution Directorate. In the Bill, the

13
Disciplinary Committee is to submit its report to the Council for
decision. However, they find that Government have in their written
submissions submitted to the Committee agreed that there will be a
Prosecution Directorate instead of Prosecution Director who will
handle minor offences under Summary Disposal Mechanism apart
from scrutinizing the complaints to be submitted before the
Disciplinary Committee. It has also been noted by the Committee
that the Government have themselves suggested the change of name
of Prosecution Director which could be termed as Disciplinary Board
who should be delegated the powers to dispose of minor cases in
respect of defined acts of misconduct classified as Minor Offence
through the summary disposal mechanism, with powers to impose
punishment up to predetermined threshold limit. They also find
that the Government have stated that Summary Disposal Mechanism
will be available in the event of admission of guilt. In the light of
Government’s proposal, the Committee feel that it will not be
possible for a single person to handle such an enormous task. Hence,
they recommend that Government should amend this clause suitably
to make it multi-member body providing for a mechanism to deal
with the minor offences expeditiously. The Government should also
clearly state the composition of such a body in the Bill itself. The
Committee recommend that such a body should be headed by a
person not below the rank of Joint Secretary belonging to the
legislative service. Two members should be from the Council and
two should be outside experts from the field of law and accountancy.
40. In view of their recommendation for authorizing the
Disciplinary Committee to award punishment, the Committee
recommend that proposed section 21C in the Bill should be deleted
and in proposed section 21D, the word ‘Disciplinary Committee’
should be substituted in place of ‘Council’. The Committee also
recommend that the Council should be authorized to give direction
both to the Disciplinary Committee as well as the Appellate
Authority to decide a case on priority in the event of its being of
paramount public importance.
41. The Committee find that the existing provision provided in
proposed section 21(D) for reprimanding or removing the name of
the member from the register permanently, when found guilty of a
professional or other misconduct mentioned in the schedule, is
inadequate as it does not provide for any monetary penalty as also
was recommended by Naresh Chandra Committee. The Committee
recommend that the Disciplinary Committee should also be

14
authorized to impose a penalty upto Rs. 5,00,000 in addition to the
existing proposed powers of reprimand and removal of the name of
the member permanently or for such period as it thinks fit. Besides
the Disciplinary Committee should be authorized to club any two
penalties and therefore instead of the word “or” the same should be
amended to read “or/and”.
Clause 16—Professional Misconduct defined
42. Clause 16 reads as under:—
“In section 212 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “specified in any of the Schedules”, the words
“mentioned in the Schedule or as may be specified” shall be
substituted;
(ii) the words “under sub-section (1) of section 21” shall be
omitted.”
43. The Committee find that the two schedules mentioned in the
present Act deal with minor and major cases of professional
misconduct respectively. They also find that the Government have
already agreed to the proposal regarding Summary Disposal
Mechanism for minor offences. Hence, they are of the opinion that
merger of the two schedules will not be necessary. They, therefore,
recommend that deletion of the above clause.
Clause 17—Constitution of the Appellate Authority
44. Clause 17 reads as under:—
“After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘22A. The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be
deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act
subject to the modification that for clause (b) of said sub-section
(1), the following clause had been substituted, namely:—
(b) the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part-
time members from amongst the persons who have been members
of the Council of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants for
at least one full term.

15
22B. (1) A person appointed as Chairperson shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is
earlier.
(2) A person appointed as a member shall hold office for a term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or
until he attains the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier.
22C. (1) The allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such as may
be specified.
(2) The allowances to the Chairperson and members shall be paid
by the Council in such manner as may be specified.
22D. (1) The Authority shall meet at such time and place and
follow in its meetings and in discharging its functions such
procedure as may be specified.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be
authenticated by an officer duly authorised by the Chairperson in
this behalf.
22E. (1) The Council shall make available to the Authority such
officers and other staff members as may be necessary for the
efficient performance of the functions of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of
the officers and other staff members made available to the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
22F. (1) The Chairperson or a member may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his
office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the
date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of term of
office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not be removed from
his office except by an order of the Central Government on the

16
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made
by such person as the President may appoint for this purpose in
which the Chairperson or a member concerned has been informed
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in respect of such charges.
22G. (1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved by any order of
the Council imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in
section 21D, may within thirty days of the date on which the
order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:
Provided that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that
the member was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time.
(2) The Authority may, after calling for the records of any
case, revise any order made by the Council under section 21D and
may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the
penalty imposed by the order;
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary Committee for such further
inquiry as the Authority considers proper in the circumstances of
the case; or
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set
aside unless the Council has been given an opportunity of being
heard and no order imposing or enhancing a penalty shall be
passed unless the person concerned has also been given an
opportunity of being heard.’.
45. The provisions of the amendment seeks to provide for the
nomination of two members by the Central Government from
amongst persons having knowledge and practical experience in the
field of law, business, economics, education, public administration,
finance and accountancy. The Committee find that the fields are too
wide which will not serve any useful purpose. Hence, they
recommend that only relevant fields such as law, finance and

17
accountancy could be retained and the fields of business, education
and public administration may be excluded.
46. New section 22(B) provides for the term of office of
Chairperson and members of Appellate Authority. The Committee
are of the opinion that the term provided in the Bill for Chairperson
and members for five years and their age of retirement as 70 and
65 years respectively is too long which could be lowered. They,
therefore, recommend that the term of office of Chairperson and
members should be reduced to three years instead of the five years
proposed in the Bill and the age of retirement should be 65 and
62 years respectively.
Clause 18—Establishment of Quality Review Board
47. Clause 18 reads as under:—
“After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the following Chapter
shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER VII A
QUALITY REVIEW BOARD
29A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
a Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairman and four other
members.
(2) The Chairman and members of the Board shall be appointed
from amongst the persons having eminence and experience in the
field of law, education, economics, business, finance, accountancy
or public administration.
(3) Two members of the Board shall be nominated by the
Council and other two members shall be nominated by the Central
Government.
29B. The Board shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to fix standards for the services provided by the members
of the Institute;
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members
of the Institute including cost audit services; and

18
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to improve the quality
of services and adherence to the various statutory and other
regulatory requirements.
29C. The Board shall follow in its meeting and in discharging
its functions such procedure as may be specified.
29D. The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and
the members of the Board, their place of meetings, remuneration
and allowances shall be such as may be specified.
29E. The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the
Council.”.
48. New Section 28(A) seeks to provide for the appointment of
the Chairman and members by the Central Government from
amongst persons having knowledge and practical experience in the
field of law, business, economics, education, public administration,
finance and accountancy. The Committee find that the fields are too
wide which will not serve any useful purpose. Hence, they
recommend that only relevant fields such as law, finance and
accountancy could be retained and the fields of business, education
and public administration may be excluded.
Clause 20—Power of Central Government to issue directions
49. Clause 20 inter alia  reads as under:
“For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“35. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government
may, from time to time, give to the Council such general or
special directions as it thinks fit, and the Council shall, in the
discharge of its functions under this act, comply with any such
directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council
has persistently made default in giving effect to the directions
issued under sub-section (1), if may, after giving an opportunity of
being heard to the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council,
whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in accordance with
the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be
decided by the Central Government.

19
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a notification
under sub-section (2) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the
constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the Council and to exercise such
functions as may be mentioned in the notification.”
The Committee had expressed the apprehensions that the provisions
of the Bill, particularly the powers to issue directions and dissolve the
Council are steps towards eroding the autonomy of the Institutes,
during the course of evidence. The Ministry of Company Affairs in
their post evidence reply stated as follows:
“As we move from a system of controls to regulation, the concerned
agencies and bodies are to be provided necessary administrative,
financial and functional freedom to carry out their functions
effectively. The Government is not required to intervene in their
day-to-day functions. In such cases, the ultimate and reserve power
of the State is limited to intervention in cases where system
improvement is required or to address situations arising out of
system breakdown. This framework is also envisaged for the
functioning of the Institutes. Thus, the nature of autonomy itself
requires that residual powers of direction/dissolution lie with the
Government to bring about changes and improvements as merited
in the framework governing the system and also to meet extreme
contingent situations.”
The Ministry further stated as:
“It is not the intention that the exercise of power to dissolve the
Council would be done in a manner that would create a vacuum
or provide scope for arbitrary exercise of power. Should an occasion
arise to dissolve any Council, procedures would be laid down
for:—
(a) Time bound re-election and reconstruction of the new
council.
(b) Providing for conduct of business of the Institute of the
interim period through a transparent arrangement.”
50. The Committee find that similar provision exists in the parent
Act also. While taking note of the justification advanced by the
Government in respect of the empowerment to the Government to

20
issue directions and dissolution of the Council, the Committee opine
that the present provision seems to be an open ended one. They are
of the opinion that such blanket powers would rather impinge upon
the autonomy of the Institute.
They, therefore, recommend that the power of the Central
Government to issue directions/dissolution of the Council should be
inconsonance with the objectives mentioned in the Bill and the same
should be restricted to the following:—
— to uphold and maintain the highest level of cost audit;
— to maintain in highest standards of the quality of audit;
and
— to take appropriate action against the defaulters in the
shortest possible time.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
23 February, 2005 Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 6th October, 2004 from 1100 to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahto
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri Lakshman Seth
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri R.P . Goenka
16. Shri Jairam Ramesh
17. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
18. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
19. Shri C. Ramchandraiah
20. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
21

22
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs
2. Dr. (Mrs.) Sheela Bhide, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Adviser
5. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Adviser, Cost
6. Shri V .S. Rao, Director, Inspection & Investigation
7. Shri R. Vasudevan, Director, Inspection & Investigation
8. Shri Neerabh Kumar Prasad, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee was then briefed by the representatives of the
Ministry of Company Affairs on (i) the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and (iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2003 with the aid of an audio-visual presentation.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry
of Company Affairs to furnish notes on certain points raised by the
Members to which replies were not readily available with them during
the discussion.
5. The briefing was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
(The Committee then adjourned)

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 16th November, 2004 from 1430 to
1610 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.P . Goenka
12. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
13. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
14. Shri Amar Singh
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
23

24
WITNESSES
ASSOCHAM
1. Shri Vishesh Chandeok, Partner, Grant Thornton India Pvt. Ltd.
2. Shri Nesar Ahmad, Senior Committee Member
3. Shri Ashish Kochhar, Asstt. Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the ASSOCHAM to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the ASSOCHAM on the provisions of the (i) the Chartered
Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003; (ii) the Cost & Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003; and (iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2003.
4. The members asked clarificatory questions which were replied
by the representatives. However, it was noticed by the Committee that
the representatives were expressing their personal opinion on the Bills
rather than presenting a considered and consolidated view of
ASSOCHAM. The Committee took very serious view to the fact that
junior functionaries have been deputed by ASSOCHAM to depose
before a Parliamentary Committee who were not able to express
properly .
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part B
At 1600 hours
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
The Committee expressed their serious concern over the absence
of senior executives of CII when they were informed that only two
junior officers of the CII have come to tender evidence on the three
Bills viz. (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003; (ii) the
Cost & Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003; and (iii) the
Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and decided not to take
oral evidence of the representatives. The decision of the Committee
was conveyed to them.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 17th November, 2004 from 1030
to 1200 hours, 1200 to 1300 hours, 1515 to 1545 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
12. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
13. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
14. Shri Amar Singh
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
25

26
Part I
WITNESSES
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1. Shri Sunil Goyal, President
2. Shri Kamlesh K. Vikamsey, Vice President
3. Dr. Ashok Haldia, Secretary
4. Shri T.N. Manoharan, Council Member
5. Shri S.C. Vasudeva, Council Member & Chairman, Accounting
Standards Board of ICAI.
Part II
At 1200 hours
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India
1. Shri Mahesh Anant Athavale, President, the ICSI
2. Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary, the ICSI
3. Shri Nesar Ahmad, Council Member, the ICSI
4. Ms. Preeti Malhotra, Council Member, the ICSI
5. Shri P .K. Mittal, Council Member, the ICSI
6. Shri V .K. Aggarwal, Senior Director, the ICSI
7. Shri S. Kumar, Director, the ICSI
Part III
At 1515 hours
The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
1. Dr. H.R. Subramanya, President, ICWAI
2. Dr. D. Jagannathan, Central Council Member, Government
Nominee
3. Shri Rakesh Singh, Central Council Member
Part I
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.

27
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India on the provisions of
the Chartered Accountant (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The President of
ICAI gave an audio-visual presentation after seeking the permission of
the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India on the provisions of
the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The President of
ICSI gave an audio-visual presentation after seeking the permission of
the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part III
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India on the
provisions of the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003.

28
The President of ICWAI gave an audio-visual presentation after seeking
the permission of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 5th January, 2005 from 1100 to
1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
14. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
29

30
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Shri Komal Anand, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Advisor
5. Shri V .S. Rao, DII
6. Shri R. Vasudevan, DII
7. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Advisor Cost
8. Shri O.P . Arya, Director, SFIO
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the  Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to provisions contained in Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Company Affairs on (i) the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003; (ii) the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003; and (iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2003.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 17 January 2005 from 1615 to
1645 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Gurudas Kamat
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahto
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri Ajit Singh
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
12. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri R.P . Goneka
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
17. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
18. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
31

32
(from 1615 to 1645 hours)
2. The Chairman and Members decided to have a preliminary
discussion on the draft reports on (i) the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost & Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and (iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2003.
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to consider and adopt the
aforesaid reports on 18.01.2005.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 18th January, 2005 from 1645 to
1710 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahto
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Vijoy Krishna
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
33

34
2. The Committee took further consideration of the draft reports
on (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost
& Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and (iii) the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The Chairman requested the
Members of the Committee to furnish their suggestions on the
recommendations contained in the aforementioned reports. The
Members suggested some modifications in the Reports. The Chairman
directed that these modifications be incorporated in the draft reports.
Then, the Chairman also directed that the revised drafts should be
circulated to the Members of the Committee for their perusal. The
Committee decided to take up further consideration and adoption of
the aforesaid reports on 27.01.2005.
3. The meeting was concluded.
(The Committee then adjourned.)

MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday , 27 January, 2005 from 1400 to
1430 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
11. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
2. The Committee took consideration up for the revised draft
reports on (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003,
(ii) the Cost & Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and
35

36
(iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The Committee
after deliberation adopted the same with modifications/amendments
as shown in Annexure I, and II.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the draft
Reports in the light of the modifications as also to make verbal and
consequential changes and present the same to the Speaker.
(The Committee then adjourned)

ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON THE COST AND WORKS
ACCOUNTANTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 OF THE MINISTRY OF
COMPANY AFFAIRS AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 27 JANUARY, 2005]
Page No. 14,
After Para No. 48
Insert New Para Nos. 49 & 50
49. Clause 20 inter alia  reads as under:
“For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“35. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government
may, from time to time, give to the Council such general or special
directions as it thinks fit, and the Council shall, in the discharge
of its functions under this act, comply with any such directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council
has persistently made default in giving effect to the directions
issued under sub-section (1), it may, after giving an opportunity of
being heard to the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council,
whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in accordance with
the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be
decided by the Central Government.
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a notification
under sub-section (2) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the
constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the Council and to exercise such
functions as may be mentioned in the notification.”
The Committee had expressed the apprehensions that the provisions
of the Bill, particularly the powers to issue directions and dissolve the
Council are steps towards eroding the autonomy of the Institute.
37

38
The Ministry of Company Affairs in their post evidence reply stated
as follows:
“As we move from a system of controls to regulation, the concerned
agencies and bodies are to be provided necessary administrative,
financial and functional freedom to carry out their functions
effectively. The Government is not required to intervene in their
day-to-day functions. In such cases, the ultimate and reserve power
of the State is limited to intervention in cases where system
improvement is required or to address situations arising out of
system breakdown. This framework is also envisaged for the
functioning of the Institutes. Thus, the nature of autonomy itself
requires that residual powers of direction/dissolution lie with the
government to bring about changes and improvements as merited
in the framework governing the system and also to meet extreme
contingent situations.”
The Ministry further stated as:
“It is not the intention that the exercise of power to dissolve the
Council would be done in a manner that would create a vacuum
or provide scope for arbitrary exercise of power. Should an occasion
arise to dissolve any Council, procedures would be laid down
for:—
(c) Time bound re-election and reconstruction of the new council.
(d) Providing for conduct of business of the Institute in the interim
period through a transparent arrangement.”
50. The Committee find that similar provision exists in the parent
Act also. While taking note of the justification advanced by the
Government in respect of the empowerment to the Government to
issue directions and dissolution of the Council, the Committee opine
that the present provision seems to be an open ended one. They are
of the opinion that such blanket powers would rather impinge upon
the autonomy of the Institute.
They, therefore, recommend that the power of the Central
Government to issue directions/dissolution of the Council should be
in consonance with the objectives mentioned in the Bill and the
same should be restricted to the following:—
— to uphold and maintain the highest level of cost audit;
— to maintain highest standards of the quality of audit; and
— to take appropriate action against the defaulters in the
shortest possible time.

39
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. LXXVII of 2003.
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cost and
Works Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2003.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Cost and Works Accountants Act,
1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section (1), of section 2,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “Authority” means the
Appellate Authority referred to in
section 22A;
(aaa) “Board” means the Quality
Review Board constituted under section
29A;’;
(ii) after clause (f), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:
‘(fa) “notification” means a
notification published in the Official
Gazette;’;
(iii) after clause (i), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section
2.
23 of 1959.

40
‘(ia) “specified” means specified by
rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
(ib) “Tribunal” means a Tribunal
established under sub-section (1) of section
10B;’.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (3), for the words “the prescribed
entrance fee, which shall not exceed rupees
three hundred”, the words “such fee, as may
be determined, by notification, by the Council
with the prior approval of the Central
Government, which shall not exceed rupees
three thousand” shall be substituted.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (4), for the words “the prescribed
entrance fee, which shall not exceed rupees two
hundred”, the words “such fee, as may be
determined, by notification by the Council with
the prior approval of the Central Government,
which shall not exceed rupees five thousand”
shall be substituted.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), for the word
“prescribed”, the words “determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior
approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees three thousand in
any case” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The certificate of practice obtained
under sub-section (1) may be cancelled by
the Council under such circumstances as
may be prescribed.”.
6. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-
section (2), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 9.

41
“(2) The Council shall be composed of the
following persons, namely:—
(a) not more than fifteen persons
elected in the specified manner by members
of the Institute, from amongst the fellows
of the Institute, and
(b) not more than five persons
nominated in the specified manner by the
Central Government.
(3) No person holding an office of profit
under the Central Government or a State
Government shall be eligible for election to
the Council under clause (a) of sub-section
(2).”.
7. For section 10 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“10. (1) A member of the Council elected
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 9
shall be eligible for re-election but not for more
than three consecutive terms.
(2) A member of the council, who is or has
been elected, as President under sub-section (1)
of section 12, shall not be eligible for re-election
as a member of the Council.
10A. In case of any dispute regarding any
election under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 9, the aggrieved person may make an
application within thirty days from the date of
the declaration of the result of the election to
the Council which shall forward the same
forthwith to the Central Government.
10B. (1) On receipt of any application under
section 10A, the Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a
Presiding Officer and two other Members to
decide such dispute and the decision of such
Tribunal shall be final.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 10.
Re-election
to Council.
Settlement
of dispute
regarding
election.
Establishment
of Tribunal

42
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment,—
(a) as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal
unless he has been a member of the Indian
Legal Service and has held a post in Grade
I of the service for at least three years;
(b) as a Member unless he has been a
member of the Council for at least one full
term; and
(c) as a Member holding the post of a
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
or any other post under the Central
Government carrying a scale of pay which
is not less than that of a Joint Secretary to
the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of
the Presiding Officer and Members of the
Tribunal, their place of meetings, remuneration
and a allowances shall be such as may be
specified.
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be
borne by the Council.”.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in the
proviso to sub-section (3), for the word
“President”, the words “President and the Vice-
President” shall be substituted.
9. In section 13 of the principal Act, in the
proviso to sub-section (3), for the words “six
months”, the words “one year” shall be
substituted.
10. In section 14 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words “three years”, the
words “four years” shall be substituted.
11. In section 16 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), after clause (e), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(f) approve the foreign travel tours of
the President, the Vice-President and
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 16.

43
members of the Council and member of its
Committees, and officers and employees of
the Institute in such manner as may be
specified.”
12. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), clause (ii) shall
be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Each of the Standing Committees
shall consist of the President and the Vice-
President ex officio , and minimum of three
and maximum of five members of the
Council elected by the Council, out of
which one shall be the member nominated
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section
9.”.
(c) sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) shall be
omitted.
13. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), the words “on
payment of such amount as may be
prescribed” shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the word
“prescribed”, the words “determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior
approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees five thousand in
any case” shall be substituted.
14. In section 20 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (2), the following sub section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(3) If the name of any member has been
removed from the register under clause (c) of
sub-section (1), on receipt of an application, his
name may be entered again in the register on
payment of the arrears of determined annual
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 19.

44
fee and entrance fee along with such additional
fee, as may be determined, by notification, by
the Council with the prior approval of the
Central Government, which shall not exceed
rupees two thousand in any case.”.
15. For section 21 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“21. (1) The Council shall constitute a
Disciplinary Committee consisting of the
President or the Vice-President of the Council
as the Presiding Officer and two members of
the Council elected by the Council and two
members to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst the persons of
eminence having experience in the field of law,
education, economics, business, finance,
accountancy or public administration:
Provided that the Council may constitute
more regional Disciplinary Committees as and
when it deems fit.
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making
the inquiry under the provisions of this Act
shall follow such procedure and submitt the
report to the Council within such time as may
be specified.
21A. (1) The Council shall, by notification,
appoint a Prosecution Director and such other
employees for making inquiries in respect of
any information or complaint received by it
under the provisions of this Act.
(2) In order to make inquiries under the
provisions of this Act, the Prosecution Director
shall follow such procedures as may be
specified.
21B. For the purposes of an inquiry under
the provision of this Act, the Authority, the
Council, the Disciplinary Committee and the
Prosecution Director shall have the same
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 21.
Disciplinary
Committee.
Appointment
of
Prosecution
Director.
Authority,
Council,
Disciplinary
Committee
and
Prosecution

45
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any
document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.
21C. ( 1) On receipt of a report from the
Disciplinary Committee, if the Council is
satisfied that the member of the Institute is
guilty of any professional or other misconduct,
it shall record its findings accordingly and shall
proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 21D.
(2) In case the Council is not satisfied with
the report of the Disciplinary Committee and
is of the opinion that it requires further inquiry,
it may refer the report again to the Disciplinary
Committee for such further inquiry as may be
directed through an order of the Council.
(3) If the Council disagrees with the
findings of the Disciplinary Committee, it may
direct the Prosecution Director to make an
appeal to the Authority .
21D. Where the Council is of the opinion
that a member is guilty of a professional or
other misconduct mentioned in the Schedule,
it shall afford to the member a reasonable
opportunity of being heard before making any
order against him and may thereafter take any
one or more of the following actions, namely:—
(a) reprimand the member; or
(b) remove the name of the member
from the register permanently or for such
period, as it thinks fit.
Director to
have
powers of
Civil Court.
Action by
Council on
Disciplinary
Committee
report.
Member to
be afforded
opportunity
of being
heard.
5 of 1908.

46
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
section, “member of the Institute” includes a
person who was a member of the Institute on
the date of the alleged misconduct although he
has ceased to be a member of the Institute at
the time of the inquiry.”
16. In section 22 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “specified in any of
the Schedules”, the words “mentioned in
the Schedule or as may be specified” shall
be substituted;
(ii) the words “under sub-section (1) of
section 21” shall be omitted.
17. After section 22 of the principal Act,
the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“22A. The Appellate Authority constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 22A of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be
deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the
purposes of this Act subject to the modification
that for clause (b) of said sub-section (1), the
following clause had been substituted,
namely:—
(b) the Central Government shall, by
notification appoint two part-time members
from amongst the persons who have been
members of the Council of the Institute of
Cost and works Accountants for at least
one full term.
22B. (1) A person appointed as Chairperson
shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or
until he attains the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier.
(2) A person appointed as a member shall
hold office for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office or until
Amendment
of section 22.
Insertion of
new section
after
section 22.
Constitution
of
Authority
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and
Members of
Authority.
38 of 1949.

47
he attains the age of sixty-seven years,
whichever is earlier.
22C. (1) The allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and members shall be such as may
be specified.
(2) The allowances to the Chairperson and
members shall be paid by the Council is such
manner as may be specified.
22D. (1) The Authority shall meet at such
time and place and follow in its meetings and
in discharging its functions such procedure as
may be specified.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Authority
shall be authenticated by an officer duly
authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.
22E. (1) The council shall make available
to the Authority such officers and other staff
members as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Authority .
(2) The salaries and allowances and
conditions of service of the officers and other
staff members made available to the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
22F. (1) The Chairperson or a member may,
by notice in writing under his hand addressed
to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member
shall, unless he is permitted by the Central
Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three
months from the date of receipt of such notice
or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the
expiry of term of office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not
be removed from his office except by an order
of the Central Government on the ground of
Allowances
and
conditions
of service
of
Chairperson
and
members of
Authority.
Procedure
to be
regulated
by
Authority.
Office and
other staff
of
Authority.
Resignation
and
removal of
Chairperson
and
members.

48
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an
inquiry made by such person as the President
may appoint for this purpose in which the
Chairperson or a member concerned has been
informed of the charges against him and given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of such charges.
22G. (1) Any member of the Institute
aggrieved by any order of the Council imposing
on him any of the penalties referred to in
section 21D, may within thirty days of the date
on which the order is communicated to him,
prefer an appeal to the Authority:
Provided that the Authority may entertain
any such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
member was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time.
(2) The Authority may, after calling for the
records of any case, revise any order made by
the Council under section 21D and may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the
order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside,
reduce, or enhance the penalty imposed by
the order;
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary
Committee for such further inquiry as the
Authority considers proper in the
circumstances of the case; or
(d) pass such other order as the
Authority thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall
be modified or set aside unless the Council has
been given an opportunity of being heard and
no order imposing or enhancing a penalty shall
be passed unless the person concerned has also
been given an opportunity of being heard’.
Appeal to
Authority.

49
18. After Chapter VII of the principal Act,
the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER VII A
QUALITY R EVIEW B OARD
29A. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, constitute a Quality Review Board
consisting of a Chairman and four other
members.
(2) The Chairman and members of the
Board shall be appointed from amongst the
persons having eminence and experience in the
field of law, education, economics, business,
finance, accountancy or public administration.
(3) Two members of the Board shall be
nominated by the Council and other two
members shall be nominated by the Central
Government.
29B. The Board shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) to fix standards for the services
provided by the members of the Institute;
(b) to review the quality of services
provided by the members of the Institute
including  cost audit services; and
(c) to guide the members of the
Institute to improve the quality of services
and adherence to the various statutory and
other regulatory requirements.
29C. The Board shall follow in its meeting
and in discharging its functions such procedure
as may be specified.
29D. The terms and conditions of service
of the Chairman and the members of the Board,
their place of meetings, remuneration
and allowances shall be such as may be
specified.
Insertion of
new
Chapter
VIIA.
Establishment
of Quality
Review
Board.
Functions
of Board.
Procedure
of Board.
Terms and
conditions
of
Chairman
and
members of
Board.

50
29E. The expenditure of the Board shall be
borne by the Council.”
19. Section 33 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
20. For section 35 and 36 of the principal
Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“35. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the
Central Government may, from time to time,
give to the Council such general or special
directions as it thinks fit, and the Council shall,
in the discharge of its functions under this Act,
comply with any such directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central
Government, the Council has persistently made
default in giving effect to the directions issued
under sub-section (1), it may, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the Council, by
notification, dissolve the Council, where after a
new Council shall be constituted in accordance
with the provisions of this Act with effect from
such date as may be decided by the Central
Government.
(3) Where the Central Government has
issued a notification under sub-section (2)
dissolving the council, it may, pending the
constitution of a new Council in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, authorise any
person or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the council and
to exercise such functions as may be mentioned
in the notification.
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the Council or the Disciplinary
Committee or the Tribunal or the Authority or
the Board or the Prosecution Director or any
officer of that Government, Council, Committee,
Tribunal, Authority or Board, for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to the
Expenditure
of Board.
Omission
of section
33.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 35
and 36.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.

51
done under this Act or any rule, regulation,
notification, direction or order made thereunder.
36A. The Chairpersons, members and other
officers and employees of the Tribunal,
Authority and board, and the Prosecution
Director shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code”.
21. After section 38 of the principal Act,
the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“38A. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of election and
nomination in respect of members to the
Council under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(b) the terms and conditions of service
of the Presiding Officers and Members of
the Tribunal, place of meeting, remuneration
and allowances to be paid to them under
sub-section (3) of section 10B.
(c) the manner of approval for the
foreign travel tours of the President, the
Vice-President and members of the Council
and member of its Committees, and officers
and employees of the Institute under clause
(f) of sub-section (1) of section 16;
(d) the procedure of inquiry and
submission of report by the Disciplinary
Committee under sub-section (2) of section
21;
(e) the procedure of inquiry by the
Prosecution Director under sub-section (2)
of section 21A;
Members,
etc., to be
public
servants.
Insertion of
new section
38A.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
45 of 1860.

52
(f) any act or omission which may be
determined as professional misconduct
under section 22;
(g) the allowances and terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and
members of the Authority and the manner
of payment of allowances by the Council
under section 22C;
(h) the procedure to be followed by the
Authority in its meetings and in
discharging its functions under sub-section
(1) of section 22D;
(i) the procedure to be followed by the
Board in its meeting and in discharging its
functions under section 29C; and
(j) the terms and conditions of service
of the Chairman and Members of the Board
under section 29D.”.
22. In section 39 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), the words “and a
copy of such regulations shall be sent to
each member of the Institute” shall be
omitted;
(ii) for sub-section (5), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) Every rule and every regulation
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or the regulation,
or both Houses agree that the rule or the
regulation should not be made, the rule or
Amendment
of section
39.

53
the regulation, shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified from or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under the rule
or regulation.”.
23. For the First Schedule and the Second
Schedule to the principal Act, the following
Schedule shall be substituted, namely:—
‘THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 21D and 22)
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to cost
accountants in practice
A cost accountant in practice shall be
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct,
if he—
(1) allows any person to practise in his
name as a cost accountant unless such
person is also a cost accountant in practice
and is in partnership with or employed by
himself;
(2) pays of allows or agrees to pay of
allow, directly or indirectly , any share,
commission or brokerage in the fees of
profits of his professional business, to any
person other than a member of the Institute
or a partner or a retired partner or the legal
representative of a deceased partner.
Explanation. —In this item “partner”
includes a person residing outside India
with whom a cost accountant in practice
has entered into partnership which is not
in contravention of item (4) of this part;
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part
of the profits of the professional work of a
Substitution
of new
Schedule
for First
Schedule
and Second
Schedule.

54
lawyer, auctioneer, broker, or other agent
who is not a member of the Institute;
(4) enters into partnership with any
person other than a cost accountant in
practice or a person resident without India
who but for his residence abroad would
be entitled to be registered as a member
under clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of
section 4 or whose qualifications are
recognised by the Central Government or
the Council for the purpose of permitting
such partnerships provided that the cost
accountant shares in the fees or profits of
the business of the partnership both within
and without India;
(5) secures, either through the services
of a person not qualified to be his partner
or by means which are not open to a cost
accountant, any professional work;
(6) solicits clients or professional work
either directly or indirectly by circular,
advertisement, personal communication or
interview or by any other means;
(7) advertises his professional
attainments or services, or uses any
designation or expressions other than cost
accountant or professional documents,
visiting cards, letter heads or sign boards,
unless it be a degree of a University
established by law in India or recognised
by the Central Government or a title
indicating membership of the Institute of
Cost and Work Accountants of India or of
any other institution that has been
recognised by the Central Government or
may be recognised by the Council;
(8) accepts a position as cost accountant
previously held by another Cost Accountant
in practice without first communicating
with him in writing;

55
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts
or offers to accept in respect of any
professional employment fees which are
based on a percentage of profits or which
are contingent upon the findings, or results
of such employment, except in cases which
are permitted under any regulations made
under this Act;
(10) engages in any business or
occupation other than the profession of cost
accountants unless permitted by the Council
so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein
shall disentitle a cost accountant from being
a director of a company, unless he or any
of his partner is interested in such company
as accountant.
(11) accepts a position as cost
accountant previously held by some other
cost accountant in practice in such
conditions as to constitute undercutting;
(12) allows a person not being a
member of the Institute or a member not
being his partner to sign or his behalf or
on behalf of his firm, any cost or pricing
statements or any other statements related
thereto;
(13) discloses information acquired in
the course of his professional engagement
to any person other than the client so
engaging him, without the consent of such
client, or otherwise than as required by an
law for the time being in force;
(14) certifies or submits in his name or
in the name of his firm a report of an
examination of cost accounting and related
statements unless the examination of such
statements has been made by him or by a
partner or an employee in his firm or by
another cost accountant in practice;

56
(15) permits his name or the name of
his firm to be used in connection with an
estimate cost or earning contingent upon
future transactions in a manner which may
lead to the belief that he vouches for the
accuracy of the forecast;
(16) expresses his opinion on pricing
statements of any business or any enterprise
in which he, his firm or a partner in his
firm has a substantial interest, unless he
discloses the interest also in his report;
(17) fails to disclose in a cost or pricing
statement a material fact known to him
which is not disclosed in a cost or pricing
statement, but disclosure of which is
necessary to make such statement not
misleading;
(18) fails to report a material mis-
statement known to him to appear in a cost
or pricing statement with which he is
concerned in a professional capacity;
(19) is grossly negligent in the conduct
of his professional duties;
(20) fails to obtain sufficient information
to warrant the expression of an opinion or
makes exceptions which are sufficiently
material to negate the expression of an
opinion;
(21) fails to invite attention to any
material departure from the generally
accepted procedure of costing and pricing
applicable in the circumstances;
(22) fails to keep moneys of his client
in a separate banking account or to use
such moneys for purposes for which they
are intended.

57
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of
the Institute in service
A member of the Institute (other than a
member in practice) shall be deemed to be
guilty of professional misconduct, if he being
an employee of any company, firm or person—
(1) pays or allows or agree to pay
directly or indirectly, to any person any
share in the emoluments of the employment
undertaken by the member;
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part
of fees, profits or gains from a lawyer, a
cost accountant or broker engaged by such
company, firm or person or agent or
customer of such company, firm or person
by way of commission or gratification;
(3) discloses confidential information
acquired in the course of his employment
otherwise than as required by any law for
the time being in force or as permitted by
his employer.
PART III
Professional misconduct in relation to members of
the Institute generally
A member of the Institute, whether in
practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
(1) includes in any statement, return or
form to be submitted to the Council any
particulars knowing to be false;
(2) not being a fellow styles himself as
a fellow;
(3) does not supply the information
called for, or does not comply with the
requirements asked for, by the Council or
any of its Committees.

58
(4) contravenes any of the provisions
of this Act or the rules/regulations made
there under;
(5) is guilty of such other act or
omission as may be specified.’.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959, which is in force for
more than forty years requires updation because of the charges that
have taken place during this period and on the basis of experience by
the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India and the
Government while administering and implementing the provision of
the Act.
2. A High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Naresh
Chandra, former Cabinet Secretary, was in the meanwhile constituted,
inter alia , to examine the Auditor—Company relationship and the
disciplinary mechanism for the Auditors. It is proposed to bring about
amendments in the Act to implement the Naresh Chandra Committee’s
recommendations regarding disciplinary procedure and setting up of
Quality Review Board.
3. The Institute also has faced certain difficulties, like in increasing
membership fee to cover increased activities, short term of the Council,
etc., and has suggested a number of amendments in the Act.
4. It has also been felt necessary to bring, as far as possible,
uniformity in the Acts of the three professional Institutes, namely the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India.
Some of the amendments in the Act have become necessary to achieve
this uniformity.
5. Some of the main amendments proposed to be made in the Bill
are as follows:—
(a) strengthening of Disciplinary Committee and also providing
for constitution of more than one Disciplinary Committee, as and
when deemed fit, which will enable the disposal of the increased
number of disciplinary cases, consequent upon the increase in the
membership of the Institute and in the number of practising cost
accountants;
(b) appointment of a Prosecution Directorate which will hasten
the disciplinary process and also impart an objectivity;
59

60
(c) constitution of an Appellate Authority to be headed by a
person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a judge of a High
Court to deal with the appeals against the orders of the Council;
(d) setting up a mechanism for review of the quality of cost
audit, enhancing the powers to the Council to fix fees, increase
the term of the Council from three to four years, streamlining the
election process and prescribing certain restrictions with regards to
eligibility of members for contesting elections for the Council of
the Institute.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; JASWANT SINGH
The 22nd December, 2003

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 seeks to define various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee of associate members
of the Institute.
Clause 4 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee of fellow members
of the Institute.
Clause 5 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee for certificate of
practice. The clause also provides for cancellation of certificate of
practice under the circumstances as may be prescribed by regulations.
Clause 6 seeks to provide for enhancing the total strength of the
Council of the Institute from sixteen to twenty and also provides that
the manner of election and nomination will be specified by rules. The
clause also debars persons holding office of profit under Central
Government or a State Government from contesting election to the
Council.
Clause 7 seeks to provide that a member of the Council shall be
eligible for re-election for a maximum of three consecutive terms. The
clause debars sitting and former Presidents of the Council from
contesting election of the Council. This clause also provides for
settlement of election disputes and establishment of election tribunal.
Clause 8 seeks to provide for the continuation in office of the
Vice-President till his successor takes charge, as is the case with the
President of the Council.
Clause 9 seeks to change the period for not filling up a casual
vacancy from six months to one year, prior to the date of expiration
of the duration of the Council.
Clause 10 seeks to provide for enhancement of duration of the
Council from three to four years.
Clause 11 seeks to provide that the Council shall approve foreign
travel tours of the members of the Council and its Committees and
61

62
staff of the Institute in accordance with rules framed by the Central
Government for this purpose.
Clause 12 seeks to, inter alia,  provide for increasing the strength of
the Executive Committee and the Examination Committee.
Clause 13 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the annual membership
fee of the Institute. The clause also provides that the list of members
can be supplied to the members on payment of the prescribed amount.
Clause 14 seeks to provide that the Council may re-enter the name
of the member of the Institute, if his name has been removed for non-
payment of dues, on payment of such additional fee as may be
determined by the Council with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
Clause 15 seeks to, inter alia , provide for constitution of more than
one Disciplinary Committee, appointment of a prosecution directorate
and empowering them and the Appellate Authority to, summon and
enforce the attendance of any person and examining him on oath, to
discover and production of any document, and receive evidence on
affidavit. The clause also provides for action to be taken by the Council
on the Disciplinary Committee report and the penalties, which Council
can impose on a member of the Institute.
Clause 17 seeks to, inter alia , provide that the  Appellate Authority
constituted under Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 shall deemed to be
Appellate Authority under this Act with some changes with the term
of office of Chairperson and Members, their allowances and terms and
conditions of service and resignation and removal of Chairperson and
Members. It also provides for the procedures to be adopted by the
authority and powers of the authority with regards to the orders passed
by the Council.
Clause 18 seeks to, inter alia, provide for establishment of a Quality
Review Board, its functions, procedures, the terms and conditions of
service of Chairman and Members, which will review the quality of
audit and other services provided by the members of the Institute.  
Clause 20 seeks to, inter alia , empower the Central Government to
issue such general or special directions, as it thinks fit, to the Council,
making it obligatory on the part of the Council to comply with such
directions. It also empowers the Central Government to dissolve the

63
Council after giving an opportunity of being heard. The clause also
seeks to make provision for protection of action taken in good faith.
Clause 21 seeks to confer upon the Central Government the power
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect
of which such rules may be made.
Clause 22 seeks to provide for laying of the rules and regulations
on the table of both the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 23 seeks to provide for substitution of a new Schedule for
the existing two Schedules.
——————

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to appoint a Prosecution Director, constitute an
Appellate Authority and establish a Quality Review Board. The
expenditure in this regard is to be borne by the Council of the Institute
and there shall be no expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
64

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clauses 3, 4, 5, and 13 of the Bill seek to amend sections 4, 5, 6,
and 19 of the principal Act so as to empower the Council to determine
the fee with the prior approval of the Central Government.
2. Clause 5 also seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act so
as to empower the Council to cancel the certificate of practice under
the circumstance as may be prescribed by regulations.
3. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
manner of election and nomination of the members to the Council.
4. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 10B so as to
empower the Central Government to specify the terms and conditions
of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, their
place of meetings, remuneration and allowances.
5. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
manner of approval of the foreign travel tours of the President, the
Vice-President and members of the Council and member of its
Committees, and officers and employees of the Institute.
6. Clause 13 of the Bill also seeks to amend section 19 of the
principal Act so as to empower the Council to prescribe by regulation
the amount a member is to pay for a copy of the list of members.
7. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 20 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Council to determine the additional fee for
re-entering the name of a member with the prior approval of the
Central Government.
8. Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
procedure of inquiry and the period for submission of report by the
Disciplinary Committee and the procedure of inquiry by the Prosecution
Director.
9. Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules act
or omission which may be determined as professional misconduct.
65

66
10. Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to add a new section after section
22 of the principal Act so as to empower the Central Government to
specify by rules the allowances and terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Authority and the manner of
payment of allowances by the Council and the procedure to be followed
by the Authority in its meetings and in discharging its functions.
11. Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter after Chapter
VII to the principal act so as to empower the Central Government to
specify by rules the procedure to be followed by the Board in its
meeting and in discharging its functions and the terms and conditions
of service of the Chairman and the members of the Board.
12. The matters in respect of which the said rules or regulations
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and
it is not practicable to provide them in the proposed legislation itself.
13. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C OST A CCOUNTANTS A CT, 1959
(NO. 23 OF 1959)
* * * * *
2. ( 1) In this act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
4. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(3) Every person belonging to any of the
classes mentioned in clauses (ii), (iii), (iv) and
(v) of sub-section (1) shall have his name
entered in the Register on application being
made and granted in the prescribed manner
and on payment of the prescribed entrance fee,
which shall not exceed rupees three hundred
in any case.
* * * * *
5. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(4) A member, being an associate who has
been in continuous practice in India for at least
five years, whether before or after the
commencement of this Act, or whether partly
before and partly after the commencement of
this Act, and a member who has been an
associate for a continuous period of not less
than five years and who possesses such
qualifications as the Council may prescribe with
a view to ensuring that he has experience
equivalent to the experience normally acquired
as a result of continuous practice for a period
of five years as a cost accountant shall, on
payment of the prescribed entrance fee, which
shall not exceed rupees two hundred in any
case, and on application made and granted in
67
Definitions
and
Interpre-
tation.
Entry of
names in
the
Register.
Fellows
and
Associates.

68
the prescribed manner, be entered in the
Register as a fellow of the Institute.
* * * * *
6. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(2) Every such member shall make
application in such form and pay such annual
fee, for his certificate as may be prescribed, and
such fee shall be payable on or before the 1st
day of April in each year.
Provided that if a member of the Institute
who was in practice immediately before the
commencement of this Act has made within
one month of such commencement an
application for the grant of certificate of
practice, he shall not be deemed to have
contravened the provisions of sub-section (1)
by reason of his having practised during the
period between such commencement and the
disposal of the application.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
C
OUNCIL OF THE I NSTITUTE
9. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(2) The Council shall be composed of—
(a) not more than twelve persons
elected by members of the Institute from
amongst the fellows of the Institute chosen
in such manner and from such regional
constituencies as may be specified in this
behalf by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette; and
(b) not more than four persons
nominated by the Central Government.
10. ( 1) Elections under clause (a) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 9 shall be conducted in
the prescribed manner:
Certificate
of practice.
Constitution
of the
Council of
the
Institute.
Mode of
election to
Council.

69
Provided that the first election under the
said clause shall be held in such manner as
the Central Government may specify in this
behalf.
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any
such election, the matter shall be referred by
the Council to a Tribunal appointed by the
Central Government in this behalf and the
decision of such Tribunal shall be final:
Provided that no such reference shall be
made except on an application made to the
Council by an aggrieved party within thirty
days from the date of the declaration of the
result of the election.
(3) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be
borne by the Council.
* * * * *
12. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(3) The President or the Vice-President shall
hold office for a period of one year from the
date on which he is chosen but so as not to
extend beyond his term of office as a member
of the Council, and, subject to his being a
member of the Council at the relevant time, he
shall be eligible for re-election:
Provided that the President of the Council
at the time of the expiration of its duration
shall continue to hold office until a new Council
is constituted in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
13. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(3) A casual vacancy in the Council shall
be filled by fresh election from the constituency
concerned or by nomination by the Central
Government, as the case may be, and the
person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy
shall hold office until the dissolution of the
Council:
President
and Vice-
President.
Resignation
of
membership
and casual
vacancies.

70
Provided that no election shall be held to
fill a casual vacancy occurring within six
months prior to the date of the expiration of
the duration of the Council, but such a vacancy
may be filled by nomination by the Central
Government after consultation with the
President of the Council.
* * * * *
14. ( 1) The duration of any Council
constituted under this Act shall be three years
from the date of its first meeting.
* * * * *
16. ( 1) For the efficient performance of its
duties, the Council may—
* * * * *
17. ( 1) The Council shall constitute from
amongst its members the following Standing
Committees, namely:—
* * * * *
(ii) a Disciplinary Committee; and
* * * * *
(3) The Executive Committee shall consist
of the President and the Vice-President ex officio,
and three other members of the Council elected
by the Council.
(4) The Disciplinary Committee shall consist
of the President, ex officio , one member to be
nominated by the Central Government from
amongst the members nominated to the Council
by that Government and one member to be
elected by the Council.
(5) The Examination Committee shall
consist of the President or the Vice-President,
ex officio , as the Council may decide, and two
other members of the Council elected by the
Council.
Duration
and
dissolution
of Council.
Staff,
remuneration
and
allowances.
Committees
of the
Council.

71
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section, any Committee formed under sub-
section (2), may, with the sanction of the
Council, co-opt such other members of the
Institute not exceeding two-thirds of the total
membership of the Committee as the
Committee thinks fit, and any member so co-
opted shall be entitled to exercise all the rights
of a member of the Committee.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
R
EGISTER OF MEMBERS
19. ( 1)*  *  * * *
(3) The Council shall cause to be published
in such manner as may be prescribed, a list of
members of the Institute as on the 1st day of
April of each year, and shall, if requested to
do so by any such member, send him a copy
of such list.
(4) Every member of the Institute shall, on
his name being entered in the Register, pay
such annual membership fee differing in
amount according as he is an associate or a
fellow as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
M
ISCONDUCT
21. ( 1) Where on receipt of information by,
or a complaint made to, it, the Council is prima
facie of opinion that any member of the Institute
has been guilty of any professional or other
misconduct, the Council shall refer the case to
the Disciplinary Committee constituted under
section 17, and the Disciplinary Committee shall
thereupon hold such inquiry and in such
manner as may be prescribed, and shall report
the result of its inquiry to the Council.
Register.
Procedure
in inquiries
relating to
misconduct
of members
of Institute.

72
(2) If on receipt of such report the Council
finds that the member of the Institute is not
guilty of any professional or other misconduct,
it shall record its finding accordingly and direct
that the proceedings shall be filed, or the
complaint shall be dismissed, as the case may
be.
(3) If on receipt of such report the Council
finds that the member of the Institute is guilty
of any professional or other misconduct, it shall
record a finding accordingly and shall proceed
in the manner laid down in the succeeding sub-
sections.
(4) Where the finding is that a member of
the Institute has been guilty of a professional
misconduct specified in the First Schedule, the
Council shall afford to the member an
opportunity of being heard before orders are
passed against him on the case, and may
thereafter make any of the following orders,
namely:—
(a) reprimand the member;
(b) remove the name of the member
from the Register for such period, not
exceeding five years, as the Council thinks
fit:
Provided that where the Council is of
opinion that the case is one in which the name
of the member ought to be removed from the
Register for a period exceeding five years or
permanently, it shall not make any order
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), but shall
forward the case to the High Court with its
recommendations thereon.
(5) Where the misconduct in respect of
which the Council has found any member of
the Institute guilty is a misconduct other than
any such misconduct as is referred to in sub-
section (4) it shall forward the case to the High
Court with its recommendations thereon.

73
(6) On receipt of any case under sub-section
(4) or sub-section (5), the High Court shall fix
a date for the hearing of the case and shall
cause notice of the date so fixed to be given to
the member of the Institute concerned, the
Council and to the Central Government, and
shall afford such member, the Council and the
Central Government an opportunity of being
heard, and may thereafter make any of the
following orders, namely:—
(a) direct that the proceedings be filed,
or dismiss the complaint, as the case may
be;
(b) reprimand the member;
(c) remove him from membership of the
Institute either permanently or for such
period as the High Court thinks fit;
(d) refer the case to the Council for
further inquiry and report.
(7) Where it appears to the Court that the
transfer of any case pending before it to another
High Court, will promote the ends of justice
or tend to the general convenience of the
parties, it may so transfer the case, subject to
such conditions, if any, as it thinks fit to
impose, and the High Court to which such case
is transferred shall deal with it as if the case
had been forwarded to it by the Council.
Explanation I.—In this section “High Court”
means the highest civil court of appeal, not
including the Supreme Court, exercising
jurisdiction in the area in which the person
whose conduct is being inquired into carries
on business, or has his principal place of
business at the commencement of the inquiry:
Provided that where the cases relating to
two or more members of the Institute have to
be forwarded by the Council to different High
Courts, the Central Government shall, having

74
regard to the ends of justice and the general
convenience of the parties, determine which of
the High Courts to the exclusion of others shall
hear the cases against all the members.
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this
section “member of the Institute” includes a
person who was a member of the Institute on
the date of the alleged misconduct although he
has ceased to be a member of the Institute at
the time of the inquiry.
(8) For the purposes of any inquiry under
this section, the Council and the Disciplinary
Committee shall have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following
matters namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any
document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.
22. For the purposes of this Act, the
expression “professional misconduct “shall be
deemed to include any act or omission specified
in any of the Schedules, but nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit or abridge
in any way the power conferred or duty cast
on the Council under sub-section (1) of section
21 to inquire into the conduct of any member
of the Institute under any other circumstances.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. ( 1) Any member of the Institute
aggrieved by any order of the Council imposing
on him any of the penalties referred to in clause
Misconduct
defined.
Appeals.
5 of 1908.

75
(a) or clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section
21, may, within thirty days of the date on
which the order is communicated to him, prefer
an appeal to the High Court:
Provided that the High Court may entertain
any such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
member was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time.
(2) The High Court may, on its own motion
or otherwise, after calling for the records of
any case, revise any order made by the Council
under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of
section 21 and may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the
order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside,
reduce, confirm, or enhance the penalty
imposed by the order;
(c) remit the case to the Council for
such further inquiry as the High Court
considers proper in the circumstances of the
case;
(d) pass such other order as the High
Court thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall
be modified or set aside unless the Council has
been given an opportunity of being heard and
no order imposing or enhancing a penalty shall
be passed unless the person concerned has been
given an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation.—In this section “High Court”
and “member of the Institute” have the same
meanings as in section 21.
* * * * *

76
35. (1) The Central Government may from
time to time issue such directions to the Council
as in the opinion of the Central Government
are conducive to the fulfilment of the objects
of this Act and in the discharge of its functions,
the Council shall be bound to carry out any
such directions.
(2) Directions issued under sub-section (1)
may include directions to the Council to make
any regulations or to amend or revoke any
regulations already made.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central
Government, the council has persistently made
default in giving effect to the directions issued
under this section, the Central Government
may, after giving an opportunity to the Council
to state its case, by order, dissolve the Council,
whereafter a new Council shall be constituted
in accordance with the provisions of this Act
with effect from such date as may be specified
by the Central Government.
(4) Where the Central Government passes
an order under sub-section (3) dissolving the
Council, it may, pending the constitution of a
new Council in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, authorise any person or body of
persons to take over the management of the
affairs of the Institute and to exercise such
functions as may be specified in this behalf by
the Central Government.
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the Council in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act
or of any regulations or orders made
thereunder.
* * * * *
Directions
of the
Central
Government.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.

77
39. (1) The Council may, by notification in
the Gazette of India, make regulations for the
purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act,
and a copy of such regulations shall be sent to
each member of the Institute.
* * * * *
(5) Every regulation made under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the regulation, or both Houses agree that
the regulation should not be made, the
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that regulation.
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 21(4) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to cost
accountants in practice
A cost accountant in practice shall be
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct,
if he—
(1) allows any person to practise in his
name as a cost accountant unless such
person is also a cost accountant in practice
and is in partnership with or employed by
himself;
(2) pays or allows or agree to pay or
allow, directly or indirectly , any share,
Power to
take
regulations.

78
commission or brokerage in the fees or
profits of his professional work, to any
person other than a member of the Institute
or a partner or a retired partner or the legal
representative of a deceased partner;
Explanation. —In this item “partner”
includes a person residing outside India
with whom a cost accountant in practice
has entered into partnership which is not
in contravention of item (4) of this Part.
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part
of the profits of the professional work of a
lawyer, auctioneer, broker, or other agent
who is not a member of the Institute;
(4) enters into partnership with any
person other than a cost accountant in
practice or a person resident without India
who but for his residence abroad would
be entitled to be registered as member of
the Institute under clause (iv) of sub-section
(1) of section 4 or whose qualifications are
recognised by the Central Government or
the Council for the purpose of permitting
such partnerships, provided that the cost
accountant shares in the fees or profits of
the professional work of the partnership
both within and without India;
(5) secures, either through the services
of a person not qualified to be his partner
or by means which are not open to a cost
accountant, any professional work;
(6) solicits clients or professional work
either directly or indirectly, by circular,
advertisement, personal communication or
interview or by any other means;
(7) advertises his professional
attainments or services, or uses any
designation or expression other than cost
accountant on professional documents,
visiting cards, letter heads or sign boards,

79
unless it be a degree of a University
established by law in India or recognised
by the Central Government or a title
indicating membership of the Institute of
Cost and Works Accountants of India or of
any other institution that has been
recognised by the Central Government or
may be recognised by the Council;
(8) accepts a position as cost accountant
previously held by another cost accountant
in practice without first communicating
with him in writing;
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts
or offers to accept in respect of any
professional employment fees which are
based on a percentage of profits or which
are contingent upon the findings or results
of such employment, except in cases which
are permitted under any regulations made
under this Act;
(10) engages in any business or
occupation other than the profession of cost
accountant unless permitted by the Council
so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein
shall disentitle a cost accountant from being
a director of a company, unless he or any
of his partners is interested in such
company as accountant;
(11) accepts a position as cost
accountant previously held by some other
cost accountant in practice in such
conditions as to constitute under-cutting;
(12) allows a person not being a
member of the Institute in practice or a
member not being his partner to sign on
his behalf or on behalf of his firm, any
cost or pricing statements or any other
statements related thereto.

80
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of
the Institute in service
A member of the Institute (other than a
member in practice) shall be deemed to be
guilty of professional misconduct, if he being
an employee of any company, firm or person—
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay
directly or indirectly to any person any
share in the emoluments of the employment
undertaken by the member;
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part
of fees, profits or gains from a lawyer, a
cost accountant or broker engaged by such
company, firm or person or agent or
customer of such company, firm or person
by way of commission or gratification;
(3) discloses confidential information
acquired in the course of his employment
otherwise than as required by any law for
the time being in force or as permitted by
his employer.
PART III
Professional misconduct in relation to members of
the Institute generally
A member of the Institute, whether in
practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
(1) includes in any statement, return or
form to be submitted to the Council any
particulars knowing them to be falls;
(2) not being a fellow styles himself as
a fellow;
(3) does not supply the information
called for, or does not comply with the
requirements asked for, by the Council or
any of its Committees.

81
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 21(5) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to cost
accountants in practice requiring action by a
High Court
 A cost accountant in practice shall be
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct,
if he—
(1) discloses information acquired in the
course of his professional engagement to
any person other than the client so
engaging him, without the consent of such
client, or otherwise than as required by any
law for the time being in force;
(2) certifies or submits in his name or
in the name of his firm a report of an
examination of cost accounting and related
statements unless the examination of such
statements has been made by him or by a
partner or an employee in his firm or by
another cost accountant in practice;
(3) permits his name or the name of
his firm to be used in connection with an
estimate cost or earnings contingent upon
future transactions in a manner which may
lead to the belief that he vouches for the
accuracy of the forecast;
(4) expresses his opinion on cost or
pricing statements of any business or any
enterprise in which he, his firm or a partner
in his firm has a substantial interest, unless
he discloses the interest also in his report;
(5) fails to disclose in a cost or pricing
statement a material fact known to him
which is not disclosed in a cost or pricing
statement, but disclosure of which is
necessary to make such statement not
misleading;

82
(6) fails to report a material mis-
statement known to him to appear in a cost
or pricing statement with which he is
concerned in a professional capacity;
(7) is grossly negligent in the conduct
of his professional duties;
(8) fails to obtain sufficient information
to warrant the expression of an opinion or
makes exceptions which are sufficiently
material to negate the expression of an
opinion;
(9) fails to invite attention to any
material departure from the generally
accepted procedure of costing and pricing
applicable to the circumstances;
(10) fails to keep moneys of his client
in a separate banking account or to use
such moneys for purposes for which they
are intended.
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of
the Institute generally requiring action by a
High Court
A member of the Institute, whether in
practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
(i) contravenes any of the provisions of
this Act or the regulations made thereunder;
(ii) is guilty of such other act or
omission as may be specified by the
Council in this behalf, by notification in the
Gazette of India.

RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959.
—————
(Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of Finance)
83