REPORT
The Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006 was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2006 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance on 27 December, 2006 by the Hon’ble Speaker,
in consultation with Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination and report
thereon.
2. The Committee invited memoranda/suggestions regarding the
Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006 from professional bodies and
Chambers of Commerce and Industry viz. the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI), the Institute of Company Secretaries of
India (ICSI), the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
(ICWAI), the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
Industries (FICCI), the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), the
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industries (PHDCCI) and Associated
Chambers of Commerce and Industries (ASSOCHAM) and also heard
the views of their representatives.
3. The professional bodies and the Chambers of Commerce and
Industry, have, in general, welcomed the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006.
4. The Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs in connection with examination of the
Bill.
A. GENESIS OF THE BILL
5. In India, the need for legislation to provide for Limited Liability
Partnerships (LLPs) has been highlighted from time to time by various
Committees and Expert Groups, viz. Bhat Committee (1972), Committee
to examine the adequacy of Institutional credit to SSI sector and related
aspects (Nayak Committee, 1992), Expert Committee on Small
Enterprises (Abid Hussein Committee, 1997) and Dr. S.P . Gupta Study
Group on Development of Small Scale Enterprises, 2001.
6. In the recent past, the need for a separate legislation for LLPs
has been recommended by the Committee on Regulation of Private
Companies and Partnerships headed by Shri Naresh Chandra (2003)
and Dr. J. J. Irani Committee on new Company Law (2005).

2
7. The LLP structure is also found in USA, Australia, Japan and
in some of the Gulf countries like Dubai (United Arab Emirates). In
addition, the European Union also recognizes the concept of LLP . The
UK enacted LLP Act in the year 2000 and Singapore enacted their
LLP Act in the year 2005. In countries, such as the UK, USA, Australia,
Singapore, etc., the law is said to have proved to be of immense use
to professionals and small enterprises.
Advantages of LLP
8. The Limited Liability Partnership is envisaged to be a corporate
form distinct from a joint stock company set up under the Companies
Act, 1956 as well as a partnership firm set up under the Partnership
Act 1932. The basic difference between an LLP and a joint stock
company centers on the fact that while the internal governance structure
of a company is regulated by statute (the Companies Act, 1956), for
an LLP , it would be by way of a contractual agreement among partners.
At the same time, the LLP provides a shield to the partners from the
joint and several liability as would arise under the traditional
partnership form. As a hybrid form of business structure distinct from
a company or a partnership, the LLP is perceived to offer the following
advantages:
(i) LLP would be a new business/profession vehicle which will
give the organizational flexibility to the partners of the LLP
(governed through an agreement);
(ii) The partners of an LLP will have the advantage of
combining themselves in a body corporate form having
separate legal entity and perpetual succession leading to
growth of professional expertise and entrepreneurial initiative
in a flexible, innovative and efficient manner.
(iii) There will not be any dependence on the Statute for
determining the internal working arrangements of an LLP;
(iv) The partners of an LLP would be able to modify their
working arrangement (by making suitable changes in the
agreement) to suit their business model and risk and reward
profile;
(v) LLP framework would suit various kinds of service
enterprises taking into account the fact that the services are
changing and evolving over time. Services in sectors like
hospitality, tourism, information technology, human resource
development, creative art and decorative art etc., are
expected to grow in coming times;

3
(vi) V enture Capital and technology based enterprises are
expected to find the LLP structure very useful;
(vii) Combination between two enterprises to build synergy
between their respective expertises would be possible.
(viii) Small enterprises would find the desirable flexibility and
ease of compliance in the LLP structure.
9. Having examined all aspects of the Limited Liability
Partnership Bill in detail, the Committee recommend consideration
of the Bill, subject to the modifications/additions suggested in this
report. The Limited Liability Partnership is an alternative corporate
business vehicle that gives the benefits of limited liability but allows
its members the flexibility of organizing the internal structure of
the entity as a partnership based on an agreement. The Committee’s
examination of the Bill reveals certain grave lacunae and serious
infirmities in the Bill. Certain key issues which are likely to impact
the effectiveness of the proposed legislation have also been brought
to the fore. These are discussed in the subsequent sections of the
report.
B. DEFINITIONS
Clause 2
10. Clause 2 of the Bill defines various expressions used in the Bill
for the purposes of certainty in the interpretation of the proposed
legislation.
(i) Definition of business
11. Clause 2(d) defines the term ‘business’ as follows:
 2(d) ‘business’ includes every trade, profession and occupation;
12. Emphasizing on defining the term ‘business’ in clear and
unambiguous terms, the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
(ICSI), made the following suggestion before the Committee:
“To make the definition clear, inclusive and unambiguous, it is
suggested to include the term ‘service’ within the definition of
`business’. Accordingly, Clause 2(d) may be re-drafted as follows:
‘business’ includes every trade, profession, service and occupation.”

4
13. Expressing agreement with the suggestion for making the
definition of the term more ‘inclusive’, the Ministry in a written reply,
informed:
“The suggestion is taken note of. The definition of the term
‘business’ would be reviewed to make it inclusive of activities of
as wide a range as possible.”
(ii) Definition of Limited Liability Partnership Agreement
14. Clause 2(l) defines “limited liability partnership agreement” as:
“limited liability partnership agreement means any written
agreement between the partners of the limited liability partnership
or between the limited liability partnership and its partners which
determines the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their
rights and duties in relation to limited liability partnership.”
15. A suggestion made by the Institute of Company Secretaries of
India (ICSI) on the definition proposed under the Clause reads:
“To make the clause more explicit, the word that may be inserted
in the last line before the words ‘limited liability partnership’; and
the redrafted sub-clause may read as:
‘limited liability partnership agreement’ means any written
agreement between the partners of the limited liability partnership
or between the limited liability partnership as its partners which
determines the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their
rights and duties in relation to that limited liability partnership.”
16. Asked to give their response on the suggestion, the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs , in a written reply stated:
“the suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately with
legislative vetting.”
(iii) Definition of partner
17. Clause 2(n) states as follows:
“partner, in relation to a limited liability partnership, means any
person who has been admitted as a partner in the limited liability
partnership in accordance with the limited liability partnership
agreement.”

5
18. In regard to definition of the term, ‘partner’ as proposed, the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India made the following
suggestion:
“The principle of holding out/estoppel may be included. Where a
person who is not a partner, represents himself as a partner or
permits himself to be represented as a partner, such a person should
be deemed to be a partner and made liable to the person who has
given credit to the LLP or entered into an agreement with LLP on
the faith of such representation.”
19. In response to a related query, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
in their written reply, stated as below:
“Clause 27 of the Bill indirectly addresses the concept of ‘partner
by holding out’. However, the suggestion for including a specific
provision for bringing this concept in the Bill more clearly is taken
note of”.
(iv) Definition of “Entity” under Clause 2
20. The term ‘Entity’ occurs under the provisions of Clause 18
which deal with the application that could be made by an LLP for
issuing a direction ‘to change a name in certain circumstances’ and
also in the provisions under various clauses in Chapter IX of the Bill
on ‘Investigation’ viz., Clauses 45, 46, 48, 49 and 51.
21. Expressing the need for providing clarity in respect of the
Clauses where the term ‘entity’ occurs, the ICSI, in their memorandum,
suggested that the term needed to be defined under Clause 2 by
including therein, ‘a partnership firm under the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932’. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in response to a related
query informed that the suggestion has been taken note of to be
addressed appropriately.
22. In order to ensure unambiguous interpretation of terms, the
Committee suggest that, as agreed to by the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, the following refinements be made in the ‘definitions’ in
Clause 2 of the Bill:
— Clause 2 (d): ‘business’
The Definition of the term ‘business’ be expanded to cover
a wide range of activities such as services, as may be
specified, so as to make it more inclusive.

6
— Clause 2(l): ‘Limited Liability Partnership Agreement’
The word ‘that’ be inserted before the words ‘limited
liability partnership’ in the last line of the definition to
make the sub-clause more explicit.
— Clause 2 (n): ‘Partner’
A specific provision be included to bring out more clearly
the concept of ‘partner by holding out’/estoppel.
— The term ‘entity’ which occurs in Clause 18 and some
other Clauses be defined to include a partnership firm
registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.
C. APPLICABILITY
Grounds for Disqualification of Partners and Identification Number
23. Clause 5 seeks to provide that an individual or a body corporate
may become a partner in an LLP and also deals with the requirement
of obtaining a Partner Identification Number from the Central
Government by every Designated Partner.
24. Clause 5 reads as under:
“5(1) Any individual or body corporate may be a partner in a
limited liability partnership.
(2) Every designated partner of a limited liability partnership shall
obtain a Partner Identification Number (PIN) from the Central
Government and the provisions of Sections 266A to 266G (both
inclusive) of the Companies Act, 1956 shall apply mutatis mutandis
for the said purpose.”
25. Sec. 266A to 266G of the Companies Act deal with Director
Identification Number (DIN) and obligations governing DIN.
26. Pointing out that contractual capacity was a prerequisite to
enter into a limited liability partnership agreement, the ICSI has
emphasized that a person who may have applied to be adjudged an
insolvent or who is declared by a court to be of unsound mind, should
be disqualified to be a partner of the limited liability partnership. The
ICSI has also suggested that the grounds of disqualification of the
partner be specified in the Act.

7
27. Responding to the suggestion, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
have stated, in their written reply that the suggestion is noted to be
addressed appropriately with legislative vetting. As regards the grounds
for disqualification of a designated partner, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs in a written note informed that the same will be prescribed
through rules to be framed under the provisions of sub clause (4) of
Clause 7.
28. It is observed in this connection that in the Companies Act,
1956, the grounds for disqualifications of directors have been specified
in the Act itself in Sec. 274.
29. Further, with specific reference to the provisions of Clause 5(2),
whereby designated partners will be required to obtain a Permanent
Account Number (PIN), a suggestion received from the ICSI reads as
under:
“The Clause requires every designated partner of a limited liability
partnership to obtain Partner Identification Number (PIN) from
the Central Government and the provisions of sections 266A to
266G of the Companies Act, 1956 shall apply mutatis-mutandis.
Since limited liability partnership administration will be under the
regime of the Ministry of Company Affairs (the MCA) which is
already managing the allocation of DIN, designated partners having
DIN may be exempted from obtaining separate PIN. For the
purpose of allocation of PIN in such cases, information from
respective DIN may be obtained. This is in order to make the
procedure simple and non-repetitive.The Clause may therefore be
re-drafted accordingly.”
30. When asked to express the Government’s perception on the
need felt for exempting designated partners possessing DIN from
obtaining a separate PIN, the Ministry, in reply stated as under:
“The Director Identification Number (DIN) which has been
introduced in the Companies Act, is a legal requirement for all
company directors and is intended to provide information in the
public domain about directors of the company, their relationship
with other companies and to provide a personal data base to enable
regulatory agencies to enforce liabilities of the directors under the
Law. It also serves as a data base to track directors of companies
that may raise funds from the public and thereafter vanish.
‘Permanent Account Number’ (PAN) issued by Income Tax
Department is a reference and identity check for the purposes of
taxation.

8
In the same manner, the Partner Identification Number (PIN) will
be mandatory only for Designated Partners of an LLP . Such
Designated Partners may or may not be directors of a company. In
the case of small LLPs, the Designated Partner may not even be
an income tax assessee. Therefore, mandating a DIN or a PAN for
a Designated Partner in a LLP as a legal requirement may not be
appropriate.
However, it may be possible to make use of the data available
under DIN for the purposes of a PIN or co-relate DIN with PIN
subject to technical feasibility. The overall intention in the exercise
would be to facilitate ease of compliance.”
31. The Committee desire that as agreed to by the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs the grounds for disqualification of a partner in
LLP be specified in the Act itself.
32. The Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have agreed with the suggestion made by the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India (ICSI) that in so far as designated partners
already having a ‘Director Identification Number’ (DIN) is concerned,
the data available under DIN may be made use of for allotment of
Partner Identification Number. The Committee hope that suitable
instructions will be issued in this regard soon after the enactment
of this legislation.
Clause 7—Minimum number of designated partners
33. Clause 7 reads as under:
“7.(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have at least two
designated partners who are individuals and at least one of them
shall be a resident in India:
Provided that in case of a limited liability partnership in which all
the partners are body corporates, at least two partners shall
nominate their respective individuals who are to act as ‘designated
partners’ and one of the nominees shall be a resident in India.
(2) For the purpose of this section, ‘resident in India’ means a
person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than one
hundred and eighty-two days during the immediately preceding
one year.”

9
34. On the issue of the minimum number of designated partners,
an LLP should necessarily have as per the stipulations of Clause 7(1),
the ICSI, in their written memorandum submitted as follows:
“Clause 7 provides for appointment of at least two designated
partners who are individuals. It also provides that in case of a
limited liability partnership in which all partners are body
corporates, at least two partners shall nominate their respective
individuals to Act as designated partners. However, the Clause
does not address a situation where a limited liability partnership
comprises of both individuals as well as body corporates. For
example, if a limited liability partnership is formed with one
individual and two body corporates then it would not be possible
to comply with the provisions of Clause 7 for it cannot have two
designated partners who are individuals. It would therefore, violate
the requirements of the Act from the very beginning. It is, therefore,
suggested that the first proviso, may be substituted as below:
“Provided that in case of a limited liability partnership in which
one or more partners are individuals and body corporates, at least
two partners who are individuals or nominees of body corporates
shall act as designated partners.”
35. Asked to respond to this suggestion, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, in their written submission stated as follows:
“The suggestion appears to be made to address situations where
an LLP comprises of a mix of individual and body corporates and
is taken note of. It may be addressed by providing that in case of
a limited liability partnership in which one or more partners are
individuals and body corporates, at least two partners who are
individuals or nominees (individuals) of body corporates shall act
as designated partners. This would ensure that at least two of the
designated partners are individuals. However, the necessary
provision may be made after suitable legal vetting.”
36. With reference to the provisions of Clause 7(2), whereby one of
the ‘designated partners’ is to be a resident of India, who would mean
to be a person ‘who has stayed in India for a period of not less than
one hundred and eighty-two days’, the ICAI have inter-alia expressed
the need for clarity on when the preceding year, as stipulated would
commence from. The related submission made by the ICAI reads as
under:
“The term preceding one year needs to be clarified that whether
preceding one year is to be seen from the end of the financial
year of LLP or from the commencement of it.”

10
37. While furnishing their views on this suggestion, the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs in reply, stated as follows:
“The term ‘year’ has not been defined in the LLP Bill. Intention
is to ensure that one of the designated partners is resident in
India for 182 days during the last year. However, the possibility of
the word ‘year’ used in this clause being defined to mean ‘financial
year’ may be considered.”
38. The proviso to Clause 7(3) of the Bill envisages nomination
of individuals to act as ‘designated partners’ in the case of an LLP
in which all partners are body corporates. The proviso, however,
does not deal with a situation where an LLP comprises a mix of
individuals and body corporates. The Committee desire that, as
agreed to by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, a suitable provision
be made in the Bill by amending the Clause to address this situation.
39. The term ‘year’ used in Clause 7(2) of the Bill has not been
defined. It is not clear whether it refers to a calendar year or financial
year. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have proposed to define the
term as ‘financial year’. Since the term is used in the context of the
period of residency of an individual in India, the Committee desire
that the term be defined suitably keeping in view the definition
used in similar context in other statutes.
Clauses 8 and 9—Appointment of designated partners arising out of
vacancy
Clauses 8 and 9 (1) of the Bill read as follows:
“8(1) If the incorporation document specifies as to who are to be
designated partners:
(a) such persons shall be the designated partners on
incorporation; and
(b) any partner may become a designated partner by and
in accordance with limited liability partnership
agreement and a partner may cease to be a designated
partner in accordance with the limited liability
partnership agreement.
(2) A limited liability partnership may appoint a designated
partner within thirty days of a vacancy arising for any
reason:
Provided that if no designated partner is appointed, or if at
any time there is only one designated partner, each partner
shall be deemed to be a designated partner.

11
(3) If the incorporation document states that every person who
from time to time is a partner of the limited liability
partnership is a designated partner, every partner shall be
designated partner.”
“9(1) Every limited liability partnership shall appoint an individual
(who is resident in India) as designated partner within thirty
days from the date on which a person ceases to be a
designated partner and the provisions of sub-section (3) and
sub-section (4) of section 7 shall apply in respect of the
new partner.”
40. On the issue of appointment of designated partners in case of
a vacancy the following suggestion has been received from the ICSI:
“The sub-clause 2 of Clause 8 defines appointment of designated
partner arising out of vacancy for any reason. It may be noted
that Clause 9(1) also deals with changes in designated partners,
and appears repetitive. Accordingly, it is suggested that the sub-
clause (2) under Clause 8 may be deleted and the same sub-clause
8(2) may be put under Clause 9(1) in place of existing Clause 9(1).
Consequent to this, existing Clause 8(3) may be renumbered as
Clause 8(2).”
41. Asked, inter alia, whether the provisions proposed under Clause
8 (2) and Clause 9 (1) were not repetitive, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, in reply informed that the issue pointed out has been noted
for addressing “appropriately with legislative vetting”.
42. There appears to be a repetition of the contents of Clause
8(2) in Clause 9 (1). Both the Clauses deal with appointment of a
designated partner against a vacancy. The Committee recommend
that, as assured by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Clauses
will be reviewed and amended appropriately.
Clause 9(2)—Liabilities of designated partners
43. Clause 9(2) of the Bill states as under:
“9(2)A designated partner shall be:
(a) answerable for the doing of all acts, matters and things as
are required to be done by the limited liability partnership
in respect of compliance of the provisions of this Act
including filing of any document, return, statement and the

12
like report pursuant to the provisions of this Act and as
may be specified in the limited liability partnership
agreement; and
(b) liable to all penalties imposed on the limited liability
partnership for any contravention of those provisions.”
44. In their written memorandum, the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India have pointed out that since the question of
answerability arises out of responsibility, a designated partner can be
made answerable only when he is responsible for the doing of all
acts, matters and things as are required to be done by the limited
liability partnership. Hence, ICSI suggested that the word “answerable”
be replaced by the word “responsible” in Clause 9(2)(a). In response
to a query raised in this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have expressed agreement to address the issue appropriately.
45. The Clause 9(2)(a) of the Bill makes a designated partner
answerable for the doing of all Acts. This raises an issue that a
designated partner can be made answerable only when he is
determined as responsible. The Committee desire that the Clause
9(2)(a) be amended suitably to substitute the word ‘answerable’.
D. INCORPORATION
Clause 11—Incorporation of Document
46. Clause 11 provides:
“11(1) For a limited liability partnership to be incorporated:
(a) two or more persons associated for carrying on a lawful
business with a view to profit shall have subscribed their
names to an incorporation document;
(b) the incorporation document shall be filed in such manner
and with such fees, as may be prescribed with the Registrar
of the State in which the registered office of the limited
liability partnership is to be situated; and
(c) there shall be filed with a statement in the prescribed form,
made by either an advocate, or a Company Secretary or a
Chartered Accountant, who is engaged in the formation of
the limited liability partnership and by anyone who
subscribed his name to the incorporation document, that all
the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder
have been complied with, in respect of incorporation and
matters precedent and incidental thereto.”

13
47. The ICSI has suggested that Clause 11(1)(c) requires a statement
in prescribed form to be filed by an advocate or a company secretary
or a chartered accountant. To bring clarity as to when the statement
is to be filed, the word ‘with’ may be replaced with the words ‘along
with the incorporation document’ in the sub-clause and the redrafted
sub-clause may read as follows:
“11(1)(c) There shall be filed along with the incorporation document,
a statement in the prescribed form made by either an advocate or
a company secretary or a chartered accountant, who is engaged in
the formation of the limited liability partnership and by anyone
who subscribed his name to the incorporation document, that all
the requirements of this Act and the rules made there under have
been complied with, in respect of incorporation and matters
precedent and incidental thereto”.
48. Questioned in this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in
reply stated:
“The suggestion is taken note of. Suitable provision would be made
to provide the desired clarity”.
49. By way of making out a case for entitling Cost Accountants
also to file the ‘declaration of compliance’, the Institute of Cost and
Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) had, in their memorandum,
suggested as follows:
“It may please be noted that for the formation of LLP also the
practicing Cost Accountants have not been authorised to file
declaration of compliance. As a well-recognized profession in the
electronic age, exclusion of professionals like Cost Accountants from
the filing of declaration of compliance under the LLP as well as
Companies Act is discriminatory. Further the proactive measures
initiated under MCA21 give equal footing to all the three
professionals. It is desired that the same may be extended to all
the three professionals i.e., practicing Chartered Accountants, Cost
Accountants and Company Secretaries in all compliances whether
under the Companies Act or LLP Bill.
It is pertinent to mention that the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949/
Cost and Works Accountants Act 1959 and Company Secretaries
Act 1980 have undergone change and enabled formation of Multi-
Disciplinary Partnerships as per the First Schedule to the respective
Acts. Accordingly professionals from all the three Institutes are
permitted to form partnership among themselves and share
commission, brokerage in the fees or profits of their professional
business.”

14
50. While responding to this, the Ministry have furnished following
reply:
“The suggestion is taken note of. Suitable provision may be
considered for including Cost Accountants in the Clause”.
51. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that there
are two shortcomings in Clause 11(1)(c) of the Bill. First, the sub-
clause requires filing of a compliance statement but does not specify
when that statement is to be filed. Institute of Company Secretaries
of India (ICSI) has suggested to the Committee that the sub-clause
be amended to indicate that the compliance statement be filed along-
with the incorporation document. Second, the professionals
authorized to file the compliance statement include only three
categories viz. advocate, company Secretary and Chartered Accountant
and do not include Cost Accountants. The Committee desire the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs to address these concerns and suitably
modify the Clause 11(1)(c) to rectify the shortcomings.
Clause 12 – Incorporation by Registration
52. Clause 12 of the Bill reads as under:
12(1) When the requirements imposed by clauses (b) and (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 11 have been complied with, the
Registrar shall retain the incorporation document and, unless
the requirement imposed by clause (a) of that sub-section
has not been complied with, he shall within a period of
fourteen days-
(a) register the incorporation document; and
(b) give a certificate that the limited liability partnership
is incorporated by the name specified in the
incorporation document.
(2) The Registrar may accept the statement delivered under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 11 as sufficient
evidence that the requirement imposed by clause (a) of that
sub-section has been complied with.
(3) The certificate shall be signed by the Registrar and
authenticated by his official seal.
(4) The certificate is conclusive evidence that the limited liability
partnership is incorporated by the name specified in the
incorporation document.

15
53. The ICSI has suggested that sub-clauses 12(1)(b) and 12(4) may
be redrafted as follows for the sake of brevity:
“Sub-clause 12 (1) (b): give a certificate that the limited liability
partnership is incorporated by the name specified therein.
Sub-clause 12 (4): The certificate is conclusive evidence that the
limited liability partnership is incorporated by the name specified
therein.”
54. In their written submission, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have agreed to address the issue of redrafting the provisions for the
purpose of brevity and providing clarity.
55. The Committee desire that for the sake of brevity, the words
“in the incorporation document” appearing in sub-clauses 12(1)(b)
and 12(4) be substituted with the word ‘therein’.
Clause 13 – Registered Office
56. Clause 13 of the bill provides as under:
“13(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have a registered
office to which all communications and notices may be
addressed and where they shall be received.
(2) A document may be served on a limited liability partnership
or a partner or designated partner thereof by sending it by
post under a certificate of posting or by registered post or
by any other mode, which may be prescribed, or by leaving
at its registered office.
(3) A limited liability partnership may change the address of
its registered office by filing with the Registrar notice of
such change in such form and manner as may be prescribed
and any such change shall take effect only upon such filing.
(4) If the limited liability partnership contravenes any provisions
of this section, the limited liability partnership and its every
partner shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees.”
57. It has been felt by the ICSI that the sub-clause 13(2) needs to
be redrafted to clarify/ensure service of documents to partners other
than designated partners. It has, therefore been suggested that the
sub-clause may be redrafted as follows:
“A document may be served on a limited liability partnership or
designated partner thereof by sending it by post under a certificate

16
of posting or by registered post or by any other mode, which may
be prescribed, at the registered office and in case of partners other
than designated partners at their usual residential address”.
58. In response to a related query posed, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs have expressed concurrence to appropriately address the issue.
59. Further it has been felt by the CII regarding Clause 13 (3) that
the existing private companies or unlisted public companies may seek
a change in their registered office from one state to the other and opt
for conversion into LLP forms of business firms for operating in a
new state. As change in name and the address could make it difficult
for creditors and other stakeholders to track such companies, CII has
suggested that adequate notices to all the stakeholders should be
insisted upon.
60. Asked to point out the ways and means of addressing such
concerns involving the interests of the stakeholders, the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, stated as under:—
“Clause 13(3) of the Bill provides that a LLP may change the
address of its registered office by filing with the Registrar notice
of such change in such form and manner as may be prescribed
and any such change shall take effect only upon such filing.
There will be issues relating to protection of interest of creditors
and other stakeholders like employees etc. in case an LLP proposes
to change its registered office from one state to another. In such a
situation the regulatory framework applicable to companies may
need to be applied to LLPs. Clause 63 of the Bill proposes that the
relevant provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 may be made
applicable to LLPs at any time in the future by Notification by
Central Government, with such changes or modifications as
appropriate. Notifications incorporating such adaptations would be
placed before the Parliament in draft form and shall be subject to
modification/refusal by the Parliament.
Alternatively, a suitable enabling provision in the LLP Bill may be
considered empowering Central Government to prescribe suitable
rules for protection of interests of creditors and other stakeholders
in such situation”.
61. The Clause 13 (2) stipulates that the registered office of a
LLP will be the venue for serving of documents on LLP or a partner
or designated partner. ICSI has proposed that in case of partners

17
other than designated partners, the venue for serving documents
should be their usual residential address and not the registered office
of LLP . This has been agreed to by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The Committee, accordingly, expect suitable amendment of the Clause
13 (2) to reflect this position.
62. There will be issues relating to protection of interest of
creditors and other stakeholders when LLP changes it’s registered
office from one place to another. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have proposed that in such a situation, the regulatory framework
applicable to companies may need to be applied to LLPs and that
this could be done by a Notification by Central Government at any
time in the future. The Committee feel that appropriate regulatory
framework in this regard should be built into the Bill itself
considering the importance of protecting the interests of creditors
and other stakeholders. The Committee, accordingly, desire suitable
provisions in this regard in the Bill.
Clause 14 – Effect of incorporation
63. Clause 14 reads as under:
“14. A limited liability partnership shall, by its name have the
power of—
(a) suing and being sued;
(b) acquiring, owning, holding and developing or disposing of
property , both movable and immovable;
(c) having a common seal; and
(d) doing and suffering such other acts and things as bodies
corporate may lawfully do and suffer.”
64. Elsewhere, the provisions under Clause 31 (1) on the form of
contribution of partners to the benefit of a Limited Liability Partnership,
read as under:—
“A contribution of a partner may consist of tangible or intangible
property or other benefit to the limited liability partnership,
including money, promissory notes, other agreements to contribute
cash or property, and contracts for services performed or to be
performed.”
65. In this regard, the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
have pointed out that in sub-clause 14(b), the terms “tangible/

18
intangible” need to be included for covering the term, ‘property’ in
line with the definition of ‘property’ as enumerated in Clause 31(1).
Asked to respond to the suggestion, the Ministry stated as below:
“The suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately”.
66. With specific reference to the provisions of Clause 14 (c),
whereby an LLP is to have a common seal, the suggestion received
from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) reads as
under:—
“Companies Act, 1956 requires companies to have common seal,
because the company does not act by itself but through its common
seal. Clause 14(C) of the LLP Bill also provides that the LLP should
have a common seal. However, the objective of the same is not
clear. LLP Bill nowhere provides where the common seal would
be used. Further, LLP acts through partners, thus the utility of
having a common seal is doubtful”.
67. Questioned on the desirability of having a common seal for
LLPs, as pointed out by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in reply, informed:—
“Since LLP would be a separate legal entity , approval of LLP to
any document/agreement may be expressed through affixing the
common seal of LLP . Similarly, there may be agreements between
an LLP and its partners. On such Agreements the LLP may be
represented through its Common Seal. The provision of common
seal to provide authenticity to LLP documents may be relevant in
the Indian context since disputes involving the LLP would require
adjudication. However, the specific documents where affixing of
common seal would be mandatory may be provided as suggested”.
68. The term ‘property’ used in sub-clause 14(b) does not
distinguish between tangible and intangible property as defined in
other statutes. Also the sub-clause 14(c) which empowers an LLP to
have a common seal by its name does not specify where affixing of
common seal would be mandatory. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have agreed to address these shortcomings. The Committee expect
suitable provisions in this regard.
Clause 15—Name of an LLP
69. Clause 15 pertaining to the registered name of a Limited
Liability Partnership provides as follows:—
“15(1) Every limited liability partnership shall have either the
words “limited liability partnership” or the acronym “LLP”
as the last words of its name.

19
(2) No limited liability partnership shall be registered by a name
which, in the opinion of the Central Government is—
(a) undesirable;
(b) identical or too nearly resembles to that of any other
partnership firm or limited liability partnership or body
corporate or a registered trade mark, or a trade mark
which is subject of an application for registration, of
any other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999”.
70. On the afore-mentioned provisions of the Bill, the ICSI, pointed
out that the word ‘or’ between the words ‘undesirable’ and ‘identical’
was missing. Questioned whether it was not essential to incorporate
the word ‘or’ between the words ‘undesirable’ and ‘identical’ as
suggested, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs expressed concurrence for
incorporating the same following legislative vetting.
71. The absence of the word ‘or’ between the words ‘undesirable’
in sub-clause 15(2) (a) and ‘identical’ in sub-clause 15(2)(b) may lead
to unintended interpretations. The Committee desire insertion of the
deficient word.
Clause 17—Rectification of name of a limited liability partnership
72. Clause 17 reads as under:
“17(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 15 and 16,
where the Central Government is satisfied that a limited
liability partnership has been registered (whether through
inadvertence or otherwise and whether originally or by a
change of name) under a name which—
(a) is a name referred to in sub-section (2) of section 15;
or
(b) so nearly resembles the name of any other limited
liability partnership or body corporate or other name
as to be likely to be mistaken for it;
the Central Government may direct the limited liability
partnership to change its name, and the limited liability
partnership shall comply with the direction within three
months after the date of the direction or such longer period
as the Central Government may allow.

20
(2) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with
a direction given under sub-section (1) shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees”.
73. By way of expressing the need for ensuring that the designated
partners were also made liable for failure to comply with the directions
of the Central Government on changing the name of a LLP considered
to be undesirable, a suggestion made by the ICSI with specific reference
to the provisions proposed under Clause 17 (2) states as follows:—
“Under sub-clause (2) of Clause 17, in addition to the limited
liability partnership, its designated partners may also be held
responsible for failure to comply with the directions of the Central
Government and accordingly, the sub-clause (2) may be redrafted
and read as under:—
“17(2) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply
with a direction given under sub-section (1), the limited
liability partnership and its designated partners shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees”.
74. Asked to respond to the suggestion, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, in reply stated that the same was being taken note of, to be
addressed appropriately with vetting by Legislative Department.
75. Under Clause 17(2), the liability to punishment for failure to
comply with the direction of the Central Government is made only
to the LLP and not to its designated partners. As agreed to by the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Committee desire that
Clause 17 (2) be suitably amended to make designated partners also
liable for punishment in the event of failure to comply with the
Central Government directions.
Clause 21 – Publication of name and limited liability
76. Clause 21(1) states as below:
“21(1) Every limited liability partnership shall ensure that its
invoices and official correspondence bear the following,
namely:—
(a) the name, address and registration number of the
limited liability partnership; and
(b) a statement that it is registered with limited liability .”

21
77. In their written memorandum, the ICSI have suggested for
modifying/amending the provisions proposed under Clause 21(1),
which reads as follows:—
“Under sub clause (1) the word “correspondence” may be replaced
with the word “publications” in order to broaden its ambit and
under Clause 21(1)(a) the word “registered” may be added before
the word “address”.
78. The clause may read as:
(1) Every limited liability partnership shall ensure that its invoices
and official publications bear the following, namely:—
(a) the name, registered address and registration number
of the limited liability partnership; and
(b) a statement that it is registered with limited liability”.
79. On the suggestion expressed for modifying the provisions, the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in reply, submitted as under:
“The suggestions are noted to be addressed appropriately with
legislative vetting”.
80. The Committee agree with the ICSI’s two suggestions
proposing substitution of the word ‘correspondence’ with the word
‘publications’ in Clause 21 (1) to broaden its ambit and insertion of
the word ‘registered’ before the word ‘address’ in sub-clause 21 (1)
(a) to ensure that only the registered address is published by LLP .
Accordingly, the Committee recommend suitable modifications in
Clause 21 (1).
E. PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS
Clause 22 – Eligibility to be partners
81. Clause 22 reads as under:
“22. On the incorporation of a limited liability partnership, the
persons who subscribed their names to the incorporation document
shall be its partners and any other person may become a partner
of the limited liability partnership by and in accordance with the
limited liability partnership agreement”.

22
82. The PHDCCI, in their written submission, have suggested
following in respect of this Clause:—
“While providing that any other person may become a partner of
a LLP , it is suggested that Clause 22 may also provide for a
restriction on the number of partnerships which a person can enter
into as a partner”.
83. Questioned whether it was not essential to restrict the number
of partnership firms in which a person may become a partner, the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in response informed:—
“At present there is no restriction under Partnership Act, 1932 in
respect of number of partnership firms in which a person may
become partners. There is a restriction under the Companies Act,
1956 on number of companies in which a person may hold office
at the same time as director. The maximum number provided for
this purpose in such Act is 15. However private companies (which
are neither subsidiary nor holding companies of public companies),
unlimited companies and ‘companies not carrying business for
profit’ are not counted while counting such limit of maximum
15 companies.
Since LLP structure is proposed to be based on agreement with
partners having freedom to manage their internal affairs themselves,
there does not appear to be any justification at this stage to put
a restriction on number of LLPs in which a person may become
partner.
However, a requirement/restriction on the number of LLPs in
which a person may become ‘designated partner’ may be
considered”.
84. As regards the issue raised by PHDCCI favouring a restriction
on number of LLPs in which a person may become partner, the
Committee are inclined to agree with the view of the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs that such restriction may impact on freedom of
partners to manage their internal affairs themselves. The Committee,
however, recommend that there should be an appropriate provision
to put restriction on number of LLPs in which a person may become
‘designated partner’.
Clause 24 – Cessation of partnership interest
85. Sub clauses 1, 2 and 3 of Clause 24 read as under:
“24(1) A person may cease to be a partner of a limited liability
partnership in accordance with an agreement with the other

23
partners or, in the absence of agreement with the other
partners as to cessation of being a partner, by giving a
notice of not less than thirty days to the other partners of
his intention to resign as partner.
(2) A person may also cease to be a partner of a limited liability
partnership by his death or by dissolution of the limited
liability partnership.
(3) Where a person has ceased to be a partner of a limited
liability partnership (hereinafter referred to as “former
partner”), the former partner is to be regarded (in relation
to any person dealing with the limited liability partnership)
as still being a partner of the limited liability partnership
unless—
(a) the person has notice that the former partner has ceased
to be a partner of the limited liability partnership; or
(b) notice that the former partner has ceased to be a
partner of the limited liability partnership has been
delivered to the Registrar.”
86. On the provisions proposed under Clause 24(1) and (2), a view
expressed by ICSI is as under:—
(a) Considering the impact any cessation shall have on the
limited liability partnership, it is suggested that any notice
of cessation should be in writing to form some cognizable
evidence of such notice. It is, therefore, suggested that Clause
24(1) be redrafted as under;
“(1) A person may cease to be a partner of a limited liability
partnership in accordance with an agreement with the
other partners or, in the absence of agreement with
the other partners as to cessation of being a partner,
by giving a notice in writing of not less than thirty
days to the other partners of his intention to resign as
partner”.
(b) Since, contractual capacity is perquisite to enter into a limited
liability partnership agreement, in addition to death or
dissolution of limited liability partnership, a partner who
has applied to be adjudged as insolvent or declared as
insolvent or is declared to be of unsound mind by a
competent court, should cease to be a partner of a limited

24
liability partnership. Accordingly sub-clause (2) may be
redrafted to read as:
“(2) A person ceases to be a partner of a limited liability
partnership by his death or by dissolution of the limited
liability partnership. Further, a partner who has applied
to be adjudged as insolvent or declared as insolvent or
is declared to be of unsound mind by a competent
court, shall cease to be a partner of a limited liability
partnership”.
87. In response to a related query, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs have agreed to take note of the suggestion for modifying
sub-clause (1) of Clause 24 to provide for notice of cessation of
partnership to be mandatorily in writing; and sub-clause (2) of Clause
24 to provide for cessation in case of insolvency, state of unsound
mind etc. of a partner.
88. Further, the PHDCCI, in their memorandum, pointed out in
respect of Clause 24(3) as follows:
“Clause 24(3) should provide that the notice for change of partner
should be made public document. Every person dealing with LLP
should have the right to have the list of partners”.
89. By way of responding to a question on the suggestion, the
Ministry, in reply, stated as follows:
“Incorporation Document, Names of partners and changes made
therein may be considered for inspection by public.”
90. Under sub-clause 1 of Clause 24, a person may cease to be
a partner of a LLP by giving a notice of his intention to resign as
partner. The sub-clause, however, does not require that the notice be
given in writing. Unless this requirement of giving the notice in
writing is expressly provided for in the Bill, the Bill will leave
room for ambiguity.
91. One of the valid reasons for a person to cease to be a partner
could be his insolvency or unsound mind. The sub-clause 2 of Clause
24, which deals with grounds for a person to cease to be a partner
of a LLP , has not incorporated this ground as specified in the
Companies Act, 1956.
92. As regards sub-clause (3) of Clause 24, the PHDCCI has
suggested that the notice for change of partner should be made a
public document. The Committee see merit in the suggestion.

25
93. In the light of what is stated above regarding sub-clauses (1),
(2) and (3) of Clause 24, the Committee recommend incorporation of
suitable provisions in the Bill to address the deficiencies.
Clause 25—Registration of changes in partners
94. The provisions under Clause 25 provide for the requirement
and the procedure for filing notice about changes in the name and
addresses of partners of the LLP to the Registrar.
95. Clause 25 (1) states as under:
25(1) A limited liability partnership shall ensure that—
(a) where a person becomes or ceases to be a partner,
notice is filed with the Registrar within thirty days
from the date he becomes or ceases to be a partner;
and
(b) where there is any change in the name or address of
a partner, notice is filed with the Registrar within thirty
days of such change.
96. In regard to the provisions under Clause 25, a suggestion made
by the ICSI reads as follows:
“In order to ensure better compliance, it is suggested that it should
be incumbent upon every partner to inform the LLP of any change
in his name or address within a period of 30 days of such change”.
97. Responding to the suggestion for making it incumbent on the
part of the partners to inform of change in name and address etc., the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in reply, observed:
“The suggestion is noted. This requirement may be provided for
in First Schedule to the Bill”.
98. The Clause 25(1) casts a responsibility on a LLP to file notice
about any change in the name or address of a partner within thirty
days of such change. This responsibility is consequential in nature
and cannot be rendered by an LLP unless information in this regard
is furnished to LLP by every partner within a stipulated period. The
Bill is, however, silent on the responsibility of partners to furnish
timely information to LLP in this respect. The Committee hope that
as indicated by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs this requirement
will be provided for in the First Schedule to the Bill without fail.

26
F. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
Clause 33—Maintenance of books of accounts, other records and
audit, etc.
99. Clause 33 which provides for the requirement relating to
maintenance of proper books of accounts, filing of an annual Statement
of Accounts and Solvency etc. reads as under:
“(1) The limited liability partnership shall maintain such proper
books of accounts as may be prescribed relating to its affairs
for each year of its existence on cash basis or accrual basis
and according to double entry system of accounting and
shall maintain the same at its registered office for such
period as may be prescribed.
(2) Every limited liability partnership shall, within a period of
six months from the end of each financial year, prepare a
Statement of Account and Solvency for the said financial
year as at the last day of the said financial year and the
designated partners of the limited liability partnership shall
put their signature on such statement evidencing their
acceptance thereof.
(3) Every limited liability partnership shall file the Statement
of Account and Solvency prepared pursuant to sub-section
(2) with the Registrar every year in such form and manner
and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) The accounts of limited liability partnerships shall be audited
in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification,
exempt any class or classes of limited liability partnerships
from the requirements of this sub-section.
(5) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with
the provisions of this section shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to five lakh rupees and the designated partners
of such limited liability partnership shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees”.
100. In response to a suggestion, as made by the ICSI for
prescribing a time frame for filing of Statement of Accounts and
Solvency in terms of the provisions of sub-clause (3), the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs expressed concurrence.

27
101. Further in response to a suggestion in regard to the provisions
of Clause 33(4), relating to the audit of accounts of LLPs as made by
the ICSI, emphasizing on allowing members of all the three professions
viz. ICAI, ICSI and ICWAI to perform audit of accounts of LLPs, the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in reply, stated as follows:
“The suggestion in respect of allowing members of all three
professionals to perform audit of accounts of LLPs is noted to be
suitably addressed through rules”.
102. The Clause 33(3) which requires a LLP to file the Statement
of Account and Solvency every year has no provision for prescribing
a time frame for filing the same. The Committee urge that as agreed
to by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, suitable provision be
incorporated in this regard as stipulated in the Companies Act, 1956.
There is a suggestion from ICSI in favour of allowing members of
all three professional categories viz., Chartered accountants, Company
Secretaries and Cost Accountants to perform audit of accounts of
LLPs. The Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have sought to address this question suitably through rules.
Clause 34—Annual Return
103. Clause 34 which deals with the requirement of filing of annual
return by every LLP reads as under:
“(1) Every limited liability partnership shall be required to file
an annual return with the Registrar within sixty days of
closure of its financial year in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with
the provisions of this section shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to five lakh rupees.
(3) If the limited liability partnership contravenes the provisions
of this section, the designated partner of such limited liability
partnership shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to
one lakh rupees”.
104. With reference to the provisions of sub-clause (3) of Clause 34
in particular, the ICSI, in their memorandum, expressed the need for
incorporating provisions therein specifying the penal measures that
may be applicable in instances of continued non-compliance with the

28
requirement of filing annual returns by an LLP . Explaining this point,
the President of ICSI, while tendering evidence stated as follows:
“On the question of continuing default, in fact, our suggestion
was it should be really drafted to specify punishment in case of
a continuing non-compliance. For example, if some document is
not filed within a certain period, say, 30 or 60 days, then there is
an offence. But if there is a continuing offence and if somebody
does not file a document for two years, then there should be
something specified and the penalty must be enhanced in the case
of continuing default”.
105. On this specific issue, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in
reply responded inter-alia as under:
“The suggestion is taken note of in context of the above and in
case of non filing of Statement of Account and Solvency under
Clause 33 (2) of the Bill.”
106. Further, with a view to establishing sound compliance
management, and at the same time facilitating and encouraging the
LLPs to comply with various legal requirements, ICSI has suggested
that a provision may be inserted specifying that certain LLPs having
minimum number of partners or having a minimum turnover or debt
exposure should be required to attach with the Annual Return a report
by a Practicing Company Secretary on the compliance of the provisions
of the Act.
107. When asked to comment on the suggestion, the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, in their written reply submitted as under:
“The suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately. However,
certification requirements will be reviewed and incorporated
appropriately keeping compliance costs in view.”
108. Sub-clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 34 have prescribed penalties
for failure of LLP to file annual return within the stipulated time.
There is, however, nothing in the sub-clauses to show whether there
would be enhanced penalty in the event of prolonged non-
compliance. The Committee believe that as promised by the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs this shortcoming will be rectified both in respect
of failure to file annual return [Clause 34(1)] and failure to file
Statement of Account and Solvency [Clause 33(3)].
109. As regards the ICSI’s suggestion that certain LLPs should
be required to attach with the annual return a report by a practicing

29
Company Secretary on the compliance of the provisions of the Act,
the Committee recommend that certification requirements will be
reviewed and incorporated appropriately.
Clause 37—Power of Registrar to obtain information
110. Clause 37 reads as under:
“37(1) In order to obtain such information as the Registrar may
consider necessary for the purposes of carrying out the
provisions of this Act, the Registrar may—
(a) require any present or former partner or designated
partner or an employee of a limited liability partnership
to answer any question in writing which the Registrar
may consider necessary to ask for the purposes
specified in this sub-section; or
(b) summon that person to appear before him or an
inspector or any other public officer whom the Registrar
may designate to answer any such question.
(2) The Registrar may further require the person referred to in
sub-section (1) to make such further declaration or supply
such further particulars as the Registrar may consider
necessary.
(3) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply
with any summons or requisition of the Registrar under
this section shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees.”
111. In regard to the powers proposed to be vested in the Registrar,
the ICSI, in their memorandum raised the following point:
“The sub-clause seeks to empower the Registrar to call for
information from any former or designated partner or employee
of the limited liability partnership or to summon them before him
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Bill.
The intent of the provision is to seek information by those who
are privy to the information. So there is no need for issue of
summons. There is no similar provision under the Companies Act,
1956. Further, there can be scope for misuse of the provision. It is,
therefore, suggested to delete Clause 37(1)(b).
Consequently, under Clause 37(1)(3) the words “summons or” may
also be deleted”.

30
112. Questioned on the appropriateness of the proposal to vest the
Registrar with power to summon ‘persons’ including former partners
etc., and the measures by way of which the apprehensions expressed
on the possible misuse of such power would be addressed, the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs in their reply informed:
“The intent is to enable Registrar to obtain information from the
LLP as may be necessary for the implementation of this Act.
However, the provisions would be reviewed to ensure that there
is no unnecessary harassment of any person who is willingly
cooperating in providing such information. Arrangement to compel
appearance of a person or providing of information may be
necessary where such information is not provided on valid
requisition by the Registrar. Such powers to Registrar are considered
necessary in situations where there is suspicion of wrong doing or
fraud”.
113. There are apprehensions that there can be scope for misuse
of the power to summon a person vested with the Registrar under
sub-clause 37(1)(b). It has been pointed out that there is no similar
provision under the Companies Act, 1956. The Committee desire that
as assured by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, appropriate
safeguards be incorporated to ensure that there is no unnecessary
harassment of any person who is willingly cooperating in providing
requisite information.
Clause 40—Enforcement of duty to make returns
114. Clause 40(1) reads as under:
“40(1) If any limited liability partnership is in default in complying
with—
(a) any provision of this Act or of any other law which
requires the filing in any manner with the Registrar of
any return, account or other document or the giving
of notice to him of any matter; or
(b) any request of the Registrar to amend or complete and
resubmit any document or to submit a fresh document;
and
(c) fails to make good the default within fourteen days
after the service on the person of a notice requiring it
to be done,

31
the Tribunal may, on application by the Registrar, make
an order directing that person or if that person is a
corporation any officer of the body corporate to make
good the default within such time as is specified in
the order”.
115. The ICSI have made following suggestion in this regard:
“Under Clause 40(1)(c) the terms “corporation” and “body
corporate” have been used interchangeably. Uniformity in use of
words may be maintained”.
116. When asked whether it is not necessary to maintain uniformity
in use of the words viz. “corporation” and “body corporate”, as pointed
out, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs stated as below in reply:
“The suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately with
legislative vetting”.
117. The Committee desire that the use of interchangeable words
such as ‘Corporation’ and ‘body corporate’ in Clause 40 (1) (c) be
avoided, and the word ‘body corporate’ used uniformly throughout
the legislation.
G. INVESTIGATION
Clause 42—Investigation of the affairs of a limited liability partnership
118. Clause 42 (3) states:
“42(3). The appointment of inspectors pursuant to sub-section (2)
may be made,—
(a) if not less than one-fifth of the total number of partners
of the limited liability partnership make an application
along with supporting evidence and security amount
as may be prescribed; or
(b) if the limited liability partnership makes an application
that the affairs of the limited liability partnership ought
to be investigated; or
(c) if, in the opinion of the Central Government, there are
circumstances suggesting—
(i) that the business of the limited liability partnership
is being conducted with an intent to defraud its

32
creditors, partners or any other person, or otherwise
for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose, or in a manner
oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to some or any of
its partners, or that the limited liability partnership
was formed for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose;
or
(ii) that any of the partners of the limited liability
partnership has been guilty of fraud, misfeasance
or other misconduct towards the limited liability
partnership or towards its other partners; or
(iii)  that any of the partners of the limited liability
partnership has not been given all the information
with respect to its affairs which they might
reasonably expect, including information relating to
the remuneration payable to a designated partner
of the limited liability partnership; or
(iv)  that, on receipt of a report of the Registrar, there
are sufficient reasons that the affairs of the limited
liability partnership ought to be investigated.”
119. With a view to cover the past conduct of the limited liability
partnership too, the ICSI proposed that the expression “the business
of the limited liability partnership is being conducted” in sub-clause
(3)(c)(i) of Clause 42 needed to be changed to “the business of the
limited liability partnership is being or has been conducted”.
120. Questioned whether it was essential or agreeable to carry out
the modification in the provision, as suggested, the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs responded in the affirmative.
121. The circumstances warranting appointment of inspectors to
investigate the affairs of a LLP under Clause 42 (3)(c)(i) specify the
present conduct of a LLP but not past conduct. The Committee
recommend the past conduct of a LLP should be brought under the
purview of the sub-clause. The Committee desire that this lacuna be
rectified suitably.
H. CONVERSION OF ENTITIES TO LLP
122. Clauses 54, 55 and 56 of the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006 provide for conversion of a firm or private company or
unlisted public company to a limited liability partnership. The
provisions of the second, third and the fourth schedules respectively
would apply for enabling such conversion to LLP form.

33
123. On issues related with Stamp Duty Liability when a
partnership or private limited company or an unlisted company
converts into an LLP , the FICCI, in their Memorandum submitted as
under:
“The stamp duty relaxation should be made available on conversion
of existing partnerships/private and unlisted public companies to
LLP in India, which would be in line with Part IX of the
Companies Act, 1956 . In UK first an LLP is established and then
the business and the assets of the existing partnership of company
transferred. There is stamp duty relief on any property transferred
within the first year of conversion. It is therefore suggested to
follow the same guidelines in India.
Under Chapter IX of the Companies Act, when a Firm registers
itself as a Company, there is no conveyance or transfer of the
properties. The vesting under Part IX is not consequent or incidental
to a transfer. It is a statutory vesting of the properties of the Firm
in the Company. In view of the benefit of the experience under
the Companies Act as discussed above, a similar provision needs
to be incorporated under the Limited Liability Partnership Bill so
as to ensure that Conversion of an existing entity (whether a Firm,
Private Company or Public Unlisted Company), does not amount
to a ‘transfer’ of assets of the existing entity. The consequence to
this would be no stamp duty since there is no transfer”.
124. The views expressed by the PHDCCI on aspects related with
stamp duty payable on conversion into an LLP , are on similar lines as
expressed above which read as follows:
“An aspect which needs to be addressed in the context of
conversion from existing form of organization to LLP form of
organization is that of registration charges and stamp duty relief
on the lines of Part IX of the Companies Act, 1956. It would be
important to have tax neutrality for conversion of partnership firms
or companies into LLPs”.
125. Section 575 of the Companies Act, 1956 regarding vesting of
property on registration reads as under:
Vesting of property on registration:—
“All property, movable and immovable (including actionable
claims), belonging to or vested in a company at the date of its
registration in pursuance of this Part, shall, on such registration,
pass to and vest in the company as incorporated under this Act
for all the estate and interest of the company therein.”

34
126. Questioned on the afore-mentioned concerns expressed by the
Chambers of Commerce on the stamp duty payable on transferring
assets on account of a firm converting into an LLP etc. the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs, in a written reply, informed as follows:
“Levy of stamp duty on transactions relating to various entities is
entrusted to the State Governments under the Constitution.
Therefore, a stipulation in this regard in a Central legislation may
result in constitutional issues. Therefore, the proposed Bill, while
allowing conversion of different business entities into LLPs does
not contain any provision as to treatment of stamp duty.
Under the Companies Act, 1956 also while Part IX allows
conversion of entities belonging to different forms into companies,
it does not stipulate any stamp duty regime for the purpose.
However, rationalization of stamp duties constitutes an element of
reform at the State level. It would be appropriate to address this
issue through dialogue with the States. This, however, is an
important issue from the point of view of making the LLP structure
more attractive”.
127. One serious lacuna that is noticed by the Committee in the
LLP Bill is the absence of a provision for vesting of property, on
conversion of an entity into a Limited Liability Partnership. This
lacuna will have implications in terms of stamp duty, etc. and
discourage existing entities from conversion to LLP . The Committee
in this connection note that Part IX of the Companies Act, 1956 has
a provision (Sec. 575) that all property vested in a company at the
date of its registration shall vest in the company as incorporated
under that Act for all the estate and interest of the Company therein.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have contended that the Companies
Act, 1956 does not stipulate any stamp duty regime for the purpose
of conversion of entities belonging to different forms into companies.
The Committee desire that suitable provision as in Part IX of the
Companies Act, 1956 should be incorporated in the LLP Bill.
I. WINDING UP AND DISSOLUTION
Clause 60—Circumstances in which limited liability partnership may
be wound up by Tribunal.
128. Clause 60 of the Bill provides:
“60. A limited liability partnership may be wound up by the
Tribunal—
(a) if the limited liability partnership decides that limited
liability partnership be wound up by the Tribunal;

35
(b) if the number of partners of the limited liability
partnership is reduced below two;
(c) if the limited liability partnership is unable to pay its
debts;
(d) if the limited liability partnership has acted against the
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State or public order;
(e) if the limited liability partnership has made a default
in filing with the Registrar the Statement of Account
and Solvency or annual return for any five consecutive
financial years;
(f) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and
equitable that the limited liability partnership be wound
up”.
129. The ICAI, in their memorandum proposed that sub-clause (b)
of Clause 60 may be deleted, as sudden death may otherwise wind
up the LLP .
130. Questioned in this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
in their written reply stated as below:
“The transition arrangements including that of winding up in the
event of sudden death of a partner that results in the number of
partners in an LLP falling below the statutory minimum of two
would be reviewed to enable a smooth transition involving
induction of new partners/conversion to other forms of business
etc. within a fixed time period failing which resort to process of
winding up may be resorted to, if so warranted”.
131. Clause 60(3) provides for winding up of a LLP by the
Tribunal, if the number of partners of the LLP is reduced below
two. The Committee feel that in the event of sudden death of a
partner that results in the number of partners in a LLP falling below
the statutory minimum of two, there should be provision for
transitional arrangements. Initiating winding up process should be
the last resort. The Committee accordingly recommend that to meet
the situation stated above, there should be a suitable provision in
the Bill to enable smooth transition involving induction of new
partners/conversion of the LLP to similar forms of business, etc.
within a fixed time period.

36
J. MISCELLANEOUS
Clause 64: Electronic filing of documents.
132. Clause 64(2) states:
“64(2). A copy of or an extract from any document electronically
filed with or submitted to the Registrar which is supplied
or issued by the Registrar and certified through digital
signature to be a true copy of or extract from such document
shall, in any proceedings, be admissible in evidence as of
equal validity with the original document”.
133. For the purpose of defining ‘digital signature’ the ICSI have
pointed out the need for incorporating, the expression as defined in
the ‘Information Technology Act, 2000’ in sub-clause (2) of Clause 64.
134. The term is defined in the Information Technology Act as
under:
“2(1)(p) digital signature means authentication of any electronic
record by a subscriber by means of an electronic method or
procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3;”
135. Accordingly, the redrafted sub-clause (2), as suggested would
read as:
“(2) A copy of or an extract from any document electronically
filed with or submitted to the Registrar which is supplied or issued
by the Registrar and certified through digital signature (as defined
in the IT Act, 2000) to be a true copy of or extract from such
document shall, in any proceedings, be admissible in evidence as
of equal validity with the original document”.
136. Questioned whether it would not be essential to make it clear
that the definition of digital signature would be in accordance with
the information Technology Act, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
agreed to carry out the relevant modification following legislative
vetting.
137. The term ‘digital signature’ used in Clause 64 (2) has not
been defined anywhere in the Bill. The ICSI has suggested adoption
of definition in this regard as available in the Information Technology
Act, 2000. The Committee agree with the suggestion and accordingly
recommend suitable provision in the Bill in this regard.

37
Jurisdiction under the proposed Act prior to constitution of National
Company Law Tribunal
138. Clause 67 states as under:
“67(1) The Tribunal shall discharge such powers and functions as
are, or may be, conferred on it by or under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of Tribunal
may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal and the
provisions of sections 10FQ, 10FZA, 10G, 10GD, 10GE and
10GF of the Companies Act, 1956 shall be applicable in
respect of such appeal.”
139. The Institute of Company Secretaries of India has submitted
in this regard that Jurisdiction under the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006 has been conferred on the National Company Law Tribunal
to be constituted under sub-section (1) of section 10FB of the Companies
Act, 1956. However, until and unless, the National Company Law
Tribunal or the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal are
constituted and become functional, it is suggested to provide that the
Court/Company Law Board shall have jurisdiction.
140. When queried on this aspect, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
in their written reply stated as under:
“The need for providing suitable transitional arrangement implicit
in the suggestion is taken note of.
In view of the existing legal challenge to the constitution of NCLT
and the NCLAT, suitable transitional provision would need to be
incorporated in the Bill to provide that appropriate judicial/quasi
judicial structures already available for companies in the Companies
Act, 1956 comprising of appropriate courts as well as other
adjudicating fora including the CLB may adjudicate on issues
relating to LLPs under the Act”.
141. The Clause 67 of the Bill confers jurisdiction on the National
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the National Company Law
Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) constituted under the Companies Act,
1956. According to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in view of the
existing legal challenge to the constitution of NCLT and the NCLAT,
suitable transitional provisions would need to be incorporated in
the Bill to provide that appropriate judicial/quasi-judicial structures

38
available for companies in the Companies Act, 1956, comprising of
appropriate Courts as well as other adjudicating fora including the
CLB may adjudicate on issues relating to LLPs. The Committee desire
that suitable transitional provision in this regard be incorporated in
the Bill, till such time the NCLT and the NCLAT become functional.
K. SCHEDULES
First Schedule [ vide Section 23 (4)]
142. The first schedule of the Bill deals with default provisions for
limited liability partnerships.
The paragraph 1 of the First Schedule reads as follows:—
“The mutual rights and duties of the partners and the mutual
rights and duties of the limited liability partnership and its partners
shall be determined, subject to the terms of any limited liability
partnership agreement or in the absence of any such agreement,
by the provisions in this Schedule.”
143. With a view to make the rights and duties of partners all
inclusive in nature, the ICSI has suggested that the words “on any
matter” in the first paragraph of the schedule, may be added so as to
read as:
“The mutual rights and duties of the partners and the mutual
rights and duties of the limited liability partnership and its partners
shall be determined, subject to the terms of any limited liability
partnership agreement or in the absence of any such agreement by
the provisions in this schedule”.
144. On this, the Ministry have replied as under:
“The suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately with
legislative vetting”.
Second Schedule ( vide Section 54)
(i) The Second Schedule of the Bill provides for conversion from
firm to limited liability partnership.
Paragraph 5 (1) of Second Schedule states:
“5 (1) Nothing in this schedule shall be construed as to require
the Registrar to register any limited liability partnership if
he is not satisfied with the particulars or other information
furnished under the provisions of this Act.”

39
145. Pointing out that the Bill/provisions of the second schedule
were silent on the procedure to be followed in instances where the
Registrar may refuse to register a ‘Limited Liability Company’ in terms
of the stipulations of para 5(1) of the schedule, the ICSI has emphasized
on specifying/designating the authorities to whom appeals can be made
in such cases. Elaborating on this point further, a representative of
ICSI, stated as below during the course of oral evidence:
“On the appellate procedure, there was a question as to what
should be the procedure. Probably, it could be from the ROC to
the Regional Director and then to the Company law Board till the
NCLT is formed. Once the NCLT is in place, then from the ROC,
it could flow to the RD and then to the NCLT. But till that time,
the appeal could lie to the RD and from the RD, it could be to the
Company Law Board”.
146. In response to a related question, the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs have agreed to take note of the suggestion for providing for
an appellate authority, which could consider appeals against refusal of
registration of an LLP by the Registrar.
(ii) Paragraph 6 of the Second Schedule reads as under:—
“On and from the date of registration specified in the certificate of
registration issued under paragraph 4,—
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name
specified in the certificate of registration registered under
this Act;
(b) all movable and immovable property vested in the firm, all
assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations
relating to the firm and the whole of the undertaking of
the firm shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited
liability partnership without further assurance, act or deed;
and
(c) the firm shall be deemed to be dissolved and if earlier
registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932)
removed from the records maintained under that Act”.
147. Pointing out the need for maintaining uniformity in defining
the term ‘property’, the ICSI also suggested re-drafting paragraph 6(b)
of the second schedule. Thereby, the redrafted paragraph would read:—
“(b) all tangible (including movable and immovable) and intangible
property vested in the firm, all assets, interests, rights, privileges,

40
liabilities, obligations relating to the firm and the whole of the
undertaking of the firm shall be transferred to and shall vest in
the limited liability partnership without further assurance, act or
deed”.
148. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have expressed agreeability
to suitably address the issue raised.
Third and Fourth Schedule
149. Para 4 (a) (ii) of the Third Schedule and para 5(a) (ii) of the
Fourth Schedule seek particulars of the date on which the company
was incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956.
150. The ICSI has stated that to remove ambiguity in between
companies registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and “existing
companies” registered under any earlier Acts, the words “under the
Companies Act, 1956” appearing in Paragraph 4 (a) (ii) of the Third
Schedule and Paragraph 5 (a) (ii) of the Fourth Schedule, may be
deleted and it may be redrafted as follows:—
“(ii) the date on which the company was incorporated”.
151. While replying to this, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs stated
as under:
“The suggestion is noted to be addressed appropriately with
legislative vetting”.
152. The Committee recommend following modifications in the
schedules to the Bill, as agreed to by the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs:—
(i) First Schedule, Para 1:
Insertion of the words “on any matter” after the words
“any such agreement” in the third line, to make the rights
and duties of partners all inclusive in nature.
(ii) Second Schedule, Para 5(1):
Though the para 5(1) empowers the Registrar to refuse
registration of a LLP , there is no provision in the Bill to
appeal against the Registrar’s decision. There is a need to
designate an appellate authority comprising Regional
Director/the Company Law Board, till such time the NCLT
and the NCLAT become functional.

41
(iii) Second Schedule, Para 6:
As already recommended with reference to Clause 14(b)
of the Bill, the term ‘property’ appearing in para 6 needs
to distinguish between tangible and intangible property.
(iv) Third Schedule para 4 (a) (ii) and Fourth Schedule, Para
5 (a) (ii)
There are companies registered under the Companies Act,
1956 and “existing companies” registered under earlier
Acts. In order to widen the ambit of para 4(a) (ii) of Third
Schedule and para 5(a) (ii) of the Fourth Schedule to cover
all companies, the words “under the Companies Act, 1956”
should be omitted.
L. CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS IN OTHER STATUTES
153. There is need to harmonise the provisions of the LLP Bill in
line with other economic legislations like the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
Guidelines by appropriate amendments for full realization of the
objectives of the LLP Bill. This aspect was emphasized by FICCI and
PHDCCI.
154. According to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (note
dated 26 September, 2006) for full realization of the objectives of the
proposed Limited Liability Partnership Bill, corresponding amendments
will be required in the Regulatory Acts governing the various
professional services so that these can be aligned with the objectives
of the proposed Bill. For example, in case of the legal profession, an
amendment would be required in the Advocates Act. Partnerships are
the only permitted model of practice for law firms in India and other
modes of practice like LLP is not permitted. Multidisciplinary practice
with other professions is also not allowed in the legal profession.
Further, advertising is also not allowed as per the Advocates Act.
There is also a limitation on the number of partners (Section 11 of the
Companies Act).
155. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have responded in this
regard as follows:
“The proposed LLP Bill is an enabling legislation. In general, it
provides a new business structure for use in economic/commercial
activity for all persons. Different enactments regulating various

42
businesses or professional entities or activities may take statutory
notice of entities availing the LLP form for the purpose of their
own regulation.
For this purpose, only statutory notice in other enactments may
need to be taken, as required, by amendment of the respective
Acts. This may require consequential amendments in:—
(a) statutes regulating any specific profession, trade or activity,
(b) other enactments such as the Income Tax Act where statutory
notice of the emergence of the new form would have to be
taken for taxation purposes.
However, for such consequential amendments to take place, the
legal entity of LLP would have to be constituted first by enactment
of this Bill.
It may be mentioned that this process has already been initiated
in the case of professions of Chartered Accountants, Company
Secretaries and Cost and Work Accountants with amendments made
in 2006 in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, the Cost and Works
Accountants Act, 1959 and the Company Secretaries Act, 1980
whereby the above professionals are allowed for multi-disciplinary
combinations”.
156. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have also stated that
enabling provisions for conversion of LLPs into general partnership
would be required to be made in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.
Similarly, provisions for conversion of LLPs into private/unlisted
companies would be required to be made in the Companies Act, 1956.
157. The Committee observe that for full realisation of the
objectives of the LLP Bill, statutory notice in other enactments need
to be taken of entities availing the LLP form. This would require
consequential amendments in statutes regulating any specific
profession, trade or activity such as Advocates Act and in other
enactments such as the Income Tax Act for taxation purposes. The
process of amendments has reportedly been already initiated with
amendments in the respective acts in the case of professions of
Chartered Accountants, Company Secretaries and Cost and Work
Accountants. The Committee desire that the question of consequential
amendments in other Acts be taken up with the concerned Ministries
to ensure that there are no bottlenecks in realizing the objectives of
the LLP Bill.

43
M. TAX TREATMENT OF LLPs
158. As regards taxation regime for LLPs, the Committee on
Regulation of Private Companies and Partnerships (headed by
Shri Naresh Chandra) had recommended as follows:
“Any asset held by an LLP , or any tax chargeable on gains made
shall be treated as held by partners or gains made by the partners,
and not by the LLP itself. Under the LLP Act in UK, an LLP
enjoys `pass through’ status and is not taxable as such. This
Committee would like to recommend the same ‘pass through’ status
for LLPs in India.
The LLPs should be governed by a taxation regime that taxes the
partners as individuals, rather than taxing the LLP itself, i.e., the
LLPs should be treated in the same manner as the firm under the
tax laws”.
159. Asked about the Government’s perception on the Naresh
Chandra Committee’s recommendations on the tax structure for LLP
firms vis-a-vis the proposed legislation permitting the creation of these
new type of corporate entities, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
informed, inter alia as follows in reply:
“The recommendation made by Naresh Chandra Committee was
examined by the Ministry. It is submitted that Indian LLPs are
expected to be formed in a wide range of activities including in
services and technology related sectors. In time, they would also
extend their operations beyond Indian borders and have
international presence as in the case of LLPs in other countries. In
context of the above, the taxation regime may have a significant
impact on the viability and attractiveness of LLPs since it would
determine the manner in which the LLP and its individual partners
would be taxed, address double taxation issues and provide for
carry forward of losses in the event of conversion from other forms
of business to LLP and vice versa .
The attractiveness of LLPs as a suitable vehicle for venture capital
would also require a tax treatment that provides appropriate
incentives for innovation and investment. It would, therefore, be
necessary to provide for a regime of taxation of LLPs with clarity
on the above issues and in a manner that does not adversely
affect the competitiveness of Indian LLPs internationally.

44
It may be mentioned that the LLP Act 2000 of the UK provides
for treatment of LLPs for the purpose of Taxation. In the UK,
income is taxed at the hands of the Partners with LLP structure
being treated as “pass through” for the purpose”.
160. The Concept Paper published by the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs prior to the introduction of the LLP Bill, 2006, provides inter
alia as under on the issue of tax treatment of LLPs:
“…the partners of an LLP which is carrying on a business with a
view to profit are treated for the purposes of income tax and
capital gains tax as if they were partners carrying on a business
in partnership, despite the fact that an LLP is a body corporate.
It also provides that the property of the LLP shall be treated for
those purposes as property of its partners. This ensures that
partners will be individually liable to tax on their share of the
profits of the trade, profession or business carried on by the LLP .
Further, the assets of the LLP shall be treated as assets held by
the partners for the purpose of taxing capital gains. This ensures
that the partners of the LLP , rather than the LLP itself, will be
liable to tax for capital gains on the disposal of LLP assets. The
chapter brings LLPs in line with the approach adopted for
partnerships, which similarly treats assets as held by the partners
rather than by the partnership.”
161. With reference to the ‘Pass through Status taxation design” in
particular, as proposed and the desirable tax structure for LLP firms,
the FICCI, in their memorandum, submitted inter alia as under:
“…While such a taxation regime is in line with those in vogue in
developed countries like USA and UK, it is felt that such a taxation
may become quite cumbersome and complicated especially where
partners are too many, there being no cap on the number of
partners of LLP .
Also, being a pass through entity, the LLP may not qualify as tax
resident of India and would not, therefore, be entitled to benefits
under the bilateral tax treaties between India and other countries
in case of cross border transactions. In this perspective, it is
suggested that LLP should be liable to tax as  such; and income
from LLP should be exempt in the hands of the partners. This is
particularly crucial in as much as Section 3 of the Bill defines a
limited liability partnership as a body corporate having legal entity
separate from that of its partners. Since companies are liable to

45
income tax as a legal taxable entity and its shareholders are tax
exempt in respect of dividend income, there is no rationale in
having a different tax system for LLPs.
It is also suggested that where an LLP succeeds a business
previously carried on by an existing partnership/private company,
it should not be treated as cessation of trade for income tax
purposes and capital gains relief on transfer of assets should be
allowed on conversion. Also, unabsorbed losses of predecessor be
allowed to be carried forward and set off by the successor  i.e. LLP .
The relevant sections will need to be amended accordingly. From
an Exchange Control/FDI perspective, it needs to be clarified that
LLPs would be “eligible entities” for receiving foreign investment
under the automatic route”.
162. On the tax structure of LLPs, the PHDCCI, however, in their
written submission on the LLP Bill, stated as follows:
“The success of limited liability partnership form of organization
would depend to a large extent on it being a tax efficient structure.
Particularly in cases of large projects undertaken by business/
industry where several agencies get together or form a consortium
for executing the project, clarity in taxation aspect would be
important.
The provisions of Income Tax Act, 1961 should be amended for
providing tax benefits to LLP . While amending the Income Tax
Act, various issues including capital gains arising on transfer or
succession of business, carry forward and set off of losses and
unabsorbed depreciation, tax implications of transactions between
LLP and partners and inter se partners, taxation issues relating to
multi-layer LLP , quantification of income, allocation of losses, etc.
will need to be thoroughly examined and debated.
Partners of a LLP for the purpose of income tax and capital gains
tax should be treated as if they were partners carrying on a
business in partnership. Despite the fact that an LLP is a body
corporate, for income tax purposes, the property of the LLP should
be treated as property of its partners, so as to ensure that partners
will be individually liable to tax on their share of the profits in
the business of the LLP .
The LLP should also be given recognition in the Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreements”.

46
163. On the other hand, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India (ICAI), have, in their Memorandum, expressed the need for
providing the LLPs, the option of choosing the applicable taxation
structure. The submission made by the ICAI in this regard, reads as
under:
“The Statement of Object and Reasons should contain the principle
that the LLP should have an option whether they will be taxed as
corporate or in the hands of partners. Similarly, it should contain
the principle on carry forward of losses and stamp duty. This will
communicate the good intention of the Government”.
164. Elaborating on the aspect of providing an option to the LLP
firms to choose the tax structure, a representative of the ICAI stated
as follows in the course of personal hearing of the Committee:
“An option is necessarily to be given either to be taxed in the
hands of the corporates or in the hands of the partners concerned
directly without taxing the corporate. We would request you to
recommend that option. The point is whether it comes as a part
of the LLP Bill or arising out of the recommendation, it comes
under the Income-Tax Act. It should be known simultaneously. We
are not worried where it is provided for. But it has to be there in
the substantive law. This august Parliamentary Committee can
recommend that. It should be there in the law itself”.
165. In response to a question on the Governments’ perception/
policy proposals contemplated on taxation of LLP firms, mainly in the
light of the varied suggestions received in this regard, the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, in reply stated as follows:
“In India, taxation related matters are dealt with under the Income
Tax Act, 1961. Therefore, no specific provision has been made in
the LLP Bill. This aspect would need to be addressed keeping the
factors indicated in above suggestions as well as report of expert
bodies such as Naresh Chandra Committee in view, at the time
when consequential amendments are made in the Income Tax Act,
1961 once the LLP Bill is enacted. However, it is felt that the
taxation regime should be such that Indian LLPs do not suffer
any discrimination or disadvantage in competition with foreign
LLPs. It is also felt that with the availability of information
technology and growing emphasis on self-regulation, there is a
need to provide flexibility to entrepreneurs in opting for taxation
structure that is relevant to the type of business and affords ease
of compliance”.

47
166. The Committee find that there are four different views
regarding tax regime for LLPs. According to Naresh Chandra
Committee, the LLP should be governed by a taxation regime that
taxes the partners as individuals rather than taxing the LLP itself.
On the other hand, FICCI has held that LLP should be liable to tax
as such and should be entitled to benefits under the bilateral tax
treaties between India and other countries. PHDCCI holds that for
the purpose of income tax and capital gains tax, partners in LLP be
taxed as individuals and for the purpose of Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreements, LLP should be given recognition. The ICAI
and the Ministry of Corporate Affairs are in favour of giving an
option to LLP as to whether they will be taxed as corporate or in
the hands of partners. Having considered all the above views, the
Committee recommend that there is a need to provide flexibility to
entrepreneurs in opting for taxation structure that is relevant to the
type and size of their business and at the same time it should be
ensured that the taxation regime is such that Indian LLPs do not
suffer any discrimination or disadvantage in competition with foreign
LLPs.
167. The Committee note the stand of the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs that in India, taxation related matters are dealt with only
under the Income Tax Act, 1961, unlike UK which provides for
treatment of LLPs for the purpose of taxation in the LLP Act itself.
The Committee, therefore, desire that consequential amendments in
the Income Tax Act and other Acts be undertaken in the light of the
Committee’s views stated in the preceding paragraph.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
22 November, 2007 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

48
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 01 June, 2007 from 1100 to
1310 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna
4. Shri Bhartruhati Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
12. Shri Rashid Alvi
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Diwan Chand, Director (Inspection & Investigation)

49
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
briefed the Committee on the various provisions contained in the
Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives that the information with regard to
queries of the Members which was not readily available with them
might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The main issues discussed during the meeting were (i) definition
of limited partnership, (ii) foreign partnership under LLP , (iii) difference
between LLP and partnership firm, (iv) penalty/punishment for
contravention of provisions of the Bill, (v) filing of document with
ROC, and (vi) audit etc.
5. The briefing was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then selected the subject “Implementation of Twenty
Point Programme (TPP)—2006” for examination, in addition to the
subjects already selected for examination.
The Committee then adjourned.

50
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27th June, 2007 from 1500 to
1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhati Mahtab
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
7. Shri A.R. Shaheen
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri S. Anbalagan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA
(i) Ms. Preeti Malhotra, President

51
(ii) Shri Nesar Ahmad, Council Member
(iii) Shri P .K. Mittal, Council Member
(iv) Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary & CEO
2. THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS OF
INDIA
(i) Shri Dhananjay V . Joshi, President
(ii) Shri Chandra Wadhwa, Vice-President
3. THE INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
(i) Shri Vinod Jain, Fellow Chartered Accountant, Central Council
member
(ii) Shri Harinderjit Singh, Chartered Accountant, Central Council
member
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the of (i) the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ii) the Institute
of Cost and Works Accountants of India and (iii) the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
on the various provisions contained in the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were
replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the
representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
4. The main issues discussed during the meeting related to
categorization of Limited Liability Partnership (LLP), penalties for non-
compliance, audit, taxation, single member LLP etc.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

52
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18th July, 2007 from 1100 to
1240 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Shri Rupchand Pal
10. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
11. Shri R. Prabhu
12. Shri K.S. Rao
13. Shri M.S. Reddy
14. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
16. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
17. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
19. Shri Raashid Alvi
20. Shri Yashwant Sinha
21. Shri Mahendra Mohan
22. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
23. Shri Vijay J. Darda
24. Shri S. Anbalagan
25. Shri Moinul Hassan

53
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
1. PHD CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(i) Shri Sanjay Bhatia, President
(ii) Shri Satish Bagrodia, Vice President
(iii) Ms. Bhavna Kohil, Advocate, Bhasin & Co. & Member, PHDCCI
(iv) Shri Krishan Kalra, Secretary General
(v) Ms. Shalini Mathur, Joint Secretary
2. CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (CII)
(i) Mr. Nishith Desai, Managing Partner, Nishith Desai Associates
(ii) Ms. Gowree Gokhale, Senior Associate, Nishith Desai Associates
(iii) Mr. Rajesh Menon, Senior Director, Confederation of Indian
Industry
(iv) Ms. Abha Seth, Deputy Director, Confederation of Indian
Industry
(v) Mr. Vikram Badshah, Head, Public Policy Confederation of
Indian Industry
3. ASSOCHAM
Mr. Sumant Batra, Partner
Kesar Dass B. & Associates
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII), and ASSOCHAM to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
on the various provisions contained in the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006. The representatives explained their major concerns on certain

54
provisions of the Bill. Then, the Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee by 25
th July, 2007 with specific suggestions
in regard to various clauses of the Bill.
4. The main issues discussed during the meeting related to practice
followed globally with particular reference to prominent developing
countries, allowing of foreign legal firms, covering of small and medium
enterprises, venture capital, foreign and designated partners, insurance
cover, investigation etc.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

55
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 30 August, 2007 from 1700 to
1745 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhati Mahtab
3. Shri Rupchand Pal
4. Shri K. S. Rao
5. Shri Lakshman Seth
6. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri M. A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mahendra Mohan
10. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.

56
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the various provisions contained
in the Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006. The representatives
explained their major concerns on certain provisions of the Bill. Then,
the Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by
the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives
that the information with regard to queries of the Members which
was not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee within a week’s time.
4. The main issues discussed during the meeting related to tax
treatment, mandatory insurance, consequential amendments in other
acts, Partner Identification Number and applicability of LLP form to
Private Equities (PEs).
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

57
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 22nd November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1720 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
6. Shri M. A. Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
9. Shri Vijay J. Dadra
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P . K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee and requested them to give their suggestions
on the recommendations contained in the draft report on the Limited
Liability Partnership Bill, 2006.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report
on the Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006. The Committee, after
deliberation, adopted the draft report with the modifications/
amendments, shown in the Annexure.

58
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the report
in the light of the modifications suggested and also to make
consequential changes and present the report to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

59
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2006 AT
THEIR SITTING HELD ON 22ND NOVEMBER, 2007]
Page Para Line Amendments/Modifications
12 3 4
397 For
‘….certain lacunae and infirmities in the
Bill.’
Read
‘….certain grave lacunae and serious
infirmities in the Bill.’
62 2 6 After
‘to cover a wide range of activities such
as services,’
Add
‘as may be specified,’
12 38 6 For
‘….a suitable provision be made in the
Bill to address this situation’
Read
‘….a suitable provision be made in the
Bill by amending the Clause to address
this situation.’
14 42 3 For
‘trust’
Read
‘recommend’

60
12 3 4
14 45 3 For
‘….made answerable only when he is
responsible.’
Read
‘….made answerable only when he is
determined as responsible.’
23 68 2 For
‘….between tangible and intangible
property .’
Read
‘….between tangible and intangible
property as defined in other statutes.’
30 90 3 After
‘Unless this requirement’
Add
‘of giving the notice in writing’
30 91 2 For
‘The sub-clause 2 of Clause 24, which
deals with grounds for a person to cease
to be a partner of a LLP , has not
incorporated this ground.’
Read
‘The sub-clause 2 of Clause 24, which
deals with grounds for a person to cease
to be a partner of a LLP , has not
incorporated this ground as specified in
the Companies Act, 1956.’
31 98 8 Insert at the end of the sentence
‘without fail’
34 102 4 For
‘….suitable provision be incorporated in
this regard.’
Read
‘….suitable provision be incorporated in
this regard as stipulated in the Companies
Act, 1956.’

61
12 3 4
36 109 3 For
‘….the Committee note the assurance of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs that
certification requirements will be
reviewed and incorporated appropriately.’
Read
‘….the Committee recommend the
certification requirements are reviewed and
provisions incorporated appropriately.’
39 117 2 For
‘….such as ‘Corporation’ and ‘body
corporate’ in Clause 40(1) (c) be avoided
to maintain uniformity in the usage of
terms throughout the legislation.’
Read
‘….such as ‘Corporation’ and ‘body
corporate’ in Clause 40(1) (c) be avoided,
and the word ‘body corporate’ used
uniformly throughout the legislation.’
41 141 3 For
‘Exclusion of past conduct of LLP from
the purview of the sub-clause is a serious
lacuna. The Committee desire that this
Lacuna be rectified suitably.’
Read
‘The Committee recommend the past
conduct of a LLP should be brought
under the purview of the sub-clause.’
44 127 11 Delete
‘The Committee wish to point out that
the contention of the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs does not explain as to
why a provision similar to that of Sec.
575 of the Companies Act, 1956 should
not be incorporated in the LLP Bill.’

62
12 3 4
44 127 14 For
‘are of the firm view’
Read
‘desire that’
46 131 9 For
‘other’
Read
‘similar’
49 141 10 After
‘The Committee desire that suitable
transitional provision in this regard be
incorporated in the Bill.’
Add
‘The Committee desire that suitable
transitional provision in this regard be
incorporated in the Bill, till such time the
NCLT and the NCLAT become
functional.’
53 152 11 After
‘authority’
Insert
‘comprising Regional Director/the
Company Law Board, till such time the
NCLT and NCLAT become functional.’
56 157 7 Delete
‘According to FICCI and PHDCCI, there
is need to harmonise the provisions of
LLP Bill with other economic legislations
like Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999.’
61 166 12 For
‘….are inclined to agree with the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs’
Read
‘….recommend’

63
Bill No. CXI of 2006
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2006
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
A
PPLICABILITY
3. Limited liability partnership.
4. Non-applicability of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.
5. Partners and their Identification Number.
6. Minimum number of partners.
7. Minimum number of designated partners.
8. Designated partners.
9. Changes in designated partners and their liabilities.
10. Punishment for contravention of sections 7, 8 and 9.
CHAPTER III
I
NCORPORATION
11. Incorporation document.
12. Incorporation by registration.
13. Registered office.
14. Effect of incorporation.

64
15. Name.
16. Reservation of name.
17. Rectification of name of a limited liability partnership.
18. Application for direction to change a name in certain
circumstances.
19. Change of registered name.
20. Penalty for Improper use of word “limited liability partnership”
or “LLP”.
21. Publication of name and limited liability.
CHAPTER IV
PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS
22. Eligibility to be partners.
23. Relationship of partners.
24. Cessation of partnership interest.
25. Registration of changes in partners.
CHAPTER V
E
XTENT AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
26. Partner as agent.
27. Extent of liability of limited liability partnership.
28. Extent of liability of a partner.
29. Unlimited liability in case of fraud.
30. Whistle blowing.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONTRIBUTIONS
31. Form of contribution.
32. Liability of contribution.
CHAPTER VII
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
33. Maintenance of books of account, other records and audit, etc.

65
34. Annual return.
35. Inspection of documents kept by Registrar.
36. Penalty for false statement.
37. Power of Registrar to obtain information.
38. Compounding of offences.
39. Destruction of old records.
40. Enforcement of duty to make returns.
CHAPTER VIII
A
SSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP RIGHTS
41. Partner’s transferable interest.
CHAPTER IX
INVESTIGATION
42. Investigation of the affairs of a limited liability partnership.
43. Application by partners for investigation to be supported by
evidence and power to all for security.
44. Firm, body corporate or association not to be appointed as
inspector.
45. Power of inspectors to carry out investigation into affairs of
related entitles, etc.
46. Production of documents and evidence.
47. Seizure of documents by inspector.
48. Inspector’s report.
49. Prosecution.
50. Application for winding up of limited liability partnership.
51. Proceeding for recovery of damages or property.
52. Expenses of investigation.
53. Inspector’s report to be evidence.
CHAPTER X
C
ONVERSION TO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
54. Conversion from firm to limited liability partnership.
55. Conversion from private company to limited liability
partnership.

66
56. Conversion from unlisted public company to limited liability
partnership.
CHAPTER XI
FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
57. Foreign limited liability partnership.
CHAPTER XII
COMPROMISE, ARRANGEMENT OR RECONSTRUCTION OF LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIPS
58. Compromise, arrangement or reconstruction of limited liability
partnerships.
CHAPTER XIII
WINDING UP AND DISSOLUTION
59. Winding up.
60. Circumstances in which limited liability partnership may be
wound up by Tribunal.
61. Rules for winding up.
CHAPTER XIV
MISCELLANEOUS
62. Business transactions of partner with limited liability
partnership.
63. Application of company law.
64. Electronic filing of documents.
65. Payment of default fee.
66. Application of other laws not barred.
67. Jurisdiction of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
68. General penalties.
69. Power of Registrar to strike defunct limited liability partnership
off register.
70. Offences by limited liability partnerships.
71. Jurisdiction of the Court.
72. Power to make rules.
73. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE

67
Bill No. CXI of 2006
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to make provisions for the formation and regulation of
limited liability partnerships and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of the
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “address” in relation to a partner
of a limited liability partnership, means—
(i) if an individual, his usual
residential address; and
(ii) if a body corporate, the address
of its registered office;
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Definitions.

68
(b) “Appellate Tribunal” means the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
constituted under sub-section (1) of section
10 FR of the Companies Act, 1956;
(c) “body corporate” means a company
as defined in section 3 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and includes,—
(i) a limited liability partnership
registered under this Act;
(ii) a limited liability partnership
incorporated outside India; and
(iii) a company incorporated outside
India,
but does not include—
(i) a corporation sole;
(ii) a co-operative society registered
under any law relating to co-operative
societies; and
(iii) any other body corporate (not
being a company as defined in section 3 of
the Companies Act, 1956 or a limited
liability partnership as defined in this Act),
which the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify
in this behalf;
(d) “business” includes every trade,
profession and occupation;
(e) “chartered accountant” means a
chartered accountant as defined in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who
has obtained a certificate of practice under
sub-section (1) of ection 6 of that Act;
(f) “company secretary” means a
company secretary as defined in clause (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-
section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(g) “cost accountant” means a cost
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and
Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-
section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
1 of 1956
1 of 1956
1 of 1956
38 of 1949
23 of 1959

69
(h) “designated partner” means any
partner designated as such pursuant to
section 7;
(i) “financial year” in relation to a
limited liability partnership means the
period from 1st day of April of a year to
the 31st day of March of the following year:
Provided that in the case of a limited
liability partnership incorporated after the 30th
September of a year, the financial year may
end on the 31st March of the year next
following that year;
(j) “foreign limited liability partnership”
means a limited liability partnership that
is formed, registered or incorporated
outside India and which establishes a place
of business within India;
(k) “limited liability partnership”
means a partnership formed and registered
under this Act;
(l) “limited liability partnership
agreement” means any written agreement
between the partners of the limited liability
partnership or between the limited liability
partnership and its partners which,
determines the mutual rights and duties of
the partners and their rights and duties in
relation to limited liability partnership;
(m) “name”, in relation to a partner of
a limited liability partnership, means—
(i) if an individual, his forename,
middle name and surname; and
(ii) if a body corporate, its
registered name;
(n) “partner”, in relation to a limited
liability partnership, means any person who
has been admitted as a partner in the
limited liability partnership in accordance
with the limited liability partnership
agreement;

70
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(p) “Registrar” means a Registrar, or
any Additional, a Joint, a Deputy or an
Assistant Registrar, having the duty of
registering companies under the Companies
Act, 1956;
(q) “Tribunal” means the National
Company Law Tribunal constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 10FB of the
Companies Act, 1956.
CHAPTER II
A
PPLICABILITY
3. (1) A limited liability partnership is a
body corporate formed and incorporated under
this Act and which has legal entity separate
from that of its partners.
(2) A limited liability partnership shall have
perpetual succession.
(3) Any change in the partners of a limited
liability partnership shall not affect the
existence, rights or liabilities of the limited
liability partnership.
4. Save as otherwise provided, the
provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932
shall not apply to a limited liability partnership.
5. (1) Any individual or body corporate
may be a partner in a limited liability
partnership.
(2) Every designated partner of a limited
liability partnership shall obtain a Partner
Identification Number (PIN) from the Central
Government and the provisions of sections
266A to 266G (both inclusive) of the Companies
Act, 1956 shall apply mutatis mutandis  for the
said purpose.
6. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall have at least two partners.
Limited
liability
partnership.
Non-
applicability
of the
Indian
Partnership
Act, 1932.
Partners
and their
Identification
Number.
Minimum
number of
partners.
1 of 1956
1 of 1956
9 of 1932
1 of 1956

71
(2) If at any time the number of partners
of a limited liability partnership is reduced
below two and the limited liability partnership
carries on business for more than six months
while the number is so reduced, the person
who is the only partner of the limited liability
partnership during the time that it so carries
on business after those six months and has the
knowledge of the fact that it is carrying on
business with him alone, shall be liable
personally for the obligations on the limited
liability partnership incurred during that period.
7. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall have at least two designated partners who
are individuals and at least one of them shall
be a resident in India:
Provided that in case of a limited liability
partnership in which all the partners are body
corporates, at least two partners shall nominate
their respective individuals who are to act as
“designated partners” and one of the nominees
shall be a resident in India.
(2) For the purpose of this section, “resident
in India” means a person who has stayed in
India for a period of not less than on hundred
and eighty-two days during the immediately
preceding one year.
(3) Every limited liability partnership shall
ensure that the particulars of every individual
who agrees to act as a designated partner of
the limited liability partnership and his consent
to act as such is filed with the Registrar in
such form and manner as may be prescribed
within thirty days of the appointment of the
designated partner.
(4) An individual eligible to be designated
partner shall satisfy such conditions and
requirements as may be prescribed.
Minimum
number of
designated
partners.

72
8. (1) If the incorporation document
specifies as to who are to be designated
partners—
(a) such person shall be the designated
partners on incorporation; and
(b) any partner may become a
designated partner by and in accordance
with limited liability partnership agreement
and a partner may cease to be a designated
partner in accordance with the limited
liability partnership agreement.
(2) A limited liability partnership may
appoint a designated partner within thirty days
of a vacancy arising for any reason:
Provided that if no designated partner is
appointed, or if at any time there is only one
designated partner, each partner shall be
deemed to be a designated partner.
(3) If the incorporation document states that
every person who from time to time is a
partner of the limited liability partnership is a
designated partner, every partner shall be
designated partner.
9. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall appoint an individual (who is resident in
India) as designated partner within thirty days
from the date on which a person ceases to be
a designated partner and the provisions of sub-
section (3) and sub-section (4) of section 7 shall
apply in respect of the new partner.
(2) A designated partner shall be—
(a) answerable for the doing of all acts,
matters and things as are required to be
done by the limited liability partnership in
respect of compliance of the provisions of
this Act including filing of any document,
return, statement and the like report
pursuant to the provisions of this Act and
as may be specified in the limited liability
partnership agreement; and
Designated
partners.
Changes in
designated
partners
and their
liabilities.

73
(b) liable to all penalties imposed on
the limited liability partnership for any
contravention of those provisions.
10. (1) If the limited liability partnership
contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 7, the limited liability partnership and
its every partner shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
(2) If the limited liability partnership
contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3)
and sub-section (4) of section 7, section 8 or
section 9 the limited liability partnership and
its every partner shall be a punishable with
fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
CHAPTER III
I
NCORPORATION
11. (1) For a limited liability partnership to
be incorporated,—
(a) two or more persons associated for
carrying on a lawful business with a view
to profit shall have subscribed their names
to an incorporation document;
(b) the incorporation document shall be
filed in such manner and with such fees,
as may be prescribed with the Registrar of
the State in which the registered office of
the limited liability partnership is to be
situated; and
(c) there shall be filed with a statement
in the prescribed form, made by either an
advocate, or a Company Secretary or a
Chartered Accountant, who is engaged in
the formation of the limited liability
partnership and by anyone who subscribed
his name to the incorporation document,
Punishment
for
contravention
of sections
7, 8 and 9.
Incorporation
document.

74
that all the requirements of this Act and
the rules made thereunder have been
complied with in respect of incorporation
and matters precedent and incidental
thereto.
(2) The incorporation document shall—
(a) be in a form as may be prescribed;
(b) state the name of the limited
liability partnership;
(c) state the proposed business of the
limited liability partnership;
(d) state the address of the registered
office of the limited liability partnership;
(e) state the name and address of each
of the persons who are to be partners of
the limited liability partnership on
incorporation;
(f) state the name and address of the
persons who are to be designated partners
of the limited liability partnership on
incorporation;
(g) contain such other information
concerning the proposed limited liability
partnership as may be prescribed.
(3) If a person makes a statement under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) which he—
(a) knows to be false; or
(b) does not believe to be true,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years and
with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees but which may extend to five
lakh rupees.
12. (1) When the requirements imposed by
clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section
11 have been complied with, the Registrar shall
Incorporation
by
registration.

75
retain the incorporation document and, unless
the requirement imposed by clause (a) of that
sub-section has not been complied with, he
shall within a period of fourteen days—
(a) register the incorporation document;
and
(b) give a certificate that the limited
liability partnership is incorporated by the
name specified in the incorporation
document.
(2) The Registrar may accept the statement
delivered under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 11 as sufficient evidence that the
requirement imposed by clause (a) of that sub-
section has been complied with.
(3) The certificate shall be signed by the
Registrar and authenticated by his official seal.
(4) The certificate is conclusive evidence
that the limited liability partnership is
incorporated by the name specified in the
incorporation document.
13. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall have a registered office to which all
communications and notices may be addressed
and where they shall be received.
(2) A document may be served on a limited
liability partnership or a partner or designated
partner thereof by sending it by post under a
certificate of posting or by registered post or
by any other mode, which may be prescribed,
or by leaving at its registered office.
(3) A limited liability partnership may
change the address of its registered office by
filing with the Registrar notice of such change
in such form and manner as may be prescribed
and any such change shall take effect only upon
such filing.
(4) If the limited liability partnership
contravenes any provisions of this section, the
Registered
office.

76
limited liability partnership and its every
partner shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than two thousand rupees but
which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees.
14. A limited liability partnership shall, by
its name have the power of—
(a) suing and being sued;
(b) acquiring, owning, holding and
developing or disposing of property, both
movable and immovable;
(c) having a common seal; and
(d) doing and suffering such other acts
and things as bodies corporate may
lawfully do and suffer.
15. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall have either the words “limited liability
partnership” or the acronym “LLP” as the last
words of its name.
(2) No limited liability partnership shall be
registered by a name which, in the opinion of
the Central Government is—
(a) undesirable;
(b) identical or too nearly resembles to
that of any other partnership firm or
limited liability partnership or body
corporate or a registered trade mark, or a
trade mark which is subject of an
application for registration, of any other
person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.
16. (1) A person may apply in such form
and manner and accompanied by such fees as
may be prescribed to the Registrar for the
reservation of a name set out in the application
as—
(a) the name of a proposed limited
liability partnership; or
Effect of
incorpora-
tion.
Name.
Reservation
of name.
47 of 1999.

77
(b) the name to which a limited
liability partnership proposes to change its
name.
(2) Upon receipt of an application under
sub-section (1) and on payment of the
prescribed fee, the Registrar may, if he is
satisfied, subject to the rules prescribed by the
Central Government in the matter, that the
name to be reserved is not one which may be
rejected on any ground referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 15, reserve the name for
a period of three months from the date of
intimation by the Registrar.
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sections 15 and 16, where the Central
Government is satisfied that a limited liability
partnership has been registered (whether
through indvertence or otherwise and whether
originally or by a change of name) under a
name which—
(a) is a name referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 15; or
(b) so nearly resembles the name of
any other limited liability partnership or
body corporate or other name as to be
likely to be mistaken for it;
the Central Government may direct the limited
liability partnership to change its name, and
the limited liability partnership shall comply
with the direction within three months after
the date of the direction or such longer period
as the Central Government may allow.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
fails to comply with a direction given under
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
18. (1) Any entity which already has a
name similar to the name of a limited liability
partnership which has been incorporated
subsequently, may apply, in such manner as
may be prescribed, to the Registrar to give a
Rectification
of name of
a limited
liability
partnership.
Application
for
direction to
change a
name in
certain
circumst-
ances.

78
direction to any limited liability partnership, on
a ground referred to in section 17 to change its
name.
(2) The Registrar shall not consider any
application under sub-section (1) to give a
direction to a limited liability partnership on
the ground referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 17 unless the Registrar
receives the application within twenty-four
months from the date of registration of the
limited liability partnership under that name.
19. Any limited liability partnership may
change its name registered with the Registrar
by filing with him a notice of such change in
such form and manner and on payment of such
fees as may be prescribed.
20. If any person or persons carry on
business under any new name or title of which
the word “Limited Liability Partnership” or
“LLP” or any contraction or imitation thereof
is or are the last word or words, that person
or each of those persons shall, unless duly
incorporated as limited liability partnership be
punishable with five which may extend to five
lakh rupees.
21. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall ensure that its invoices and official
correspondence bear the following, namely:—
(a) the name, address and registration
number of the limited liability partnership;
and
(b) a statement that it is registered with
limited liability.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
contraveness the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than two thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
Change of
registered
name.
Penalty for
Improper
use of
word
“limited
liability
partnership”
or “LLP .”
Publication
of name
and limited
liability.

79
CHAPTER IV
PARTNERS AND THEIR RELATIONS
22. On the incorporation of a limited
liability partnership, the persons who
subscribed their names to the incorporation
document shall be its partners and any other
person may become a partner of the limited
liability partnership by and in accordance with
the limited liability partnership agreement.
23. (1) Save as otherwise provided by this
Act, the mutual rights and duties of the
partners of a limited liability partnership, and
the mutual rights and duties of a limited
liability partnership and its partners, shall be
governed by the limited liability partnership
agreement between the partners, or between the
limited liability partnership and its partners.
(2) The limited liability partnership
agreement and any changes made therein shall
be filed with the Registrar in the form and
manner accompanied by such fees as may be
prescribed.
(3) An agreement in writing made before
the incorporation of a limited liability
partnership between the persons who subscribe
their names to the incorporation document may
impose obligations on the limited liability
partnership, provided such agreement is ratified
by all the partners after the incorporation of
the limited liability partnership.
(4) In the absence of agreement as to any
matter, the mutual rights and duties of the
partners and the mutual rights and duties of
the limited liability partnership and the partners
shall be determined by the provisions relating
to that matter as are set out in the First
Schedule.
24. (1) A person may cease to be a partner
of a limited liability partnership in accordance
with an agreement with the other partners or,
Eligibility
to be
partners.
Relationship
of partners.
Cessation
of
partnership
interest.

80
in the absence of agreement with the other
partners as to cessation of being a partner, by
giving a notice of not less than thirty days to
the other partners of his intention to resign as
partner.
(2) A person may also cease to be a partner
of a limited liability partnership by his death
or by dissolution of the limited liability
partnership.
(3) Where a person has ceased to be a
partner of a limited liability partnership
(hereinafter referred to as “former partner”), the
former partner is to be regarded (in relation to
any person dealing with the limited liability
partnership) as still being a partner of the
limited liability partnership unless—
(a) the person has notice that the
former partner has ceased to be a partner
of the limited liability partnership; or
(b) notice that the former partner has
ceased to be a partner of the limited
liability partnership has been delivered to
the Registrar.
(4) The cessation of a partner from the
limited liability partnership does not by itself
discharge the partner from any obligation to
the limited liability partnership or to the other
partners or to any other person which he
incurred while being a partner.
(5) Where a partner of a limited liability
partnership ceases to be a partner, unless
otherwise provided in the limited liability
partnership agreement, the former partner or a
person entitled to his share in consequence of
the death or insolvency of the former partner,
shall be entitled to receive from the limited
liability partnership an amount—
(a) equal to the capital contribution of
the former partner actually made to the
limited liability partnership; and

81
(b) his right to share in the
accumulated profits of the limited liability
partnership after the deduction of losses of
the limited liability partnership, determined
as at the date the former partner ceased to
be a partner.
(6) A former partner or a person entitled
to his share in consequence of the death or
insolvency of the former partner shall not have
any right to interfere in the management of
the limited liability partnership.
25. (1) A limited liability partnership shall
ensure that—
(a) where a person becomes or ceases
to be a partner, notice is filed with the
Registrar within thirty days from the date
he becomes or ceases to be a partner; and
(b) where there is any change in the
name or address of a partner, notice is filed
with the Registrar within thirty days of
such change.
(2) A notice filed with the Registrar under
sub-section (1)—
(a) shall be in such form and
accompanied by such fees as may be
prescribed;
(b) shall be signed by the designated
partner of the limited liability partnership
and authenticated in a manner as may be
prescribed; and
(c) if it relates to admissions of a
partner, shall contain, a statement by the
incoming partner that he consents to
becoming a partner, signed by him and
authenticated in a manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) if the limited liability partnership
contraveness the provisions of sub-section (1),
the limited liability partnership and every
Registration
of changes
in partners.

82
designated partner of the limited liability
partnership shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than two thousand rupees but
which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees.
(4) Any person who ceases to be a partner
of a limited liability partnership may himself
file with the Registrar the statement referred to
in sub-section (2) if he has reasonable cause to
believe that the limited liability partnership may
not file the statement with the Registrar and in
case of any such statement filed by a partner,
the Registrar shall obtain a confirmation to this
effect from the limited liability partnership
unless the limited liability partnership has also
filed such statement.
CHAPTER V
E
XTENT AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
26. Every partner of a limited liability
partnership is the agent of the limited liability
partnership, but not of other partners.
27. (1) A limited liability partnership is not
bound by anything done by a partner in
dealing with a person if—
(a) the partner in fact has no authority
to act for the limited liability partnership
in doing a particular act; and
(b) the person knows that he has no
authority or does not know or believe him
to be a partner of the limited liability
partnership.
(2) The limited liability partnership is liable
if a partner of a limited liability partnership is
liable to any person as a result of a wrongful
act or omission on his part in the course of
the business of the limited liability partnership
or with its authority.
(3) An obligation of the limited liability
partnership whether arising in contract or
Partner as
agent.
Extent of
liability of
limited
partnership.

83
otherwise, is solely the obligation of the limited
liability partnership.
(4) The liabilities of the limited liability
partnership shall be met out of the property or
the limited liability partnership.
28. (1) A partner is not personally liable,
directly or indirectly for an obligation referred
to in sub-section (3) of section 27 solely by
reason of being a partner of the limited liability
partnership.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (3) of
section 27 and sub-section (1) of this section
shall not affect the personal liability of a partner
for his own wrongful act or omission, but a
partner shall not be personally liable for the
wrongful act or omission of any other partner
of the limited liability partnership.
29. (1) In the event of an act carried out
by a limited liability partnership, or any of its
partners, with intent to defraud creditors of the
limited liability partnership or any other person,
or for any fraudulent purpose, the liability of
the limited liability partnership and partners
who acted with intent to defraud creditors or
for any fraudulent purpose shall be unlimited
for all or any of the debts or other liabilities of
the limited liability partnership:
Provided that in case any such act is carried
out by a partner, the limited liability
partnership is liable to the same extent as the
partner unless it is established by the LLP that
such act was without the knowledge or the
authority of the LLP .
(2) Where any business is carried on with
such intent or for such purpose as mentioned
in sub-section (1), every person who was
knowingly a party to the carrying on of the
business in the manner aforesaid shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years and with fine which
Extent of
liability of
a partner.
Unlimited
liability in
case of
fraud.

84
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees.
30. (1) The Court or Tribunal may reduce
or waive any penalty leviable against any
partner or employee of a limited liability
partnership, if it is satisfied that,—
(a) such partner or employee of a
limited liability partnership has provided
useful information during investigation of
such limited liability partnership; or
(b) when any information given by any
partner or employee (whether or not during
investigation) leads to limited liability
partnership or any partner or employee of
such limited liability partnership being
convicted under this Act or any other Act.
(2) No limited liability partnership or any
partner or any employee of any limited liability
partnership may be discharged, demoted,
suspended, threatened, harassed or in any other
manner discriminated against the terms and
conditions of his partnership or employment
merely because of his providing information or
causing information to be provided pursuant
to sub-section (1).
CHAPTER VI
C
ONTRIBUTIONS
31. (1) A contribution of a partner may
consist of tangible or intangible property or
other benefit to the limited liability partnership,
including money, promissory notes, other
agreements to contribute cash or property , and
contracts for services performed or to be
performed.
(2) the monetary value of contribution of
each partner shall be accounted for and
disclosed in the accounts of the limited liability
partnership in the manner as may be
prescribed.
Whistle
blowing.
Form of
contribution.

85
32. (1) The obligation of a partner to
contribute money or other property or other
benefit or to perform services for a limited
liability partnership shall be as per the limited
liability partnership agreement.
(2) A creditor of a limited liability
partnership, which extends credit or otherwise
acts in reliance on an obligation described in
that agreement without notice of any
compromise between partners, may enforce the
original obligation against such partner.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCIAL DISCLOSURES
33. (1) The limited liability partnership shall
maintain such proper books of accounts as may
be prescribed relating to its affairs for each year
of its existence on cash basis or accrual basis
and according to double entry system of
accounting and shall maintain the same at its
registered office for such period as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every limited liability partnership shall,
within a period of six months from the end of
each financial year, prepare a Statement of
Account and Solvency for the said financial
year as at the last day of the said financial
year and the designated partners of the limited
liability partnership shall put their signature on
such statement evidencing their acceptance
thereof.
(3) Every limited liability partnership shall
file the Statement of Account and Solvency
prepared pursuant to sub-section (2) with the
Registrar every year in such form and manner
and accompanied by such fee as may be
prescribed.
(4) The accounts of limited liability
partnerships shall be audited in accordance
with the rules as may be prescribed:
Liability for
contribution.
Maintenance
of books of
accounts,
other
records and
audit, etc.

86
Provided that the Central Government may,
by notification, exempt any class or classes of
limited liability partnerships from the
requirements of this sub-section.
(5) Any limited liability partnership which
fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees and the
designated partners of such limited liability
partnership shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
34. (1) Every limited liability partnership
shall be required to file an annual return with
the Registrar within sixty days of closure of its
financial year in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(3) If the limited liability partnership
contravenes the provision of this section, the
designated partner of such limited liability
partnership shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
35. The Statement of Accounts and Solvency
and Annual Return filed by each limited
liability partnership shall be available for
inspection in the office of the Registrar during
business hours in such manner and on payment
of such fees as may be prescribed.
36. If in any return, statement or other
document required by or for the purposes of
any of the provisions of this Act, any person
makes a statement—
(a) which is false in any material
particular, knowing it to be false; or
Annual
return.
Inspection
of
documents
kept by
Registrar.
Penalty for
false
statement.

87
(b) which omits any material fact
knowing it to be material;
he shall, save as otherwise expressly provided
in this Act, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees but which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees.
37. (1) In order to obtain such information
as the Registrar may consider necessary for the
purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
Act, the Registrar may—
(a) require any present or former
partner or designated partner or an
employee of a limited liability partnership
to answer any question in writing which
the Registrar may consider necessary to ask
for the purposes specified in this sub-
section; or
(b) summon that person to appear
before him or an inspector or any other
public officer whom the Registrar may
designate to answer any such question.
(2) The Registrar may further require the
person referred to in sub-section (1) to make
such further declaration or supply such further
particulars as the Registrar may consider
necessary.
(3) Any person who, without lawful excuse,
fails to comply with any summons or
requisition of the Registrar under this section
shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than two thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
38. The Central Government may
compound any offence under this Act which is
punishable with fine only, by collecting from a
person reasonably suspected of having
committed the offence a sum which may extend
to the amount of the maximum fine prescribed
for the offence.
Power of
Registrar to
obtain
information.
Compoun-
ding of
offences.

88
39. The Registrar may destroy any
document filed or registered with him in
physical form or in electronic form in
accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed.
40. (1) If any limited liability partnership
is in default in complying with—
(a) any provision of this Act or of any
other law which requires the filing in any
manner with the Registrar of any return,
account or other document or the giving
of notice to him of any matter; or
(b) any request of the Registrar to
amend or complete and resubmit any
document or to submit a fresh document;
and
(c) fails to make good the default
within fourteen days after the service on
the person of a notice requiring it to be
done,
the Tribunal may , on application by the
Registrar, make an order directing that person
or if that person is a corporation any officer of
the body corporate to make good the default
within such time as is specified in the order.
(2) Any such order may provide that all
the costs of and incidental to the application
shall be borne by that person or by any officer
of the body corporate who is responsible for
the default if that person is a body corporate.
(3) Nothing in this section shall limit the
operation of any other provision of this Act or
any other law imposing penalties in respect of
any default referred to in this section on that
person or an officer of a body corporate if that
person is a body corporate.
CHAPTER VIII
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF PARTNERSHIP RIGHTS
41. (1) The rights of a partner to a share of
the profits and losses of the limited liability
Destruction
of old
records.
Enforcement
of duty to
make
returns.
Partner’s
transferable
interest.

89
partnership and to receive distributions in
accordance with the limited liability partnership
agreement are transferable either wholly or in
part.
(2) The transfer of any right by any partner
pursuant to sub-section (1) does not by itself
cause the disassociation of the partner or a
dissolution and winding up of the limited
liability partnership.
(3) The transfer of right pursuant to this
section does not, by itself, entitle the transferee
or assignee to participate in the management
or conduct of the activities of the limited
liability partnership, or access information
concerning the transactions of the limited
liability partnership.
CHAPTER IX
INVESTIGATION
42. (1) The Central Government shall
appoint one or more competent persons as
inspectors to investigate the affairs of a limited
liability partnership and to report thereon in
such manner as it may direct if—
(a) the Tribunal, either suo motu,  or on
an application received from not less than
one-fifth of the total number of partners of
limited liability partnership, by order,
declares that the affairs of the limited
liability partnership ought to be
investigated; or
(b) any Court, by order, declares that
the affairs of a limited liability partnership
ought to be investigated.
(2) The Central Government may appoint
one or more competent persons as inspectors
to investigate the affairs of a limited liability
partnership and to report on them in such
manner as it may direct.
Investigation
of the
affairs of a
limitd
liability
partnership.

90
(3) The appointment of inspectors pursuant
to sub-section (2) may be made,—
(a) if not less man one-fifth of the total
number of partners of the limited liability
partnership make an application along with
supporting evidence and security amount
as may be prescribed; or
(b) if the limited liability partnership
makes an application that the affairs of the
limited liability partnership ought to be
investigated; or
(c) if, in the opinion of the Central
Government, there are circumstances
suggesting—
(i) that the business of the limited
liability partnership is being conducted
with an intent to defraud its creditors,
partners or any other person, or
otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful
purpose, or, in a manner oppressive or
unfairly prejudicial to some or any of
its partners, or that the limited liability
partnership was formed for any
fraudulent or unlawful purpose; or
(ii) that any of the partners of the
limited liability partnership has been
guilty of fraud, misfeasance or other
misconduct towards the limited liability
partnership or towards its other
partners; or
(iii) that any of the partners of the
limited liability partnership has not
been given all the information with
respect to its affairs which they might
reasonably expect, including
information relating to the remuneration
payable to a designated partner of the
limited liability partnership; or
(iv) that, on receipt of a report of
the Registrar, there are sufficient reasons
that the affairs of the limited liability
partnership ought to be investigated.

91
43. An application by partners of the
limited liability partnership under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 42 shall be supported
by such evidence as the Tribunal may require
for the purpose of showing that the applicants
have good reason for requiring the investigation
and the Central Government may, before
appointing an inspector, require the applicants
to give security, of such amount as may be
prescribed for payment of the costs of the
investigation.
44. No firm, body corporate or other
association shall be appointed as an inspector.
45. (1) If an inspector appointed by the
Central Government to investigate the affairs
of a limited liability partnership thinks it
necessary for the purposes of his investigation
to investigate also the affairs of an entity which
has been associated in the past or is presently
associated with the limited liability partnership
or any present or former partner or designated
partner of the limited liability partnership, the
inspector shall have the power to do so and
shall report on the affairs of the other entity or
partner or designated partners, so far as he
thinks that the results of his investigation
thereof are relevant to the investigation of the
affairs of the limited liability partnership.
(2) In the case of any entity or partner or
designated partner referred to in sub-section (1),
the inspector shall not exercise his power of
investigating into, and reporting on, its or his
affairs without first having obtained the prior
approval of the Central Government thereto:
Provided that before according approval
under this sub-section, the Central Government
shall give the entity or partner or designated
partner a reasonable opportunity to show cause
why such approval should not be accorded.
Application
by partners
for
investigation
to be
supported
by evidence
and power
to call for
security.
Firm, body
corporate
or
association
not to be
appointed
as
inspector.
Power of
inspectors
to carry
out
investigation
into affairs
of related
entities, etc.

92
46. (1) It shall be the duty of the designated
partner and partners of the limited liability
partnership—
(a) to preserve and to produce before
an inspector or any person authorised by
him in this behalf with the previous
approval of the Central Government, all
books and papers of, or relating to, the
limited liability partnership or, as the case
may be, the other entity, which are in their
custody or power; and
(b) otherwise to give to the inspector
all assistance in connection with the
investigation which they are reasonably able
to give.
(2) The inspector may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, require
any entity other than an entity referred to in
sub-section (1) to furnish such information to,
or produce such books and papers before him
or any person authorised by him in this behalf
with the previous approval of that Government
as he may consider necessary if the furnishing
of such information or the production of such
books and papers is relevant or necessary for
the purposes of his investigation.
(3) The inspector may keep in his custody
any books and papers produced under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) for thirty days and
thereafter shall return the same to the limited
liability partnership, other entity or individual
by whom or on whose behalf the books and
papers are produced:
Provided that the inspector may call for the
books and papers if they are needed again:
Provided further that if certified copies of
the books and papers produced under sub-
section (2) are furnished to the inspector, he
shall return those books and papers to the
entity or person concerned.
Production
of
documents
and
evidence.

93
(4) An inspector may examine on oath —
(a) any of the persons referred to in
sub-section (1); and
(b) with the previous approval of the
Central Government, any other person in
relation to the affairs of the limited liability
partnership or any other entity as the case
may be; and
(c) may administer an oath accordingly
and for that purpose may require any of
those persons to appear before him
personally.
(5) If any person fails without reasonable
cause or refuses —
(a) to produce before an inspector or
any person authorised by him in this behalf
with the previous approval of the Central
Government any book or paper which it is
his duty under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) to produce; or
(b) to furnish any information which
it is his duty under sub-section (2) to
furnish; or
(c) to appear before the inspector
personally when required to do so under
sub-section (4) or to answer any question
which is put to him by the inspector in
pursuance of that sub-section; or
(d) to sign the notes of any
examination,
he shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than two thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and
with a further fine which shall not be less than
fifty rupees but which may extend to five
hundred rupees for every day after the first
day after which the default continues.

94
(6) The notes of any examination under
sub-section (4) shall be taken down in writing
and signed by the person whose examination
was made on oath and a copy of such notes
shall be given to the person so examined on
oath and thereafter be used as an evidence by
the inspector.
47. (1) Where in the course of investigation,
the inspector has reasonable ground to believe
that the books and papers of, or relating to,
the limited liability partnership or other entity
or partner or designated partner of such limited
liability partnership may be destroyed,
mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the
inspector may make an application to the
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or, as the
case may be, the Metropolitan Magistrate,
having jurisdiction, for an order for the seizure
of such books and papers.
(2) After considering the application and
hearing the inspector, if necessary, the
Magistrate may, by order, authorise the
inspector —
(a) to enter, with such assistance, as
may be required, the place or places where
such books and papers are kept;
(b) to search that place or those places
in the manner specified in the order; and
(c) to seize books and papers which
the inspector considers it necessary for the
purposes of his investigation.
(3) The inspector shall keep in his custody
the books and papers seized under this section
for such period not later than the conclusion
of the investigation as he considers necessary
and thereafter shall return the same to the
concerned entity or person from whose custody
or power they were seized and inform the
Magistrate of such return:
Seizure of
documents
by
inspector.

95
Provided that the books or papers shall not
be kept seized for a continuous period of more
than six months:
Provided further that the inspector may,
before returning such books and papers as
aforesaid, place identification marks on them
or any part thereof.
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this
section, every search or seizure made under
this section shall be carried out in accordance
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 relating to searches or seizures
made under that Code.
48. (1) The inspectors may, and if so
directed by the Central Government, shall make
interim reports to that Government, and on the
conclusion of the investigation, shall make a
final report to the Central Government and any
such report shall be written or printed, as the
Central Government may direct.
(2) The Central Government —
(a) shall forward a copy of any report
(other than an interim report) made by the
inspectors to the limited liability partnership
at its registered office, and also to any other
entity or person dealt with or related to
the report; and
(b) may, if it thinks fit, furnish a copy
thereof, on request and on payment of the
prescribed fee to any person or entity
related to or affected by the report.
49. If, from the report under section 48, it
appears to the Central Government that any
person in relation to the limited liability
partnership or in relation to any other entity
whose affairs have been investigated, has been
guilty of any offence for which he is liable, the
Central Government may prosecute such person
for the offence; and it shall be the duty of all
partners, designated partners and other
Inspector’s
report.
Prosecution.
2 of 1974

96
employees and agents of the limited liability
partnership or other entity, as the case may be
to give the Central Government all assistance
in connection with the prosecution which they
are reasonably able to give.
50. If any such limited liability partnership
is liable to be wound up under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, and it
appears to the Central Government from any
such report under section 48 that it is expedient
to do so by reason of any such circumstances
as are referred to in sub-clause (i) or (ii) of
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 42, the
Central Government may, unless the limited
liability partnership is already being wound up
by the Tribunal, cause to be presented to the
Tribunal by any person authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf, a petition
for the winding up of the limited liability
partnership on the ground that it is just and
equitable that it should be wound up.
51. If from any report under section 48, it
appears to the Central Government that
proceeding ought, in the public interest, to be
brought by the limited liability partnership or
any entity whose affairs have been
investigated,—
(a) for the recovery of damages in
respect of any fraud, misfeasance or other
misconduct in connection with the
promotion or formation, or the management
of the affairs, of such limited liability
partnership or such other entity; or
(b) for the recovery of any property of
such limited liability partnership or such
other entity, which has been misapplied or
wrongfully retained,
the Central Government may itself bring
proceedings for that purpose.
Application
for winding
up of
limited
liability
partnership.
Proceedings
for
recovery of
damages or
property.

97
52. (1) The expenses of and incidental to
an investigation by an inspector appointed by
the Central Government under this Act shall
be defrayed in the first instance by the Central
Government; but the following persons shall,
to the extent mentioned below, be liable to
reimburse the Central Government in respect
of such expenses, namely:—
(a) any person who is convicted on a
prosecution, or who is ordered to pay
damages or restore any property in
proceedings brought by virtue of section
51, may, in the same proceedings, be
ordered to pay the said expenses to such
extent as may be specified by the Tribunal
convicting such person, or ordering him to
pay such damages or restore such property,
as the case may be;
(b) any entity in whose name
proceedings are brought as aforesaid shall
be liable, to the extent of the amount or
value of any sums or property recovered
by it as a result of the proceedings; and
(c) unless, as a result of the
investigation, a prosecution is instituted in
pursuance of section 49,
(i) any entity, a partner or
designated partner or any other person
dealt with by the report of the inspector
shall be liable to reimburse the Central
Government in respect of the whole of
the expenses, unless and except in so
far as, the Central Government
otherwise directs; and
(ii) the applicants for the
investigations, where the inspector was
appointed in pursuance of the
provisions of clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 42, shall be liable to such
extent, if any, as the Central
Government may direct.
Expenses of
investigation.

98
(2) Any amount for which a limited liability
partnership or other entity is liable by virtue
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be a first
charge on the sums or property mentioned in
that clause.
(3) The amount of expenses in respect of
which any limited liability partnership, other
entity, a partner or designated partner or any
other person is liable under sub-clause (i) of
clause (c) of sub-section (1) to reimburse the
Central Government shall be recoverable as an
arrear of land revenue.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any
costs or expenses incurred by the Central
Government or in connection with proceedings
brought by virtue of section 51 shall be treated
as expenses of the investigation giving rise to
the proceedings.
53. A copy of any report of any inspector
or inspectors appointed under this Act,
authenticated in such manner, if any, as may
be prescribed, shall be admissible in any legal
proceeding as evidence of the opinion of the
inspector or inspectors in relation to any matter
contained in the report.
CHAPTER X
C
ONVERSION TO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
54. The provisions of the Second Schedule
shall apply to the conversion from firm to a
limited liability partnership.
55. The provisions of the Third Schedule
shall apply to the conversion from private
company to a limited liability partnership.
56. The provisions of the Fourth Schedule
shall apply to the conversion from unlisted
public company to a limited liability
partnership.
Inspector’s
report to
be
evidence.
Conversion
from firm
to limited
liability
partnership.
Conversion
from
private
company to
limited
liability
partnership.
Conversion
from
unlisted
public
company to
limited
liability
partnership.

99
CHAPTER XI
FOREIGN LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
57. The Central Government shall make
rules for provisions in relation to establishment
of place of business by foreign limited liability
partnership within India and carrying on their
business therein by—
(a) applying or incorporating, with
such modifications, as appear appropriate,
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956;
and
(b) in all other respect the provisions
of this Act shall apply.
CHAPTER XII
C
OMPROMISE, ARRANGEMENT OR RECONSTRUCTION OF
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIPS
58. The Central Government shall make
rules for provisions in relation to compromise,
arrangement or reconstruction of limited
liability partnerships.
CHAPTER XIII
W
INDING UP AND DISSOLUTION
59. The winding up of a limited liability
partnership may be either voluntary or by the
Tribunal.
60. A limited liability partnership may be
wound up by the Tribunal,—
(a) if the limited liability partnership
decides that limited liability partnership be
wound up by the Tribunal;
(b) if the number of partners of the
limited liability partnership is reduced
below two;
(c) if the limited liability partnership
is unable to pay its debts;
Foreign
limited
liability
partnership.
Compromise,
arrangement
or
reconstruction
of limited
liability
partnership.
Winding
up.
Circumstances
in which
limited
liability
partnership
may be
wound up
by
Tribunal.
1 of 1956

100
(d) if the limited liability partnership
has acted against the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the
security of the State or public sector;
(e) if the limited liability partnership
has made a default in filing with the
Registrar; the Statement of Account and
Solvency or annual return for any five
consecutive financial years;
(f) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that
it is just and equitable that the limited
liability partnership be wound up.
61. The Central Government shall make
rules of provisions in relation to winding up
and dissolution of limited liability partnerships.
CHAPTER XIV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
62. A partner may lend money to and
transact other business with the limited liability
partnership and has the same rights and
obligations with respect to the loan or other
transactions as a person who is not a partner.
63. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
any of the provisions of the Companies Act,
1956 specified in the notification—
(a) shall apply to any limited liability
partnership; or
(b) shall apply to any limited liability
partnership with such exception,
modification and adaptation as may be
specified in the notification.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed
to be issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid
in draft before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before
Rules for
winding
up.
Business
transactions
of partner
with
limited
liability
partnership.
Application
of company
law.
1 of 1956

101
the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in disapproving the issue
of the notification or both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification, the
notification shall not be issued or, as the case
may be, shall be issued only in such modified
form as may be agreed upon by both the
Houses.
64. (1) Any document required to be filed,
recorded or registered under this Act may be
filed, recorded or registered in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
(2) A copy of or an extract from any
document electronically filed with or submitted
to the Registrar which is supplied or issued by
the Registrar and certified through digital
signature to be a true copy of or extract from
such document shall, in any proceedings, be
admissible in evidence as of equal validity with
the original document.
(3) Any information supplied by the
Registrar that is certified by the Registrar
though digital signature to be a true extract
from any document filed or filed with or
submitted to the Registrar shall, in any
proceedings, be admissible in evidence and be
presumed, unless evidence to the contrary is
adduced, to be a true extract from such
document.
65. Subject to the provisions of this Act, if
any document or return required to be filed or
registered under this Act with the Registrar, is
not filed or registered in time and is allowed
to be filed or registered after that time, then,
without prejudice to any other action or liability
under this Act, such document or return may
be filed or registered with the Registrar on
payment of a default fee of five hundred rupees
for every day of such delay in addition to any
Electronic
filing of
documents.
Payment of
default fee.

102
fee as is payable for filing of such document
or return, as the case may be.
66. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
67. (1) The Tribunal shall discharge such
powers and functions as are, or may be,
conferred on it by or under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order or
decision of Tribunal may prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal and the provisions of
sections 10FQ, 10FZA, 10G, 10GD, 10GF and
10GE of the Companies Act, 1956 shall be
applicable in respect of such appeal.
68. Any person guilty of an offence under
this Act for which no punishment is expressly
provided shall be liable to a fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees and with a further
fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every
day after the first day after which the default
continues.
69. Where the Registrar has reasonable
cause to believe that a limited liability
partnership is not carrying on business or its
operation, in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, the name of limited liability
partnership may be struck off the register of
limited liability partnerships in such manner
and following such procedure as may be
prescribed.
70. Where an offence under this Act
committed by a limited liability partnership is
proved—
(a) to have been committed with the
consent or connivance of a partner or
partners or designated partner or
designated partners of the limited liability
partnership; or
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Jurisdiction
of Tribunal
and
Appellate
Tribunal.
General
penalties.
Power of
Registrar to
strike
defunct
limited
liability
partnership
off register.
Offences by
limited
liability
partnerships.
1 of 1956

103
(b) to be attributable to any neglect on
the part of the partner or partners or
designated partner of that limited liability
partnership,
the partner or partners or designated partner
or designated partners of the limited liability
partnership, as the case may be, as well as that
limited liability partnership shall be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
71. Notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary in any Act for the time being in force,
the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or, as
the case may be, the Metropolitan Magistrate
shall have jurisdiction to try any offence under
this Act and shall have power to impose
punishment in respect of the offence.
72. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of that Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matter, namely:—
(a) the particulars of every individual
agreeing to act as designated partner of
limited liability partnership under sub-
section (3) of section 7;
(b) the conditions and requirements
under sub-section (4) of section 7;
(c) the manner of filing the
incorporation document and payment of
fees payable thereof under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 11;
(d) the form of statement to be filed
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 11;
(e) the form of incorporation document
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 11;
Jurisdiction
of the
Court.
Power to
make rules.

104
(f) the information to be contained in
the incorporation document concerning the
proposed limited liability partnership under
clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 11;
(g) the mode of serving the documents
on a limited liability partnership under sub-
section (2) of section 13;
(h) the form and manner of notice to
Registrar under sub-section (3) of
section 13;
(i) the manner of application and
amount of fee payable to the Registrar
under sub-section (1) of section 16;
(j) the manner in which names will be
reserved by Registrar under sub-section (2)
of section 16;
(k) the manner in which an application
may be made under sub-section (1) of
section 18;
(l) the form and manner of notice of
change of name of limited liability
partnership and the amount of fees payable
under section 19;
(m) the form and manner of the
limited liability partnership agreement and
the changes made therein and the amount
of fees payable under sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(n) the form of notice, the amount of
fees payable and the manner of
authentication of the statement under
clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) of
section 25;
(o) the manner of accounting and
disclosure of monetary value of contribution
of a partner under sub-section (2) of
section 31;

105
(p) the books of account and the period
of their maintenance under sub-section (1)
of section 33;
(q) the form and manner of filing of
statement of account and Solvency under
sub-section (3) of section 33;
(r) the accounts of a limited liability
partnership shall be audited under sub-
section (4) of section 33;
(s) the form and manner of filing of
annual return under sub-section (1) of
section 34;
(t) the manner and amount of fees
payable for inspection of statement of
Accounts and Solvency and Annual Return
under section 35;
(u) destruction of documents by
Registrar under section 39;
(v) the amount required as security
under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of
section 42;
(w) the amount of security to be given
under section 43;
(x) the fees payable for furnishing a
copy under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 48;
(y) the manner of authentication of
report of inspector under section 53;
(z) the provisions in relation to foreign
limited liability partnerships under
section 57;
(za) the provisional in relation to
compromise, arrangement or reconstruction
under section 58;
(zb) the provisions in relation to
winding up and dissolution and limited
liability partnerships under section 61;

106
(zc) the manner and conditions for
filing a document electronically under
section 64;
(zd) the manner and procedure for
striking off the names of limited liability
partnerships from the register under section
69;
(ze) the statement and form containing
particulars under paragraph 3(a) of the
Second Schedule;
(zf) the form, manner and amount of
free payable on the statement under sub-
paragraph (a) of paragraph 4 of the Third
Schedule;
(zg) the form of certificate of
registration under paragraph 5 of the Third
Schedule;
(zh) the form, manner and amount of
fee payable on the statement under sub-
paragraph (a) paragraph 5 of the Fourth
Schedule.
(3) Every rule or order made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree
in making any modification in the rule, or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or by of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however that any such modification
shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
73. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
Power to
remove
difficulties.

107
may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of a period
of two years from the commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See Section 23(4)]
DEFAULT PROVISIONS FOR LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIPS
1. The mutual rights and duties of the
partners and the mutual rights and duties of
the limited liability partnership and its partners
shall be determined, subject to the terms of any
limited liability partnership agreement or in the
absence of any such agreement, by the
provisions in this Schedule.
2. All the partners of a limited liability
partnership are entitled to share equally in the
capital profits and losses of the limited liability
partnership.
3. The limited liability partnership shall
indemnify each partner in respect of payments
made and personal liabilities incurred by him—
(a) in the ordinary and proper conduct
of the business of the limited liability
partnership; or
(b) in or about anything necessarily
done for the preservation of the business
or property of the limited liability
partnership.
4. Every partner may take part in the
management of the limited liability partnership.

108
5. No partner shall be entitled to
remuneration for acting in the business or
management of the limited liability partnership.
6. No person may be introduced as a
partner without the consent of all the existing
partners.
7. Any matter or issue relating to the
limited liability partnership shall be decided by
resolution passed by a majority in number of
the partners, and for this purpose, each partner
shall have one vote. However, no change may
be made in the nature of business of the limited
liability partnership without the consent of all
the partners.
8. Each partner shall render true accounts
and full information of all things affecting the
limited liability partnership to any partner or
his legal representatives.
9. If a partner, without the consent of the
limited liability partnership, carries on any
business of the same nature as and competing
with the limited liability partnership, he must
account for and pay over to the limited liability
partnership all profits made by him in that
business.
10. Every partner shall account to the
limited liability partnership for any benefit
derived by him without the consent of the
limited liability partnership from any
transaction concerning the limited liability
partnership, or from any use by him of the
property , name or any business connection of
the limited liability partnership.
11. No majority of the partners can expel
any partner unless a power to do so has been
conferred by express agreement between the
partners.

109
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See Section 54]
CONVERSION FROM FIRM TO LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIP
1. (1) A firm may convert to a limited
liability partnership by complying with the
requirements as to the conversions set out in
this Schedule.
(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of
the firm shall be bound by the provisions of
this Schedule that are applicable to them.
(3) The Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, amend, add
to or vary the provisions of this Schedule.
Explanation—In this paragraph, “convert”,
in relation to a firm converting to a limited
liability partnership, means a transfer of the
property , assets, interests, rights, privileges,
liabilities, obligations and the undertaking of
the firm to the limited liability partnership in
accordance with the provisions of this Schedule.
2. A firm may apply to convert to a limited
liability partnership in accordance with this
Schedule if and only if the partners of the
limited liability partnership to which the firm
is to be converted, comprise all the partners of
the firm and no one else.
3. A firm may apply to convert to a limited
liability partnership by filing with the
Registrar—
(a) a statement by all of its partners in
such medium and form and accompanied
by such fees as the Central Government
may prescribe, containing the following
particulars, namely:—
(i) the name and registration
number (if applicable) of the firm; and
Conversion
of firms to
limited
liability
partnership.
Eligibility
for
conversion.
Statements
to be filed.

110
(ii) the date on which the firm was
registered under the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) or any written
law (if applicable); and
(b) incorporation document and
statement referred to in section 11.
4. On receiving the documents referred to
in paragraph 3, the Registrar shall subject to
the provisions of this Act, register the
documents and issue a certificate a registration
in such form as the Registrar may determine
stating that the limited liability partnership is,
on and from the date specified in the certificate,
registered under this Act.
5. (1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be
construed as to require the Registrar to register
any limited liability partnership if he is not
satisfied with the particulars or other
information furnished under the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular
case, require the documents referred to in
paragraph 3 to be verified in such manner as
he considers fit.
6. On and from the date of registration
specified in the certificate of registration issued
under paragraph 4,—
(a) there shall be a limited liability
partnership by the name specified in the
certificate of registration registered under
this Act;
(b) all movable and immovable
property vested in the firm, all assets,
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities,
obligations relating to the firm and the
whole of the undertaking of the firm shall
be transferred to and shall vest in the
limited liability partnership without further
assurance, act or deed; and
Registration
of
conversion.
Registrar
may refuse
to register.
Effect of
registration.

111
(c) the firm shall be deemed to be
dissolved and if earlier registered under the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932)
removed from the records maintained under
that Act.
7. If any property to which sub-paragraph
(b) of paragraph 6 applies is registered with
any authority, the limited liability partnership
shall, as soon as practicable after the date of
registration, take all necessary steps as required
by the relevant authority to notify the authority
of the conversion and of the particulars of the
limited liability partnership in such medium
and form as the authority may specify.
8. All proceedings by or against the firm
which are pending in any court or tribunal or
before any authority on the date of registration
may be continued, completed and enforced by
or against the limited liability partnership.
9. Any conviction, ruling, order or judgment
of any court, tribunal or other authority in
favour of or against the firm may be enforced
by or against the limited liability partnership.
10. Every agreement to which the firm was
a party immediately before the date of
registration, whether or not of such nature that
the rights and liabilities thereunder could be
assigned, shall have effect as from that day as
if—
(a) the limited liability partnership
were a party to such an agreement instead
of the firm; and
(b) for any reference to the firm, there
were substituted in respect of anything to
be done on or after the date of registration
a reference to the limited liability
partnership.
11. All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds,
agreements, applications, instruments and
arrangements subsisting immediately before the
Registration
in relation
to property.
Pending
proceedings.
Continuance
of
conviction,
ruling,
order or
judgment.
Existing
agreements.
Existing
contracts,
etc.

112
date of registration relating to the firm or to
which the firm is a party, shall continue in force
on and after that date as if they relate to the
limited liability partnership and shall be
enforceable by or against the limited liability
partnership as if the limited liability partnership
were named therein or were a party thereto
instead of the firm.
12. Every contract of employment to which
paragraph 10 or paragraph 11 applies shall
continue to be in force on or after the date of
registration as if the limited liability partnership
were the employer thereunder instead of the
firm.
13. (1) Every appointment of the firm in
any role or capacity which in force immediately
before the date of registration shall take effect
and operate from that date as if the limited
liability partnership were appointed.
(2) Any authority or power conferred on
the firm which is in force immediately before
the date of registration shall take effect and
operate from that date as if it were conferred
on the limited liability partnership.
14. The provisions of paragraphs 6 to 13
(both inclusive) shall not apply to any approval,
permit or licence issued under any written law
to the firm which is in force immediately before
the date of registration of the limited liability
partnership.
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything in
paragraphs 6 to 13 (both inclusive), every
partner of a firm that has converted to a limited
liability partnership shall continue to be
personally liable (jointly and severally with the
limited liability partnership) for the liabilities
and obligations of the firm which were incurred
prior to the conversion or which arose from
any contract entered into prior to the
conversion.
Continuance
of
employment.
Existing
appointment
authority
or power.
Application
of
paragraphs
6 to 13.
Partner
liable for
liabilities
and
obligations
of firm
before
conversion.

113
(2) If any such partner discharges any
liability or obligation referred to in sub-
paragraph (1), he shall be entitled (subject to
any agreement with the limited liability
partnership to the contrary) to be fully
indemnified by the limited liability partnership
in respect of such liability or obligation.
16. (1) The limited liability partnership shall
ensure that for a period of twelve months
commencing not later than fourteen days after
the date of registration, every official
correspondence of the limited liability
partnership bears the following:
(a) a statement that it was as from the date
of registration, converted from a firm to a
limited liability partnership; and
(b) the name and registration number (if
applicable) of the firm from which it was
converted.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
contravenes the provisions of sub-paragraph (1)
shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees and with a
further fine which shall not be less than fifty
rupees but which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day after the first day after
which the default continues.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See Section 55]
C
ONVERSION FROM PRIV ATE COMPANY TO LIMITED
LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
1. In this Schedule, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(a) “company” means a private
company as defined in clause (iii) of sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
Notice of
conversion
in
correspon-
dence.
Interpretation.

114
(b) “convert”, in relation to a private
company converting to a limited liability
partnership, means a transfer of the
property , assets, interests, rights, privileges,
liabilities, obligations and the undertaking
of the private company to the limited
liability partnership in accordance with this
Schedule.
2. The Central Government may, by order
published in the Gazette, amend, add to or vary
the provisions of this Schedule.
3. (1) A company may convert to a limited
liability partnership by complying with the
requirements as to the conversion set out in
this Schedule.
(2) A company may apply to convert to a
limited liability partnership in accordance with
this Schedule if and only if—
(a) there is no security interest in its
assets subsisting or in force at the time of
application; and
(b) the partners of the limited liability
partnership to which it converts comprise
all the shareholders of the company and
no one else.
(3) Upon such conversion, the company, its
shareholders, the limited liability partnership to
which the company has converted and the
partners of that limited liability partnership
shall be bound by the provisions of this
Schedule that are applicable to them.
4. A company may apply to convert to a
limited liability partnership by filing with the
Registrar—
(a) a statement by all its shareholders
in such form and manner to be
accompanied by such fees as the Central
Government may prescribe, containing the
following particulars, namely:—
Amendment
of
Schedule.
Eligibility
for
conversion
of private
companies
to limited
liability
partnership.
Statements
to be filed.

115
(i) the name and registration
number of the company; and
(ii) the date on which the company
was incorporated under the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); and
(b) incorporation document and
statement referred to in section 11.
5. On receiving the documents referred to
in paragraph 3, the Registrar shall, subject to
the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder register the documents and issue a
certificate of registration in such form as the
Central Government may prescribe stating that
the limited liability partnership is, on and from
the date specified in the certificate, registered
under this Act.
6. (1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be
construed as to require the Registrar to register
any limited liability partnership if he is not
satisfied with the particulars or other
information furnished under the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular
case, require the documents referred to in
paragraph 3 to be verified in such manner as
he considers fit.
7. On and from the date of registration
specified in the notice of registration issued
under paragraph 4—
(a) there shall be a limited liability
partnership by the name specified in the
certificate of registration registered under
this Act;
(b) all movable and immovable
property vested in the company, all assets,
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities,
obligations relating to the company and the
whole of the undertaking of the company
shall be transferred to and shall vest in the
Registration
of
conversion.
Registrar
may refuse
to Register.
Effect of
registration.

116
limited liability partnership without further
assurance, act or deed; and
(c) the company shall be deemed to
be dissolved and removed from the records
of the Registrar of Companies.
8. If any property to which clause (b) of
paragraph 7 applies is registered with any
authority, the limited liability partnership shall
as soon as practicable after the date of
registration, take all necessary steps are required
by the relevant authority to notify the authority
of the conversion and of the particulars of the
limited liability partnership in such medium
and form as the authority may determine.
9. All proceedings by or against the
company which are pending before any court,
tribunal or other authority on the date of
registration may be continued, completed and
enforced by or against the limited liability
partnership.
10. Any conviction, ruling, order or
judgment of any court, tribunal or other
authority in favour of or against the company
may be enforced by or against the limited
liability partnership.
11. Every agreement to which the company
was a party immediately before the date of
registration, whether or not such nature that
the rights and liabilities thereunder could be
assigned, shall have effect as from that day as
if—
(a) the limited liability partnership
were a party to such an agreement instead
of the company; and
(b) for any reference to the company,
there were substituted in respect of
anything to be done on or after the date of
registration a reference to the limited
liability partnership.
Registration
in relation
to property.
Pending
proceedings.
Continuance
of
conviction,
ruling,
order or
judgement.
Existing
agreements.

117
12. All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds,
agreements, applications, instruments and
arrangements subsisting immediately before the
date of registration relating to the company or
to which the company is a party shall continue
in force on and after that date as if they relate
to the limited liability partnership and shall be
enforceable by or against the limited liability
partnership as if the limited liability partnership
were named therein or were a party thereto
instead of the company.
13. Every contract of employment to which
paragraph 11 paragraph 12 applies shall
continue in force on or after the date of
registration as if the limited liability partnership
were the employer thereunder instead of the
company.
14. (1) Every appointment of the company
in any role or capacity which is in force
immediately before the date of registration shall
take effect and operate from that date as if the
limited liability partnership were appointed.
(2) Any authority or power conferred on
the company which is in force immediately
before the date of registration shall take effect
and operate from that date as if it were
conferred on the limited liability partnership.
15. The provisions of paragraphs 7 to 14
(both inclusive) shall not apply to any approval,
permit or licence issued under any written law
to the company which is in force immediately
before the date of registration of the limited
liability partnership.
16. (1) The limited liability partnership shall
ensure that for a period of twelve months
commencing not later than fourteen days after
the date of registration, every official
correspondence of the limited liability
partnership bears the following, namely:—
(a) a statement that it was, as from
the date of registration, converted from a
company to a limited liability partnership;
and
Existing
contracts,
etc.
Continuance
of
employment.
Existing
appointment,
authority
or power.
Application
of
paragraphs
7 to 14.
Notice of
conversion
in
correspon-
dence.

118
(b) the name and registration number
of the company from which it was
converted.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
contravenes the provision of sub-paragraph (1)
shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees and with a
further fine which shall not be less than fifty
rupees but which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day after the first day after
which the default continues.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See Section 56]
CONVERSION FROM UNLISTED PUBLIC COMPANY TO
LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
1. (1) In this Schedule, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(a) “company” means an unlisted
public company;
(b) “convert”, in relation to a company
converting to a limited liability partnership,
means a transfer of the property, assets,
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities,
obligations and the undertaking of the
company to the limited liability partnership
in accordance with the provision of this
Schedule;
(c) “listed company” means a listed
company as defined in the SEBI (Disclosure
and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000
issued by the Securities and Exchange
Board of India under section 11 of the
Securities of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).
(d) “unlisted public company”, means
a company which is not a listed company.
Interpretation.

119
2. The Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, amend, add
to or vary the provisions of this Schedule.
3. (1) A company may convert to a limited
liability partnership by complying with the
requirements as to the conversion set out in
this Schedule.
(2) Upon such conversion, the company, its
shareholders, the limited liability partnership to
which the company has converted and the
partners of the limited liability partnership shall
be bound by the provisions of this Schedule
that are applicable to them.
4. A company may apply to convert to a
limited liability partnership in accordance with
this Schedule if and only if—
(a) there is no security interest in its
assets subsisting or in force at the time of
application; and
(b) the partners of the limited liability
partnership to which it converts comprise
all the shareholders of the company and
no one else.
5. A company may apply to convert to a
limited liability partnership by filing with the
Registrar—
(a) a statement by all its shareholders
in such form and manner to be
accompanied by such fees as the Central
Government may prescribe containing the
following particulars, namely:—
(i) the name and registration
number of the company; and
(ii) the date on which the company
was incorporated under the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); and
(b) incorporation document and
statement referred to in section 11.
Amendment
of
Schedule.
Conversion
of company
to a limited
liability
partnership.
Eligibility
for
conversion.
Statements
to be filed.

120
6. On receiving the documents referred to
in paragraph 5, the Registrar shall subject to
the provisions of this Act, and the rules made
thereunder, register the documents and issue a
certificate of registration in such form as the
Registrar may determine stating that the limited
liability partnership is, on and from the date
specified in the certificate, registered under this
Act.
7. (1) Nothing in this Schedule shall be
construed as to require the Registrar to register
any limited liability partnership if he is not
satisfied with the particulars or other
information furnished under the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular
case, require the documents referred to in
paragraph 3 to be verified in such manner as
he considers fit.
8. On and from the date of registration
specified in the notice of registration issued
under paragraph 4—
(a) there shall be a limited liability
partnership by the name specified in the
certificate of registration registered under
this Act;
(b) all movable and immovable
property vested in the company all assets
interests, rights, privileges, liabilities,
obligations relating to the company and the
whole of the undertaking of the company
shall be transferred to and shall vest in the
limited liability partnership without further
assurance, act or deed; and
(c) the company shall be deemed to
be dissolved and removed from the records
of the Registrar of Companies.
9. If any property to which clause (b) of
paragraph 8 applies is registered with any
authority, the limited liability partnership shall
Registration
of
conversion.
Registrar
may refuse
to Register.
Effect of
registration.
Registration
in relation
to property.

121
as soon as practicable after the date of
registration, take all necessary steps as required
by the relevant authority to notify the authority
of the conversion and of the particulars of the
limited liability partnership in such medium
and form as the authority may determine.
10. All proceedings by or against the
company which are pending in any court or
tribunal or before an authority on the date of
registration may be continued, completed and
enforced by or against the limited liability
partnership.
11. Any conviction, ruling, order or
judgment of any court, tribunal or other
authority in favour of or against the company
may be enforced by or against the limited
liability partnership.
12. Every agreement to which the company
was a party immediately before the date of
registration, whether or not of such nature that
the rights and liabilities thereunder could be
assigned, shall have effect as from that day as
if—
(a) the limited liability partnership
were a party to such an agreement instead
of the company; and
(b) for any reference to the company,
there were substituted in respect of
anything to be done on or after the date of
registration a reference to the limited
liability partnership.
13. All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds,
agreements, applications, instruments and
arrangements subsisting immediately before the
date of registration relating to the company or
to which the company is a party shall continue
in force on and after that date as if they relate
to the limited liability partnership and shall be
enforceable by or against the limited liability
partnership as if the limited liability partnership
Pending
proceedings.
Continuance
of
conviction
ruling,
order or
judgement.
Existing
agreements.
Existing
contracts
etc.

122
were named therein or were a party thereto
instead of the company.
14. Every contract of employment to which
paragraph 12 or paragraph 13 applies shall
continue in force on or after the date of
registration as if the limited liability partnership
were the employer thereunder instead of the
company.
15. (1) Every appointment of the company
in any role or capacity which is in force
immediately before the date of registration shall
take effect and operate from that date as if the
limited liability partnership were appointed.
(2) Any authority or power conferred on
the company which is in force immediately
before the date of registration shall take effect
and operate from that date as if it were
conferred on the limited liability partnership
were appointed.
16. The provisions of paragraphs 8 to 15
(both inclusive) shall not apply to any approval,
permit or licence issued under any written law
to the company which is in force immediately
before the date of registration of the limited
liability partnership.
17. (1) The limited liability partnership shall
ensure that for a period of twelve months
commencing not later than fourteen days after
the date of registration, every official
correspondence of the limited liability
partnership bears the following:
(a) a statement that it was, as from
the date of registration, converted from a
company to a limited liability partnership;
and
(b) the name and registration number
of the company from which it was
converted.
Continuance
of
employment.
Existing
appointment
authority of
power.
Application
of
paragraphs
8 to 15.
Notice of
conversion
of
correspon-
dence.

123
(2) Any limited liability partnership which
contravenes the provisions of sub-paragraph (1)
shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees and with a
further fine which shall not be less than fifty
rupees but which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day after the first day after
which the default continues.

124
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the growth of the Indian economy, the role played by its
entrepreneurs as well as its technical and professional manpower has
been acknowledged internationally. It is felt opportune that
entrepreneurship, knowledge and risk capital combine to provide a
further impetus to India’s economic growth. In this background, a
need has been felt for a new corporate form that would provide an
alternative to the traditional partnership, with unlimited personal
liability on the one hand, and, the statute-based governance structure
of the limited liability company on the other, in order to enable
professional expertise and entrepreneurial initiative to combine, organize
and operate in flexible, innovative and efficient manner.
2. The Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) is viewed as an
alternative corporate business vehicle that provides the benefits of
limited liability but allows its members the flexibility of organizing
their internal structure as a partnership based on a mutually arrived
agreement. The LLP from would enable entrepreneurs, professionals
and enterprises providing services of any kind or engaged in scientific
and technical disciplines, to form commercially efficient vehicles suited
to their requirements. Owing to flexibility in its structure and operation,
the LLP would also be a suitable vehicle for small enterprises and for
investment by venture capital.
3. The salient features of the Limited Liability Partnership Bill,
2006, inter alia , are as follows:—
(i) The LLP shall be a body corporate and a legal entity
separate from its partners. Any two or more persons,
associated for carrying on a lawful business with a view to
profit, may by subscribing their names to an incorporation
document and filing the same with the Registrar, form a
Limited Liability Partnership. The LLP will have perpetual
succession;
(ii) The mutual rights and duties of partners of an LLP inter se
and those of the LLP and its partners shall be governed by
an agreement between partners or between the LLP and
the partners subject to the provision of the proposed
legislation. The Bill, if enacted, would provide flexibility to
devise the agreement as per their choice. In the absence of
any such agreement, the mutual rights and duties shall be
governed by the provisions of proposed legislation;

125
(iii) The LLP will be a separate legal entity, liable to the full
extent of its assets, with the liability of the partners being
limited to their agreed contribution in the LLP which may
be of tangible or intangible nature or both tangible and
intangible in nature. No partner would be liable on account
of the independent or un-authorized actions of other partners
or their misconduct;
(iv) Every LLP shall have at least two partners and shall also
have at least two individuals as Designated Partners, of
whom at least one shall be resident in India. The duties
and obligations of Designated Partners shall be as provided
in the law;
(v) The LLP shall be under an obligation to maintain annual
accounts reflecting true and fair view of its state of affairs.
A statement of accounts and solvency shall be filed by every
LLP with the Registrar every year. The accounts of LLPs
shall also be audited, subject to any class of LLPs being
exempted from this requirement by the Central Government.
(vi) The Central Government shall have powers to investigate
the affairs of an LLP , if required, by appointment of
competent inspector for the purpose;
(vii) The proposed legislation would confer powers on the Central
Government to apply such provisions of the Companies Act,
1956 to provide, inter alia,  for mergers, amalgamations,
winding up and dissolutions of LLPs, as appropriate, by
notification with such changes or modifications as deemed
necessary. However, such notifications shall be laid in draft
before each House of Parliament for a total period of
30 days and shall be subject to any modification as may be
approved by both Houses;
(viii) The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 shall not be applicable to
LLPs. Other entities may convert themselves to LLP in
accordance with provisions of the proposed legislation;
(ix) The Central Government shall have powers to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
New Delhi; PREM CHAND GUPTA
The 12
th December, 2006

126
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill
for the purposes of certainty in the interpretation of the proposed
legislation e.g., “foreign limited liability partnership” as limited liability
partnership which is formed, registered or incorporated outside India
and establishes a place of business in India, ‘limited liability
partnership’ as a partnership formed and registered under the proposed
legislation; ‘limited liability partnership agreement’ as a written
agreement between the partners of the limited liability partnership or
between the limited liability partnership and its partners which
determines the mutual rights and duties of the partners and their
rights and duties in relation to such partnership; and ‘partner’ in
relation to limited liability partnership, as any person who has been
admitted as a partner in the limited liability partnership in accordance
with the limited liability partnership agreement.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to provide that Limited Liability
Partnership (LLP) is to be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a legal entity separate from its partners and any change in the
partners of such partnership shall not affect its liabilities.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) shall not apply to an LLP .
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide that an individual or a
body corporate may become a partner in an LLP and also requirements
of obtaining a Partner Identification Number from the Central
Government by every Designated Partner.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to provide that an LLP shall consist of
at least two partners and also provides that in a situation where the
number of partners is reduced to one and such LLP carries on business
with such sole partner for more than six months and then such partner,
if having knowledge of such a situation, shall be liable personally for
the obligations of the LLP .
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to provide that an LLP shall have at
least two Designated Partners who shall be individuals and at least
one of them shall be resident in India. Particulars of every designated
partner who agrees to act as such shall be filed with Registrar. It also
seeks to empower Central Government to make rules for prescribing

127
conditions and requirements for an individual to be a Designated
Partner.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to provide for the manner in which
an individual can become a Designated Partner and also provides for
the procedure and time period for filling up of a vacancy of a
Designated Partner. If no Designated Partner is appointed, or if at any
time there is only one Designated Partner, each partner of the LLP
shall be deemed to be a Designated Partner.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide for the obligation of an
LLP to appoint an individual (resident of India) as a Designated
Partner, within thirty days, and liabilities and duties of the Designated
Partner who shall be—
(a) answerable for the doing of all acts, matters and things as are
required to be done by the LLP in respect of compliance of the
provisions of this Bill including filing of any document, return,
statement and the like report pursuant to the provisions of this Bill
and as may be specified in the LLP Agreement; and
(b) liable to all penalties imposed on the LLP for any contravention
of those provisions.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide that if the LLP fails to
appoint Designated Partners under sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the
Bill, then the LLP and its every partner shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees. The clause also seeks to provide that if an
LLP does not meet other requirements provided in clauses 7, 8 and 9
in relation to Designated Partners, the LLP and its every partner shall
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees and may extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide for manner of filing of
incorporation document and other statement of LLP with Registrar
and also the contents and form of the incorporation document. It also
seeks to provide for penalties for making statement by any person,
knowing it to be false, or not believing it to be true, which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees and may extend to five lakh rupees
and also for imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.
Clause  12.—This clause seeks to provide for registration of
incorporation document of LLP and issue of a certificate of its
incorporation by the Registrar.

128
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide that every LLP shall have
a registered office to which all communications will be made and
received. It also seeks to provide for mode of serving the documents
to LLP and intimating the change of the address of the registered
office in the prescribed manner to the Registrar. This clause further
seeks to provide for penalties of not less than two thousand rupees
which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees in case the LLP
contravenes the provisions of this clause.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide that LLP shall be a body
corporate and can use and be sued, acquire, own, hold and develop
or dispose of property and have a common seal.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide an obligation on every
LLP to suffix “limited liability partnership” or “LLP” with its name.
The clause also seeks to provide that no LLP shall be registered with
an undesirable name or a name which is identical or nearly resembles
to that of any other partnership firm or an LLP or a body corporate
or a registered trade mark or a trade mark the application of which
is pending.
Clause  16.—This clause seeks to provide for making of an
application for reservation of proposed name of the LLP or change of
its existing name to the Registrar who may reserve the name for a
period of three months. It also seeks to empower the Central
Government to make rules regarding form, manner and fees payable
on such application. The clause further seeks to empower the Central
Government to frame rules which may be followed by Registrars while
reserving names of LLPs.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to give direction to the LLP to rectify its name if the name registered
is undesirable or so nearly resembles the name of any other LLP or
body corporate or other name as to be likely to be mistaken for it. It
seeks to provide for imposition of a fine of not less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees in case the LLP fails
to comply with such direction.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide for an application to be
made by an LLP to the Registrar in case another LLP has been
incorporated with the same name subsequently, for giving a direction
to the LLP (subsequently registered) to change its name. A period of
twenty-four months has been provided within which the former LLP
will have to make an application to the Registrar.

129
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide that an LLP may change
its name by filing with the Registrar a notice of such change in such
form, and manner and on payment of fee as may be prescribed by the
rules.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide for imposition of a fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees in case any person carries on
business using the words “Limited Liability Partnership” or “LLP”
without getting incorporated as LLP .
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to provide that every LLP shall ensure
that its invoices and official correspondence bear the name, address
and registration number of the LLP and the statement that it is
registered with limited liability. It also seeks to provide for imposition
of a fine of not less than two thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty five thousand rupees in case the LLP contravenes these
provisions.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide that the persons who
subscribe their names to the incorporation document shall be partners
of LLP and any other person may also become partner of the LLP in
accordance with its agreement.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to provide that the mutual rights
and duties of the partners of the LLP inter-se and that of the LLP and
its partners shall be governed by the LLP Agreement and in absence
of any such Agreement, such mutual rights and duties shall be
determined as set out in the First Schedule of the Bill. It also seeks to
empower the Central Government to prescribe, by rules, the form,
manner and fees for filing the LLP Agreement and informing changes
therein. This clause further seeks to provide that any agreement, made
before the incorporation of LLP , between the partners who subscribe
their names to the incorporation document may impose obligation on
LLP , if ratified by all the partners after its incorporation.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for the circumstances under
which a person may cease to be a partner of an LLP and for his
obligation to the LLP or to the other partners or to other persons
incurred during the period when he was partner of the LLP . It also
seeks to provide that a former partner or a person entitled to his
share in case of death or insolvency of former partner shall not have
any right to interfere in the management of the LLP .
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to provide for the requirement and
the procedure for filing notice about changes in the name and addresses

130
of partners of the LLP to the Registrar. It also seeks to provide for
imposition of a fine of not less than two thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty five thousand rupees in case the LLP fails to
intimate such changes to the Registrar.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide that every partner of the
LLP is agent of the LLP but not of other partners.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to provide that the LLP shall not be
bound by anything done by a partner in dealing with a person if that
partner has no authority to act for LLP in doing a particular act and
the person with whom he is dealing also knows that the partner has
no authority for such act and to provide that an obligation of LLP ,
whether arising out of contract or otherwise will solely be the obligation
of LLP . It also seeks to provide that liabilities of LLP are to be met
from the property of LLP . It further seeks to provide that LLP shall be
liable for a wrongful act or omission by a partner in the course of the
business of the LLP or with its authority. It further seeks to provide
that the obligation of an LLP shall not affect the personal liability of
a partner for his own wrongful act or omission but a partner shall not
be personally liable for wrongful act or omission of any other partner.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to provide that the partner is not
personally liable directly or indirectly for an obligation of LLP solely
by reason of his being a partner of the LLP .
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to provide for unlimited liability of
the LLP and its partners in case LLP or any of its partners carry out
an act with intent to defraud creditors of the LLP or any other person
or if they carry out an act for any fraudulent purpose. The clause
further seeks to provide that in case any such act is carried out by a
partner, the LLP is liable to the same extent as the partner unless it
is established by the LLP that such act was without the knowledge or
the authority of the LLP . This clause further seeks to provide that any
person who knowingly carries such act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to provide that the Court or Tribunal
may reduce or waive any penalty leviable against any partner or
employee of an LLP in case such partner or employee has provided
useful information during investigation of such LLP for finding out
the offence. The clause further seeks to provide that no such partner

131
or employee shall be discharged, demoted, suspended, threatened,
harassed or in any other manner discriminated merely because of his
providing information to the Court or Tribunal.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to provide various kinds in which
contributions may be made by partners of an LLP and the manner in
which such contributions shall be valued and disclosed in the accounts
of the LLP .
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to provide that obligation of a partner
to make contribution shall be as per the LLP Agreement. The clause
further seeks to provide that a creditor of an LLP may enforce the
original obligation against any partner of the LLP without notice of
any subsequent compromise between partners.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide for requirement relating
to maintenance of proper books of accounts by the LLP relating to its
affairs for each year and for filing of an annual Statement of Accounts
and Solvency with the Registrar in such form and manner as may be
prescribed. This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
prescribe rules for the manner in which the accounts of LLPs shall be
audited. It also seeks to empower the Central Government to grant
exemption to any class or classes of LLPs from this requirement. It
also seeks to provide for imposition of a fine of not less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees for LLP and of a
fine of not less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to
one lakh rupees for Designated Partner of LLP , in case the LLP fails
to comply with these provisions.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to provide that every LLP shall be
required to file with the Registrar an Annual Return every year. It
also seeks to empower the Central Government to specify, by rules,
the contents of such Annual Return. The clause also seeks to provide
that any LLP which fails to comply with these provisions shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees and the Designated Partner of
such LLP shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to provide that the Statement of
Accounts and Solvency and Annual Return filed by each LLP with the
Registrar shall be available for inspection in the office of the Registrar
by the public. It also seeks to empower the Central Government to
prescribe by rules, the manner and amount of fees for such inspection.

132
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to provide that if any person makes
any statement in any return, statement or other document under this
Bill which is false in any material particular, or which omits any
material fact, knowingly, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees but which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to empower the Registrar to call for
information from any present or former partner or Designated Partner
or employee of the LLP or to summon them before him for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of this Bill. The clause seeks to provide
that any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with any
summons or requisition of the Registrar under this clause shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees
but which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide for empowering the Central
Government to compound any offence under this Bill which is
punishable with fine by collecting a sum not exceeding the amount of
maximum fine prescribed for such offence.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to prescribe by rules the manner in which the Registrar may destroy
any document filed or registered with him by the LLPs.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to provide that in case any LLP is in
default in complying with the provisions relating to filing with the
Registrar of any return, account or other document or giving of any
notice to him, the Registrar may make an application before the
Tribunal for making an order for directions in order to make good the
default within a time frame.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to provide that the rights of a partner
to a share of the profits and losses of the LLP and to receive
distributions shall be transferable in accordance with the LLP
Agreement and such transfer shall not by itself cause the disassociation
of the partner or a dissolution and winding up of the LLP . The clause
further seeks to provide that such transfer would not entitle the
transferee to participate in the management of the LLP .
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to provide the circumstances under
which investigation of the affairs of the LLP may be ordered and the
inspectors appointed by the Central Government to carry out such
investigation.

133
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to provide that an application by
partners of the LLP for investigation of the LLP shall be supported by
such evidence as the Tribunal may require and that the Central
Government may require the applicants to give security of such amount
as may be prescribed for payment of the costs of the investigation.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to prohibit a firm, body corporate or
other association to be appointed as an inspector.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to provide that the inspector appointed
by the Central Government to investigate the affairs of the LLP under
this Bill may carry out investigation into the affairs of other entities
associated with the LLP in the past or present or of partner or
designated partner, after seeking prior approval of the Central
Government.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to provide the duty of the Designated
Partner and partners of the LLP to preserve and produce all books,
papers relating to the LLP before inspector and otherwise give all
assistance to the inspector for investigation. This clause also seeks to
empower the inspector to examine such persons on oath. This clause
further seeks to provide that if any person fails without reasonable
cause or refuses to produce before an inspector any book or paper or
furnish any relevant information or to appear before the inspector
personally when required to do or to answer any question which is
put to him by the inspector under this clause or to sign the notes of
any examination, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty five
thousand rupees and with a further fine which shall not be less than
fifty rupees but which may extend to five hundred rupees for every
day after the first day after which the default continues.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to empower the inspector appointed
by the Central Government under this Bill to investigate the affairs of
an LLP , to enter the place where books and papers kept, search and
seize the documents or books or papers relating to LLP , after seeking
permission from the judicial Magistrate First Class or Metropolitan
Magistrate in this regard, if he has reasonable cause that the partner
of such LLP or other entity may destroy, mutilate, alter, falsify or
secret the documents. The clause also seeks to empower inspector to
keep such books and papers in his custody for a period not exceeding
six months for investigation and return the same, after needful is done,
to the concerned entity or person and inform the Magistrate of such
return.

134
Clause  48.—This clause seeks to provide that an inspector
investigating an LLP may, and if so directed by the Central
Government, shall make interim reports to that Government in relation
to an investigation carried out by him. It further seeks to provide that
on conclusion of the investigation, a final report shall be made to
Central Government by the inspector. This clause further seeks to
provide that the Central Government shall forward a copy of the report
other than interim report to the concerned LLP or related entity or
persons. A copy of such report may also be furnished to any person
or entity related to or affected by the report on the request and on
payment of prescribed fee.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to provide that if, from the inspectors
report, it appears to the Central Government that any person in relation
to LLP or any other entity being investigated has been guilty of any
offence for which he is liable, the Central Government may prosecute
such person for the offence. The clause further seeks to provide that
it shall be the duty of all partners, Designated Partners and other
employees and agents of the LLP to give the Central Government all
assistance in connection with such prosecution.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to provide that if any such LLP is
liable to be wound up under this Bill or any other law and it appears
to the Central Government from report made by an Inspector under
clause 48 that it is expedient to do so by reason that the business of
the LLP is being conducted with an intent to defraud its creditors,
partners or any other person, or otherwise for a fraudulent or unlawful
purpose, or in a manner oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to some or
any of its partners, or that the LLP was formed for any fraudulent or
unlawful purpose; or that any of the partners of the LLP has been
guilty of fraud, misfeasance or other misconduct towards the LLP or
towards its other partners, the Central Government may, cause to be
presented to the Tribunal by any person authorized by it, a petition
for the winding up of the LLP on the just and equitable grounds.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to provide that if from any report of
inspector, it appears to the Central Government that proceedings ought,
in the public interest, to be brought by the LLP or any entity whose
affairs have been investigated for the recovery of damages in respect
of any fraud, misfeasance or other misconduct in connection with the
promotion or formation, or the management of the affairs, of such
LLP or such other entity or for the recovery of any property of such
LLP or such other entity, which has been misapplied or wrongfully
retained, the Central Government may itself bring proceedings for that
purpose.

135
Clause 52.—This clause seeks to provide about the manner in which
the expenses of an investigation by an inspector appointed by the
Central Government under this Bill shall be defrayed and reimbursed.
The Clause also seeks to provide that any amount for which an LLP
or other entity is liable, shall be a first charge on the sums or property
recovered by such LLP or other entity during investigation. The clause
further seeks to provide that the amount of expenses in respect of
which any LLP , other entity, a partner or Designated Partner or any
other person is liable to reimburse the Central Government shall be
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. The clause further seeks to
provide that any costs or expenses incurred by the Central Government
or in connection with proceedings for recovery of damages or property
brought by virtue of this Bill shall be treated as expenses of the
investigation.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to provide that a copy of any report
of any inspector appointed under this Bill, authenticated in a manner
as may be prescribed by rules, shall be admissible in any legal
proceeding as evidence of the opinion of the inspector or inspectors in
relation to any matter contained in the report.
Clause 54.—This clause seeks to provide that provisions contained
in the Second Schedule shall apply at the time of conversion of a firm
to an LLP .
Clause 55.—This clause seeks to provide that provisions contained
in Third Schedule shall apply at the time of conversion of a private
limited company to an LLP .
Clause 56.—This clause seeks to provide that provisions contained
in the Fourth Schedule shall apply at the time of conversion of an
unlisted public company to an LLP .
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to make rules for provisions in relation to establishment of place of
business by foreign LLP within India and carrying on their business
therein by applying or incorporating, with such modifications, as appear
appropriate, the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. The clauses
further seeks to state that in all other respect the provisions of this
Bill shall apply.
Clause 58.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to make rules with regard to compromise, arrangement or
reconstruction of the LLPs.
Clause 59.—This clause seeks to provide that the winding up of an
LLP may be either voluntary or by the Tribunal.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to specify the circumstances in which
an LLP may be wound up by the Tribunal.

136
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government
to make rules for provisions in relation to winding up and dissolution
of LLPs.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to provide that a partner may lend
money to and transact other business with the LLP and that he shall
have the same rights and obligations with respect to the loan or other
transactions as a person who is not a partner.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government,
to direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that any of the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 shall apply to any LLP or shall
apply to any LLP with such exception, modification and adaptation as
may be specified in the notification. The clause further seeks to provide
that such notification shall be laid in draft before each House of
Parliament for a total period of thirty days and shall be subject to
modification as may be approved by both the Houses.
Clause 64.—This clause seeks to provide that any document required
to be field, recorded or registered under this Bill may be filed, recorded
or registered in a manner and as per such conditions as may be
prescribed by rules by the Central Government.
Clause 65.—This clause seeks to provide that, if any document or
return required to be filed or registered under this Bill with the
Registrar, is not filed or registered in time, then without prejudice to
any other action or liability under this Bill, such document or return
may be filed or registered with the Registrar on payment of a default
fee of five hundred rupees for every day of such delay.
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to provide that other laws are also
applicable to the LLP in addition to the provisions of this Bill and
their application is not barred.
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to provide that the Tribunal shall
discharge such powers and functions as are, or may be, conferred on
it by or under this Bill or any other law for the time being in force.
The clause also seeks to allow filing of appeal to the Appellate Tribunal
by any person who is aggrieved by an order or decision of Tribunal.
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to provide that any person guilty of
an offence under this Bill for which no punishment is expressly
provided shall be liable to a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees
and with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every
day after the first day after which the default continues.

137
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to provide that where the Registrar
has reasonable cause to believe that an LLP is not carrying on business
or its operation, the name of LLP may be struck off from the register
of LLPs. The clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
prescribe, by rules, the manner and procedure which shall be followed
for such striking off of name of any LLP by the Registrar.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to provide that where an offence
under this Bill committed by an LLP is proved to have been committed
with the consent or connivance of a partner(s) or Designated Partner(s)
of the LLP or is attributable to any neglect on the part of the partner(s)
or Designated Partner(s) of that LLP , the partner(s) or Designated
Partner(s) of the LLP as well as that LLP shall be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to provide that notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary in any Act, the Judicial Magistrate of the
first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to try
any offence under this Bill and shall have power to impose punishment
in respect of the offence.
Clause  72.—This clause seeks to confer upon the Central
Government the power to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Bill. The clause seeks to enumerate the various matters in
respect of which such rules may be made. The clause further seeks to
provide that every rule or orders made under this Bill are required to
be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to confer power upon the Central
Government to make provision, by order published in the Official
Gazette, to remove difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the
provisions of this Bill and such order to be issued only within a
period of two years from the date of the commencement of this Bill.
The clause seeks to provide that the orders made under this clause
shall be required to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.

138
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (c) of clause 2 of the Bill confers power upon the Central
Government to specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any other
body corporate (not being a company as defined in section 3 of the
Companies Act, 1956 or an LLP as defined in the proposed legislation)
not to be included in the definition of ‘body corporate’.
2. Clause 63 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government
to give directions, by notification in the Official Gazette, that any of
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 shall apply to any LLP or
shall apply to any LLP with such exception, modification and
adaptation as may be specified in the notification.
3. Clause 72 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The matters
in respect of which rules may be made relate, inter-alia, to provide for
form and manner of filing of the particulars of every individual
agreeing to act as Designated Partner of LLP under sub-clause (3) of
clause 7; conditions and requirements for appointment of an individual
as Designated Partner under sub-clause (4) of clause 7; manner of
filing the incorporation document and payment of fees payable thereof
with the Registrar under of sub-clause (1) (b) of clause 11; form of
statement to be filed under sub-clause (1) (c) of clause 11; form of
Incorporation Document under sub-clause (2) (a) of clause 11; other
information to be contained in the Incorporation Document under sub-
clause (2) (g) of clause 11; mode of serving the documents on a LLP
under sub-clause (2) of clause 13; the form and manner of notice to
the Registrar under sub-clause (3) of clause 13; the manner of
application and amount of fee payable to the Registrar under sub-
clause (1) of clause 16; the manner in which names will be reserved
by Registrar under sub-clause (2) of Clause 16 prescribes; manner in
which an application may be made for change of name under sub-
clause (1) of clause 18; form and manner of notice of change of name
of LLP and the amount of fees payable under clause 19; contents of
LLP Agreement and the form manner and payment of fees thereof at
the time of filling of such Agreement under sub-clause (2) of clause
23; form of notice, the amount of fees payable and the manner of
authentication of the statement under sub-clauses (2) (a), (b) and (c) of
clause 25; manner of accounting and disclosure of monetary value of
contribution of a partner under sub-clause (2) of clause 31; books of
account and the period of their maintenance under sub-clause (1) of

139
clause 33; form and manner of filing of statement of Account and
Solvency under sub-clause (3) of clause 33; the manner in which the
accounts of a LLP shall be audited under sub-clause (4), of clause 33;
form and manner of filing of annual return under sub-clause (1) of
clause 34; manner and amount of fees payable for inspection of
Statement of Accounts and Solvency and Annual Return under clause
35; destruction of documents by Registrar under clause 39; regarding
the amount required as security under sub-clause (3) (a) of clause 42;
the amount of security to be given under clause 43; fees payable for
furnishing a copy under sub-clause (2) (b) of clause 48; manner of
authentication of report of inspector under clause 53; provisions in
relation to establishment of place of business by foreign LLP within
India under clause 57; compromise, arrangement or reconstruction of
LLPs under clause 58; winding up and dissolution of LLPs under
clause 61; manner and conditions for filing a document electronically
under clause 64; manner and procedure for striking off the names of
LLPs from the register of LLP by the Registrar under clause 69; form,
manner and amount of fee payable on the statement under sub-
paragraph (a) of paragraph 4 of the Second Schedule; form of certificate
of registration under Paragraph 5 of the Third Schedule; form, manner
and amount of fee payable on the statement under sub-paragraph (a)
of paragraph 5 of the Fourth Schedule; any other matter which is to
be, or may be, prescribed in respect of which provision is to be, or
may be, made by rules.
4. Sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 of the Second Schedule of the
Bill confers power upon the Central Government to amend, add to or
very the provisions of that Schedule, by order published in the Official
Gazette.
5. Paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule of the Bill confers power
upon the Central Government to amend, add to or vary the provisions
of that Schedule, by order published in the Official Gazette.
6. Paragraph 2 of Fourth Schedule of the Bill confers power upon
the Central Government to amend, add to or vary the provisions of
that Schedule, by order published in the Official Gazette.
7. The notification issued under sub clause (1) of clause 63 and
rules made under sub-clause (2) of clause 72; and orders issued under
sub-clause (1) of clause 73; under sub-para (3) of para 1 of Second
Schedule; under para 2 of Third Schedule and para 2 of Fourth
Schedule shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
8. The matters in respect of which notifications or order may be
issued and the rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

140
RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to make provisions for the formation and regulation of limited liability
partnerships and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
——————
(Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs)

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
BILL, 2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.11.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

COF No. 58
Price : Rs. 148.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
A. Genesis of the Bill ......................................................................... 1
B. Scope of Definitions—Clause 2 .................................................. 3
C. Applicability: Grounds for Disqualification—Clauses 5 and
7 to 9 ................................................................................................ 6
D. Incorporation—Clauses 11 to 15, 17 and 21 ........................... 12
E. Partners and their relations—Clauses 22, 24 and 25 ........... 21
F. Financial Disclosures—Clauses 33, 34, 37 and 40 ................. 26
G. Investigation—Clause 42 ............................................................... 31
H. Conversion of entities to LLP—Clauses 54, 55 and 56 ....... 32
I. Winding up and Dissolution—Clause 60 ................................ 34
J. Miscellaneous—Clauses 64 and 67 ............................................ 36
K. Schedules .......................................................................................... 38
L. Consequential amendments in other statutes ......................... 41
M. Tax treatment of LLPs .................................................................. 43
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
1st June, 27th June, 18th July, 30th August and
22nd November, 2007 ............................................................ 48
II. The Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006.................... 63
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty-eighth Report on the Limited Liability Partnership
Bill, 2006.
2. The Limited Liability Partnership Bill, 2006, introduced in
Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2006 was referred to the Committee on
27 December, 2006 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The representatives of the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs also briefed the Committee at their sitting held
on 1 June, 2007.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India (ICSI), the Institute of Cost & Works Accountants
of India (ICWAI), the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI), the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), the
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industries (PHDCCI) and Associated
Chambers of Commerce and Industries (ASSOCHAM).
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 27 June, 2007 took
evidence of the representatives of ICAI, ICSI and ICWAI. At their
sitting held on 18th July, 2007, the Committee heard the views of the
representatives of PHDCCI, CII and ASSOCHAM.
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 30 August, 2007.
7. The Committee considered and adopted the report at their sitting
held on 22nd November, 2007.
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the representatives of ICAI,
ICSI and ICWAI for appearing before the Committee and furnishing

the material and information which were desired in connection with
the examination of the Bill.
9. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to CII, PHDCCI,
ASSOCHAM and FICCI for furnishing Memoranda and to the
representatives of CII, PHDCCI and ASSOCHAM for appearing before
the Committee and placing their views.
10. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
22 November, 2007 Chairman,
1 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

58
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
BILL, 2006
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
