50 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
           FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS LAWS) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2006 
 
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2006/Agrahyana, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 

FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
           FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
  MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS LAWS) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2006 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14 December, 2006 
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 14 December, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2006/Agrahyana, 1928 (Saka) 

 CONTENTS 
PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………            (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………..         (v) 
 
Report……………………………………………………..                                  1 
 
Notes of Dissent………………………………………………                  42 
 
   
ANNEXURES 
 
    
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Comm ittee held on 19 September, 2006,  
   26 and 27 October, 6,7 and 29 November, 2006 and 11 December, 2006……44 
 
II. Modifications/Amendments made by Standing Committee on Finance in 
their draft report on the State Bank of India (subsidiary Banks Laws)  
Amendment, Bill, 2006……………………………………………………………..59 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment, Bill, 2006…..60 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2006-2007    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
          
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe 
12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi1 
13. Shri R. Prabhu 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
17. Shri Lakshman Seth 
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
23. Shri Raashid Alvi 
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu -    Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri S.B. Arora  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar -   Under Secretary    
                                                           
1 Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil   

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Fiftieth Report on the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. 
 
2. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2006 was referred to the Committee on 24 May, 
2006 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha under 
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee obtained written in formation on various provisions 
contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Mi nistry of Finance (De partment of Economic 
Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting held on 19 September, 2006. 
 
4. Written views/ Memoranda were rece ived from Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI), Indian Banks’ Associati on (IBA), State Bank of India ( SBI), State Bank of Indore, 
State Bank of Travancore, St ate Bank of Bikaner and Jai pur, State Bank of Mysore, 
State Bank of Saurashtra, St ate Bank of Patiala, Stat e Bank of Hyderabad, Bombay 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, ASSOCHAM, The Institute of Company 
Secretaries of India, Associate Banks Officers’ Associati on, All India Bank Officers’ 
Association, All India Bank Officers’ Conf ederation, Bank Employees Federation of 
India, State Bank of Tr avancore Employees’ Union, All India Bank Employees’ 
Association and All India State Bank of Indore Officers’ Co-ordination Committee. 
 
5. The Committee at their sitting hel d on 26 October, 2006 heard the views 
of the representatives of Indian Banks’ Association, All India Bank Officers’ Association, 
All India Bank Officers’ Confederation, All India Bank Employees Association, Bank 
Employees Federation of India and National Confederation of Bank Employees. 
 
6. At their sitting held on 27 Oct ober, 2006, the Committee heard the views 
of the representatives of St ate Bank of Travancore, Stat e Bank of Mysore and State 
Bank of Hyderabad.  On 6 and 7 November, 2006, the Co mmittee heard the views of 
the representatives of State Bank of India and Reserve Bank of India respectively. 
 
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 29 November, 2006. 
 
8. The Committee, at their sitting hel d on 11 December, 2006, considered 
and adopted the draft report and authorized t he Chairman to final ize the same and 
present it to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
9. The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs), representatives of subsidiary banks/State 
Bank of India, Officers’ and Employees’ Associat ions/Confederations/Unions of public 

sector banks and other individuals for their cooperation in placi ng before them their 
considered views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written 
notes and information that the Commi ttee had desired in c onnection with the 
examination of the Bill. 
 
10. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;     MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
12 December, 2006                                               Chairman, 
21  Agrahayana, 1928(Saka)          Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

REPORT
IIIIIntroductoryntroductoryntroductoryntroductoryntroductory
The preamble to the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 reads as follows:—
“An Act to provide for the formation of certain Government or
Government associated banks as subsidiaries of the State Bank of
India and for the constitution, management and control of the
subsidiary banks so formed and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto”.
2. Separate Acts namely, the State Bank of Saurashtra Act,
1950 and the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 relate to taking over
of the Saurashtra Bank and Hyderabad Bank and the capital and
reserve funds  of the banks. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks)
Act, 1959 deals with the establishment of State Bank of Bikaner and
Jaipur (SBBJ), State Bank of Indore (SBI), State Bank of Mysore (SBM)
State Bank of Patiala (SBP) and State Bank of Travancore (SBT)
which are termed as ‘new banks’ and other provisions relating to
management, business of subsidiary banks, accounts and audit and
miscellaneous provisions such as power of making rules, regulations etc.
The provisions of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959
which relate to management, business, accounts and audit are also
applicable to the State Bank of Hyderabad (SBH) and State Bank of
Saurashtra (SBS).
3. The Structure of the SBI Group of Banks represents the legacy
of the operations of the subsidiary banks mainly concentrated
in the States of their incorporation. The State-wise concentration of the
branches of the subsidiary banks as on 31 March, 2006 is as under:—
 States SBBJ SBH SBI SBM SBP SBS SBT
Indore
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8
M.P. 7 337

2
 12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Haryana 11 143
H. Pradesh 77
Punjab 9 361
Chandigarh 24
Delhi 27 11 10 37
U.P. 21 46
Rajasthan 671 12
Tamil Nadu 35 69
Karnataka 115 521
Kerala 10 565
Andhra Pradesh 575 18
Maharashtra 20 166 20 19 19 12
Gujarat 363
All India Total 816 930 436 634 753 425 694
Total branch—  4688
All subsidiary
banks
4. While the entire capital of State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank
of Patiala and State Bank of Saurashtra is at present held by the State
Bank of India, the remaining four Subsidiary Banks have private share
holdings, in addition to the shares held by SBI. The shares of these four
Subsidiary Banks with private shareholdings are listed on the Stock

3
Exchanges. The present share holding pattern in all the seven Subsidiary
Banks of SBI is as under:—
Name of the Subsidiary Paid up % of paid % of paid
Bank capital of up capital up capital
Subsidiary held by held by
Bank SBI other share
holders
Rs. in Crores (%) (%)
State Bank of Hyderabad 17.25 100 —
State Bank of Patiala 24.75 100 —
State Bank of Saurashtra 314.00 100 —
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 50.00 75.00 25.00
State Bank of Indore 17.50 98.05 1.95
State Bank of Mysore 36.00 92.33 7.67
State Bank of Travancore 50.00 75.00 25.00
5. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2006 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 22.5.2006 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance by the Hon’ble Speaker on 24.5.2006 for
examination and report.
6. The statement of objects and reasons for seeking enactment of
the amendment proposals of the Bill, inter-alia, reads as under:—
“There are more than twenty-eight lakh shares held by private
shareholders (other than the State Bank of India) of the four
subsidiary banks, i.e. the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, the State
Bank of Indore, the State Bank of Mysore and the State Bank of
Travancore. The shareholders of these four subsidiary banks are
facing certain difficulties due to certain restrictions imposed under
the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. These
restrictions, inter alia, include (a) lack of dematerialisation facility

4
for the shares; (b) difficulty in free transferability; (c) restrictions on
individual holdings of shares and their voting rights etc. The
shareholders, at the annual general meetings of these four banks,
have been expressing, time and again, the difficulty faced by them
due to such restrictive provisions in the said Act.
The Basel Capital Accord, the current international framework
on Capital adequacy, was adopted in the year 1988 by many banks
world-wide and in the year 1992 in India. Afterwards, over the past
several years, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has
worked on a new accord for international convergence on capital
standards and released the latest version of the new Basel Capital
Accord known as Basel II in June, 2004. With the introduction of
the new capital adequacy framework (Basel II), all the banks
(including subsidiary banks of the State Bank of India)  may be
required to increase their capital base to meet minimum require-
ments. Achievement of the capital adequacy norms under Basel II
will improve the basic financial health of the banking system and
thus improve its international credibility since banks in many
countries are also in the process of adopting these standards.
In order to remove the difficulties faced by the shareholders
of the subsidiary banks and to facilitate increase of the capital of
the subsidiary banks to enable them to raise resources from the
market and also to comply with certain guidelines issued by the
Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI) under the Securities
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and the Depositories Act, 1996,
it has become necessary to amend the State Bank of Saurashtra Act,
1950, the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 and the State Bank
of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.”
7. The amendments proposed to be carried out vide the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006 are as
under:—
(1) increasing the authorised capital of subsidiary banks to
Rs. 500 crores and dividing the authorised capital into shares
of one hundred rupees each or such denomination as may be

5
decided by the subsidiary banks, with the approval of the State
Bank.
(2) enabling subsidiary banks to issue shares of such denomina-
tion as may be prescribed to the existing shareholders.
(3) fixing the issued capital of subsidiary banks by the State Bank
with the approval of RBI and deciding on the denomination
of shares with the approval of the State Bank.
(4) enabling subsidiary banks to raise issued capital by preferen-
tial allotment or private placement or public issue in
accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed and to
issue preference shares in accordance with guidelines framed
by RBI.
(5) enabling subsidiary banks to issue bonus shares to the
equity shareholders with the approval of the State Bank and
RBI.
(6) reducing State Bank’s shareholding from 55% to 51% and
restricting State Bank’s shareholding in subsidiary banks not
to fall below the ceiling of 51% of the issued capital consisting
of equity shares.
(7) enabling the subsidiary banks to accept share monies in
instalments, make calls, and forfeiture of unpaid shares and
their reissue.
(8) providing for nomination facility for shareholders.
(9) removing the restriction on individual shareholdings, in excess
of two hundred shares and increase the percentage of voting
rights of shareholders, other than SBI from the existing level
of one per cent to 10 per cent of the issued capital of the
subsidiary bank concerned.
(10) restricting the voting rights of preference shares only to
resolutions directly affecting their rights and also restricting the
preference shareholder to exercise voting rights in respect of
preference shares held by her/him to a ceiling of 10% of total

6
voting rights of all the shareholders holding preference share
capital only.
(11) enabling the Chairman of State Bank to nominate an official
of State Bank as Chairman of the Board of subsidiary bank,
with the approval of RBI.
(12) deleting the provisions relating to nomination of RBI Official
on the Board of Directors and to provide an enabling clause
to nominate additional director by RBI as and when considered
necessary, in the interest of banking policy/depositor’s interest
etc.
(13) increasing the number of elected directors representing
shareholders limited to a maximum of 3 subject to different
percentage of public ownership.
(14) prescribing qualification regarding eligibility criteria including
‘fit and proper’ criteria for elected directors with the condition
that a director can not be elected unless he is a person having
fit and proper status based on the criteria to be notified by RBI
and empowering RBI to remove elected directors who are not
fit and proper and empowering the Board to co-opt any other
person who is fit and proper in his place.
(15) providing for the Chairman of subsidiary bank to preside
over the meetings of the Board instead of the Chairman of
SBI.
(16) empowering RBI to supercede the Board of Directors in public
interest or for depositors’ interest or for securing proper
management of the subsidiary banks on the recommendation
of SBI and to appoint an administrator and a Committee to
assist the administrator.
(17) transferring unpaid/unclaimed dividend upto 30 days to
‘unpaid dividend account’ and after 7 years to ‘Investor
Education and Protection Fund’.
(18) entitling the Shareholders present in an AGM to ‘adopt’ the
balance sheet.

7
8. The amendment proposals of the Bill listed above that relate
to raising of capital by preferential allotment/private placement, issuing
of preference shares, ‘fit and proper’ criteria for elected directors, fixing
the number of elected directors, supersession of the Board, transferring
unclaimed dividend etc. are primarily aimed at maintaining uniformity
among the various banking statutes in order to provide a level playing
field to the Banks.
9. The restrictive provisions such as the limitation on individual
holdings of shares which are proposed to be removed are specific to the
subsidiary banks. The other provisions of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006 are largely similar to the
proposals made for private sector banks vide the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Public Sector Banks vide the Banking
Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. Both these Bills were
scrutinized by the Standing Committee on Finance and the related reports
presented to Parliament.
10. In addition to the amendment proposals of the Bill, per se ,
issues relating to level playing field among the public and private sector
banks including the subsidiary banks; the benefits that may accrue to
the subsidiary banks on account of being a part of the ‘SBI Group’; and
the alternatives that could be considered for enabling the subsidiary
banks to effectively face competition, mainly from the private banks
figured prominently in the course of the Committee’s interactions,
particularly with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the
Reserve Bank of India.
11. Communicating the Government’s perception of the recom-
mendations of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
on issues relating to strengthening the Banking System in the Country,
the Ministry of Finance, in a written note furnished to the Committee,
informed as under:—
“Recently, the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
commenting on the strengthening of the  banking system,
recommended that all commercial banks should be subject to a

8
single Banking Legislation and separate legislative frameworks for
groups of public sector banks should be abrogated. All banks,
including public sector banks, should be incorporated under the
Companies Act which would provide a level playing field.
The Government is also proposing/examining to have a
comprehensive Act which will regulate all the public sector banks
in order to have uniformity in approach among these banks.”
12. By way of giving the Reserve Bank’s perception on the
benefits that accrue to the subsidiary banks on account of belonging
to the ‘SBI Group’; and issues relating to possible merger of the
subsidiary banks, a written note furnished by the Bank inter-alia reads
as under:—
“Subsidiary banks, being a part of SBI group enjoy the benefits that
the powerful SBI brand bring along with it. However, if subsidiary
banks differ too much from each other and SBI, the cohesiveness
of the group would suffer and reduce the value of the brand for
the subsidiaries.”
13. The benefits to the subsidiary banks on account of belonging
to the SBI group, as stated in the Reserve Bank’s note furnished to the
Committee are as under:—
“(i) availability of large branch network of the Group (about
13,800 branches taken together).
(ii) confidence of public who perceive these banks as strong
due to the ownership/majority ownership of State Bank of
India.
(iii) the Group handles a large market share of domestic/
international banking business.
(iv) all the banks within the Group are able to share good quality
business offered by high value clientele through consortia
arrangements.
(v) availability of funds within the Group which not only helps
in quicker funds settlement but also lower cost thereof.

9
(vi) by sharing the foreign exchange/international banking
business within the group, the income generation is helped.
(vii) the ben efit of product development is shared by all Group
members thereby saving costs in these areas.
(viii) the vast experience of State Bank of India in the field of
computerization is available to all Associate Banks without
costs. The banks share the same IT platform.
(ix) human resource development through vast training facilities at
Staff Colleges, Specialist training facilities in Agriculture,
Computerisation at specialized branches and Departments and
also at foreign branches.
(x) development of systems and procedures and improving the
quality of advances through Board level control by State Bank
of India.”
14. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Bill from (i) Reserve Bank of India (RBI),
(ii) Indian Banks Association (IBA), (iii) State Bank of India (SBI),
(iv) State Bank of Indore, (v) State Bank of Travancore, (vi) State Bank
of Bikaner and Jaipur, (vii) State Bank of Mysore, (viii) State Bank of
Saurashtra, (ix) State Bank of Patiala, (x) State Bank of Hyderabad,
(xi) Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry, (xii) ASSOCHAM,
(xiii) The Institute of Company Secretaries of India, (xiv) Associate Banks
Officers’ Association, (xv) All India Bank Officers’ Association, (xvi) All
India Bank Officers Confederation, (xvii) Bank Employees Federation of
India, (xviii) State Bank of Travancore Employees’ Union, (xix) All India
Bank Employees Association, (xx) All India State Bank of Indore Officers’
Co-ordination Committee and (xxi) Elected Directors of State Bank of
Mysore. The Committee also had personal hearings of the views of the
representatives of RBI, SBI, IBA, the subsidiary banks of SBI and officers/
employees  associations and unions.
15. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to further
enlighten themselves on various aspects of the proposed legislation.

10
16. The Committee, upon examining the State of Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006, express agreement
with the broad objectives envisaged. The proposals of the Bill mainly
attempt to bring forth uniformity among various banking statutes
inter-alia by proposing enabling provisions in regard to raising of
capital by the subsidiary banks by means of preferential allotment/
private placement of equity/issue of preference shares; and removing
certain restrictive provisions in the laws, such as the limitation
presently applicable on individual shareholdings. Enactment of the
proposed legislation is expected to aid the subsidiary banks in
augmenting their capital funds to ensure continuous compliance with
the regulatory capital adequacy requirements, and prepare the banks
for competition in the banking sector in future by providing them
a level playing field vis-à-vis other banks.
17. The changes proposed in the statutory provisions pertaining
to the capital structure of the subsidiary banks as well as the
provisions proposed in regard to eligibility criteria for Directors,
determining the number of elected directors on the basis of
percentage of public shareholding, supersession of the boards of the
subsidiary banks etc., are in line with the proposals already made
for private as well as public sector banks, which were examined
and reported upon by the Committee in the related reports viz.,
the 26th Report on the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005
and the 34th Report on the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amend-
ment) Bill, 2005. Some of the amendment proposals of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006 are
discussed in the subsequent paragraphs of the Report.

11
Clauses 6 — Substitution of New Section for Section 6 and Clause
7 — Amendment of Section 7 (Capital Structure of Subsidiary Banks).
18. Clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill deal with provisions relating to
authorised capital and issued capital of the subsidiary banks
respectively. Clauses 2 and 3 (Chapter II of the Bill) and Clauses 4 and
5 (Chapter III of the Bill) contain similar provisions relating to authorised
capital and issued capital of State Bank of Saurashtra and State Bank
of Hyderabad respectively.
19. Clause 6  relating to the authorised capital of the subsidiary
banks reads as under:—
“For section 6 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 [hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act], the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
6.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised capital of
every new bank shall be rupees five hundred crores.
(2) The authorised capital of every new bank shall be divided into
shares of one hundred rupees each or of such denomination
as the new bank may, with the approval of the State Bank,
decide.
(3) Every new bank may issue the certificates of shares of
equivalent values of such denomination as the new bank may,
decide, with the approval of the State Bank, in accordance with
the procedure as may be prescribed and every shareholder of
the new bank shall be entitled to have the certificate of shares
of equivalent value of such denomination.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank,
authorise a new bank to increase or reduce its authorised
capital.”
20. Clause 7 relating to the issued capital of the subsidiary banks
reads as under:—
“In section 7 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks)
Act,—

12
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
issued capital of a  new bank shall, consist of such amount as the
State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix, and
shall be divided into fully paid-up shares of such denomination
in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 6.”;
(b) for sub-sections (4) and (5), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(4) A new bank may from time to time, with the approval of the
State Bank and the Reserve Bank, increase, whether by public
issue or by preferential allotment or private placement in
accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed, its issued
capital by issue of equity or preference shares.
(5) The issued capital of a new bank shall consist of equity shares
or equity and preference shares:
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue
of each class of such preference shares (whether perpetual or
irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be
issued.
(6) A new bank may, with the approval of the State Bank and
the Reserve Bank, increase from time to time by way of issuing
bonus shares to existing equity shareholders, its issued capital
in such manner as the State Bank, with the approval of the
Reserve Bank, direct.
(7) No increase or reduction in the issued capital of a new bank
shall be made in such a manner that the State Bank holds at
any time less than fifty-one per cent of the issued capital
consisting of equity shares of new bank.
(8) A new bank may accept the money in respect of shares issued
towards increase in issued capital in instalments, make calls
and forfeit unpaid shares and re-issue them, in the manner
as may be prescribed.”.

13
(a) Authorised Capital:
21. By way of giving the rationale for proposing to raise
the authorised capital of the subsidiary banks to Rs. 500 crore, the
Ministry of Finance, in a written submission inter-alia informed as
under:—
“As per the existing provision, the authorised capital of State Bank
of Mysore and the State Bank of Travancore is Rs. 2 crore. In case
of other subsidiary banks, it is Rs. 1 crore. As against this, the paid-
up or issued capital of these banks is quite high which is as
follows:—
Name of the Bank Paid-up Capital (in Rs. crore)
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 50.00
State Bank of Hyderabad 17.25
State Bank of Indore 17.50
State Bank of Mysore 36.00
State Bank of Patiala 24.75
State Bank of Saurashtra 314.00
State Bank of Travancore 50.00
The subsidiary banks can raise the authorised capital with the
approval of the Reserve Bank by issuance of a notification.
However, this leaves the provisions of the SBI (subsidiary banks)
Act, 1959 unchanged and the actual position on a cursory glance
appears to be in contravention of the provisions of the Act. This
amendment is proposed to remove this apparent inconsistency
between what has been provided in the statute and the actual paid-
up capital.
Further, it enables the bank to raise capital as and when required
without seeking further approval of the Reserve Bank.”
(b) Issued Capital :
22. The proposed insertion of the new Section 7A in terms of the
proposals of Clause 7 provides that subsidiary banks may, with the

14
approval of State Bank and Reserve Bank, increase by way of public issue
or preferential allotment or private placement, their issued capital by
issue of equity or preference shares. The issue of preference shares shall
be in accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of and the terms and conditions of issue. This is in
line with the amendment proposed for private sector banks in the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and as already made applicable for
nationalised banks in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer
of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980.
23. The existing provisions of Section 7 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 provide that no increase or decrease in the
issued capital of a Subsidiary Bank shall be made in a manner such
that State Bank holds, at any time, less than 55% of the issued capital
of a Subsidiary Bank. This section has been proposed to be amended
by inserting a provision in the new section to provide that State Bank’s
holding (statutory minimum) may be reduced from the existing 55% to
51% of the issued capital consisting of equity shares of that Bank.
24. The proposed new section also enables the subsidiary banks
to issue bonus shares with the prior approval of State Bank and the
Reserve Bank.
25. In regard to the matter of enabling private sector banks to issue
preference shares for meeting the regulatory capital requirements, the
relevant provision proposed in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which
has been endorsed by the Committee in the related report (26th Report)
reads as follows:—
“(ii) that notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies
Act, 1956, the capital of such banking company consists
of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares, and
(b) preference shares issued in accordance with the guide-
lines framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class of,
and the terms and conditions subject to which, the
preference shares may be issued:
Provided that no holder of the preference share issued
by the company shall be entitled to exercise the voting

15
right specified in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section
87 of the Companies Act, 1956.;
(iii) the proviso shall be omitted.”
26. Similarly, the amendments already carried out in the Bank
Nationalisation Acts, 1970/1980 (as endorsed by the Committee in their
report on the related Bill viz. 34th Report) inter-alia provide that the paid-
up capital of the nationalized banks can be increased by:—
“(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and
with the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise whether
by public issue or preferential allotment or private placement, of
equity shares or preference shares in accordance with the procedure
as may be prescribed, so, however that the Central Government
shall, at all times hold not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-
up capital consisting of equity shares of each corresponding new
bank:
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each
class of such preference shares (whether perpetual or irredeemable
or redeemable) and the terms and conditions subject to which, each
class of preference shares may be issued.”;
“Provided that the shareholder holding any preference share
capital in the corresponding new bank shall, in respect of such
capital,  have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before such
corresponding new bank which directly affects the rights attached
to his preference shares:
Provided further that no preference shareholder shall be
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of preference shares held
by him in excess of one percent of the total voting rights of all the
shareholders holding preference share capital only.”
27. On the provisions proposed under Clause 7 of the present
Bill, which relate to the capital structure of the subsidiary banks, the
Reserve Bank in its memorandum, stated as under:—
“At present, the Act does not provide for issue of preference shares.
The current amendment would therefore, enable the subsidiary

16
banks to raise capital by issuing preference shares. Being in the
nature of instruments, akin to capital, in that the redemption of such
capital will be subordinate to the claims of other creditors, it is
expected that subscribers to such capital will be mostly qualified
institutional buyers. For targeting such subscribers, issuance of
preference shares is usually through the private placement made
and is more flexible. Further, additional advantages in private
placement would be the cost and time saving”.
28. Responding to a query on the urgency that may have
necessitated initiation of the proposed amendments, the representative of
RBI stated:
“......We are not looking really at a short-term point of view. We
need to look at longer term perspective. As and when advances
increase, as and when capital requirements go up because of
Basel-II requirements and growth, they will need to raise capital.
Therefore, while retaining the majority holdings, it has been
proposed that the shareholding can be brought down to 51% per
cent”.
29. In response to a question inter-alia on the necessity of the
proposal to reduce SBI’s shareholding in the subsidiary banks from
55% to 51%, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, stated as
under:—
“Reduction of SBI’s shareholding from the prescribed minimum of
55% to 51% will bring the holding of SBI in the subsidiary banks
at par with the Central Government’s holding in the nationalized
banks. In the SBI Act too, there is a proposal to bring down RBI’s
shareholding to 51%.
Under Basel I, the banks were required to maintain capital for credit
risk and market risk, whereas under Basel II, the banks will be
required to additionally maintain capital for operational risk in
addition to credit risk. This will necessitate maintaining higher
capital. The reduction of SBI’s shareholding from 55% to 51% is
aimed at providing more head-room to the subsidiary banks to raise
capital from the market without the necessity for infusion of capital
by SBI and also without diluting their public sector character. As
per the existing provision, the subsidiary banks can raise capital

17
only through public issue of equity shares. The process is time-
consuming and costly and cannot be resorted to in exigencies”.
30. Questioned on the regulatory capital requirements of the
public sector banks and the subsidiary/associate banks in particular in
the coming years, particularly in the wake of the proposed transition to
the Basel II framework on Capital Adequacy, a written note furnished
by the Ministry of Finance, inter alia , reads as under:—
“RBI had carried out a simulation study of the regulatory capital
requirement of the public and private sector banks under certain
assumptions and in different scenarios.
RBI will have to contribute Rs. 3161 Crore to SBI and Govt. will
have to contribute Rs. 2573 crore to 10 nationalised banks. The RBI
and the Government will have to contribute the above mentioned
amounts on account of the fact that RBI’s share holding in SBI and
SBI’s shareholding in subsidiary banks has to be a minimum of
55% and likewise Govt.’s shareholding in the nationalised banks
has a floor of 51%. The details are as under :
(i) 2 banks in SBI Group and 9 nationalised banks have sufficient
head room available and they will be able to maintain 9%
CRAR, as on 31st March 2009 by raising equity for Rs. 507
crore and Rs. 6483 crore, respectively from the market.
(ii) 6 banks in the SBI Group will have to raise Rs. 9563 crores
by way of equity (Rs. 3161 crores from the RBI and Rs. 6402
crores from the market).
(iii) 10 Nationalised banks will have to raise Rs. 14728 crores of
equity (Rs. 2573 crores from the Govt. and Rs. 12155 crores
from the market)”.
31. Questioned specifically on the total capital requirements of the
SBI Group banks per se in the coming years, the Ministry, in a written
reply inter-alia stated as follows:—
“(i) The two banks in the SBI Group, which are said to have
sufficient head room for raising equity capital of Rs. 507 crore,
without infusion of additional capital from the SBI are State
Bank of Mysore and State Bank of Saurashtra.

18
(ii) The infusion of additional capital of Rs. 3161 crore in six
banks in the SBI Group would be required to maintain the
SBI’s shareholding in subsidiary banks and RBI’s holding in
SBI at the statutory minimum level of 55%. The details are as
follows:
Name of the Bank SBI/RBI’s share in equity
(Rs. in crore)
State Bank of India 2543
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 57
State Bank of Hyderabad 123
State Bank of Indore 129
State Bank of Patiala 213
State Bank of Travancore 96
Total 3161
It is clarified that out of Rs. 3161 crore, RBI would have to
contribute Rs. 2543 crore to State Bank of India and the
balance amount i.e., Rs. 618 crore will be contributed by
State Bank of India to the capital of the 5 subsidiary banks.
(iii) 6 banks in the SBI Group (SBI and 5 other subsidiary banks
as mentioned above) will have to raise Rs. 9563 crore by way
of equity. This is based on the assumption that these banks
will register an annual compound growth rate of 25% in the
risk weighted assets from which they will have to meet the
minimum CRAR prescription of 9% as on March 31, 2009 and
maintain the shareholding of SBI at the statutory minimum
level at 55%.”
32. For enhancing the banks’ capital raising options for capital
adequacy purposes, the Reserve Bank has vide circular dated January,
2006 issued policy guidelines enabling the banks to issue; “Innovative
Perpetual Debt Instruments (IPDI) eligible for inclusion as Tier 1 Capital;
and Debt Capital Instruments eligible for inclusion as Upper Tier 2
Capital.”

19
33. In terms of the amended Bank Nationalisation Act, 1970 &
1980, nationalised banks are now enabled to issue preference shares for
meeting regulatory capital requirements. Questioned as to by when the
policy guidelines for issue of preference shares would be notified, the
Reserve Bank, in a written reply inter-alia informed:—
“Guidelines in this respect are being drafted. Similar guidelines will
be issued to SBI, its subsidiaries and private sector banks as and
when enabling legislations are passed”.
34. In response to a query on the means by which fairness and
transparency would be ensured in private placement/allotment of shares,
the Reserve Bank, in a written response, stated as follows:—
“Raising capital through preferential allotment/private placement
will be done in a transparent manner as it involves:–
— Approval of State Bank of India and Reserve Bank of
India.
— The procedure as will be prescribed by the Regulation.”.
35. In terms of the proposed provisions of clause 7(b)(6),
subsidiary banks are to be entitled to issue bonus shares to the existing
shareholders. Asked whether it was not essential to provide clarity in the
provisions by specifically including ‘rights issue of shares’, in the
proposals, the Ministry informed as follows:—
“The proposal will be examined in consultation with the Ministry
of Law & Justice”.
36. As per the existing provisions of Section 6 of the Act, the
authorized capital of the State Bank of Travancore and State Bank
of Mysore is limited to Rs. 2 crore, and that of the other five
subsidiary banks to Rs. 1 crore. However, the actual position of the
paid up or issued capital of the subsidiary banks is much higher.
The Committee note that the proposal to raise the authorized capital
of the subsidiary banks to Rs. 500 crore would remove the apparent
inconsistency between the existing statutory provisions and the actual
position of issued or paid up capital of the subsidiary banks. The
banks being entitled to raise capital beyond the statutory prescription
with the specific approval of the Reserve Bank, the current figures

20
relating to the paid up or issued capital range from Rs. 17.25 crores
in the case of State Bank of Hyderabad to Rs. 314 crore in the
case of State Bank of Saurashtra. The amendment proposal to
raise the authorized capital of the subsidiary banks to Rs. 500 crore
being intended to remove the apparent inconsistency between
what has been presently provided in the statute and the actual paid
up capital of the banks, and enable the banks to raise capital
as per their business requirements, without seeking specific
approval of the Reserve Bank, the Committee endorse the same for
enactment.
37. The amendments proposed to Section 7 of the Act (under
the proposals of Clause 7), inter-alia seek to reduce the SBI’s
shareholding in the subsidiary banks from the prescribed minimum
of 55% to 51%, which, the Committee note, is at par with the capping
on the Government’s shareholding in nationalized banks. The
Committee further note that in consonance with the proposals
already made in respect of private sector banks as well as public
sector banks, the provisions proposed seek to entitle the subsidiary
banks to shore up their capital requirements by way of public issue
or private placement of equity, or raise preference capital by way
of preferential allotment of shares in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank. The statutory measures, as proposed
are intended to enable the subsidiary banks to meet the regulatory
capital requirements of the future, and are at par with the proposals
already made for public as well as private sector banks. The
Committee, while endorsing the same for enactment, however, note
that though the Reserve Bank has issued the policy guidelines
relating to enhancing the banks’ capital raising options by way of
issue of innovative debt capital instruments etc., the policy guidelines
prescribing the terms and conditions for issue of preference shares
are yet to be issued. The Committee feel it necessary to emphasize
on ensuring fairness and transparency in the regulations/procedures
relating to private placement of equity shares; and enabling a level
playing field for the subsidiary banks vis-à-vis the other banks,
particularly in matters relating to the terms and conditions for issue
of preference shares, guidelines relating to which are to be framed
by the Reserve Bank.

21
Clause 13–Amendment of Section 25 (Composition of the Board of
Directors)
38. Clause 13 reads as under:—
“In section 25 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1)—
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(a) the Chairman for the time being of the State Bank, ex officio
or an official of the State Bank nominated by him as
Chairman, with the approval of the Reserve Bank;”;
(b) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(c) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
(d) not more than three directors to be elected in the following
manner, namely:—
(i) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other
than the State Bank) of a subsidiary bank is more than
one per cent. of the total issued capital, and equal to or
less than sixteen per cent. of such capital, one director
to be elected, in the prescribed manner, by such
shareholders and two directors shall be nominated by the
State Bank, or
(ii) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other
than the State Bank) of a subsidiary bank is more than
sixteen per cent. of the total issued capital, and equal to
or less than thirty-two per cent, of such capital, two
directors to be elected, in the prescribed manner, by such
shareholders and one director shall be nominated by the
State Bank, or
(iii) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other
than the State Bank) of a subsidiary bank is more than

22
thirty-two per cent, of the total issued capital, all the three
directors to be elected, in the prescribed manner, by such
shareholders:
Provided that in case, the total amount of holdings of the
shareholders of a subsidiary bank (other than the State
Bank) is not more than one per cent, of the total issued
capital, all three directors shall be nominated by the
State Bank and such directors shall, for the purposes of
this Act, be deemed to be directors elected under this
clause.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the
total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other than
the State Bank) whose names are on the register of
shareholders of the subsidiary bank three months before
the date fixed for election of directors shall be taken into
account.”;
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;
(iii) in sub-section (4), the words “the Reserve Bank or” shall
be omitted”.
A.A.A.A.A. Chairman of Subsidiary BanksChairman of Subsidiary BanksChairman of Subsidiary BanksChairman of Subsidiary BanksChairman of Subsidiary Banks
39. As per the existing provisions of Section 25(1)(a), the Chairman
of State Bank will be the ex-officio Chairman of the Board of a Subsidiary
Bank. Now, by way of the amendment proposal, it has been proposed
that the Chairman of SBI may also nominate an official of the State Bank
as Chairman of the Board of a subsidiary bank with the approval of
RBI.
40. Asked to give the rationale for enabling the Chairman of SBI
to nominate an official of the Bank as Chairman, the Ministry of Finance,
in a written reply stated:
“As per the provisions of section 25(1)(a), the Board of a
subsidiary bank shall consist of the Chairman of the State Bank,
ex officio. Further, as per section 43(2) of the Act, the Chairman of

23
the State Bank shall preside at every meeting of the Board of
Directors of a subsidiary bank and, in his absence such one of
the Directors as may generally or in relation to any particular
meeting be authorized by the Chairman in this behalf shall preside;
and in the absence of the Chairman and also failing such
authorization, the Directors of the subsidiary bank present at the
meeting shall elect one from among themselves to preside at the
meeting.
In practice, it was difficult on the part of the Chairman to attend
the meeting of the Board of all the seven subsidiary banks. Thus,
in order to avoid such problem of representation of the Chairman
in the Board, it has been proposed that the Chairman of the State
Bank of India can nominate an official of the State Bank with the
approval of the Reserve Bank to be the ex officio Chairman of the
Board of Directors”.
41. On the provision proposed, the All India Bank Officers
Association and the All India State Bank of Indore Officers’ Coordination
Committee, in particular, in their written Memoranda, inter-alia, stated
that the provision of SBI Chairman “for the time being”, functioning as
the Chairman of subsidiary banks was 47 years old which was
incorporated when the subsidiaries were very small banking institutions.
Now, that these banks were performing at par and rather better than
many public sector banks, it has been, inter-alia, submitted as follows
in the memoranda:—
“.....subsidiary banks too have talented and well experienced
executives to discharge Board level responsibilities. In the past,
executives of subsidiary banks have successfully worked as CMDs
in UCO bank, United Bank, Indian Bank, Vijaya Bank, Bank of
India, Bank of Maharashtra etc. Now they are not permitted to opt
for CMD or ED postings in nationalized banks so as to protect the
interests of respective banks’ cadres. On similar lines, subsidiary
banks cadre to expect to rise up to the highest positions in their
respective banks. It will be grossly unfair to deprive them of senior
most positions in their banks”.

24
42. It has also been suggested as follows:
“(a) subsidiary banks too may be headed by a Chairman-cum-
Managing Director, which should invariably be from subsidiary
banks only.”
43. Making out a case for enabling the executives of subsidiary
banks too for being considered for nomination as Chairman of the
subsidiary banks, the MD of the State Bank of Hyderabad stated as
follows while tendering evidence:—
“......out of all the seven associate banks, four are headed by
officers from the State Bank of India and three are headed by the
officers from the associate banks. At the end of the day,
the authority to appoint Chairman to the Board vests with the
Chairman of the State Bank of India. We feel that the scope
can be expanded by saying that an officer from the associate
bank, who is heading the particular associate bank, could be
the Chairman of the Board of Directors. So, we feel that
enabling provision to that effect should be there. That is our only
suggestion.”
44. Questioned whether it was not desirable to consider the
executives of subsidiary banks too for nomination as Chairman in terms
of the proposed change in Section 25(1) (a), a representative of SBI
responded as follows during evidence:—
“It is our view and it is the practice among all organizations that
the Chairman of the parent bank of the parent organization or the
parent company should continue as the Chairman of all subsidiary
banks, even though he may be a figure head. In fact, this question
has been debated very many times. In fact, the Chairman of the
State Bank of India, because of the tremendous pressure on his time,
has also been discussing this with various subsidiary banks that
should I relinquish the charge etc. The common feedback from the
associate banks themselves has been that this is the only link we
have with the State Bank of India, in the sense that if even the
Chairman of the State Bank of India is not the Chairman of the

25
associate banks, then that link which is a very strong link, will be
snapped. I think it is in the benefit of the associate banks that link
continues to be there. That is the sense of it.”
45. To a similar question on why the ‘nomination process’ of the
Chairman of a subsidiary bank should be confined to officials from the
SBI, when other capable persons would also be available, the
representative of RBI submitted as follows during evidence:—
“......because the State Bank is the owner of the subsidiaries and the
SBI does have a very large pool of professionals and very competent
people.”
46. The rank of officers of SBI who are nominated as Managing
Director and Directors to serve on the Boards of Subsidiary Banks as per
the written note of the Ministry of Finance is as under:—
“SBI has a separate department for looking after the domestic
banking as well as non-banking subsidiaries. The said department
viz. “Associates & Subsidiaries” is headed by an officer of Dy.
Managing Director’s rank as group executive. The Deputy
Managing Director (Associates & Subsidiaries) along with General
Manager (Associates & Subsidiaries) and Deputy General
Manager (Associates & Subsidiaries) are the three officers nomi-
nated by SBI as Directors on the Board of all the seven subsidiary
banks under Section 25 (1) (C) of the Act. This nomination is made
by Chairman, SBI. They have a dual role to play i.e.  one as a
coordinator & supervisor and another as a director of the respective
Board.
The Managing Director of a subsidiary bank is of the rank of
Deputy Managing Director. Deputy Managing Directors of SBI/
subsidiary banks are appointed by SBI, with the approval of RBI,
as Managing Director in subsidiary banks. Deputy Managing
Director (A&S) nominated on the board of subsidiary banks is
generally one of the senior most Deputy Managing Director in
SBI. The other two nominated officers, one in the rank of
General Manager and the other in the rank of Deputy
General Manager are in the Top Executive Grade of SBI

26
but relatively junior in rank to the Managing Director of the
subsidiary banks.”
47. On the rank of the official of SBI who would be entitled for
nomination as Chairman of a subsidiary bank in terms of the proposed
amendment to Section 25(1) (a), the Ministry informed:—
“Such an official shall be in the rank of either Managing Director
of SBI or the Dy. Managing Director of SBI.”
48. Asked whether it would not be prudent to consider the
executives of the subsidiary/associate banks too, for nomination as the
Chairman of the subsidiary/associate banks, the Ministry of Finance in
a written reply at first stated that :
“The proposal will be considered by the Government.”
49. In a subsequent reply, however, the Ministry informed as
follows:—
“It would be appropriate that an official from State Bank of India
i.e. the parent bank be nominated as Chairman of a Subsidiary
Bank. State Bank of India is also the major shareholder in these
banks. The Chairman of the State Bank of India has so far
continued as Chairman of all the group entities and the proposed
amendment is an enabling clause for him to appoint another
suitable official as Chairman of a Subsidiary Bank in case of need.
The post of Chairman also serves as an important link between State
Bank of India and the Subsidiary Banks. Many of the business
policies in the Subsidiaries as well as major new initiatives such
as in the fields of Technology and Business Process Re-engineering
have their origin in or are closely integrated with those in the parent
bank. Further, State Bank of India is often entrusted with task of
pioneering responsibilities in business, developmental and regula-
tory areas by the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of
India. Implementation of these responsibilities is discussed and
operationalised by the Group of the Top Executives in State Bank
of India viz. Central Management Committee, consisting of the

27
Chairman, Managing Directors and Dy. Managing Directors.
Considering the policy exposure and perspective required for the
position of a Chairman of a Subsidiary Bank, Government’s view
is that a senior officer of State Bank of India would be suitable for
it.”
B. Withdrawal of RBI Nominee Director
50. Section 25(1)(b) of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks
Act), 1959 envisages for mandatory nomination of an officer of RBI as
a director on the Board of Subsidiary Bank. As the provision is perceived
to be in conflict with the regulatory/supervisory function of RBI, the
amendment Bill proposes to drop the present provision and insert a new
section 25B in the Act providing for appointment of one or more persons
by RBI to hold office as additional directors of the subsidiary bank as
and when it is considered necessary in the interest of banking policy/
public/subsidiary bank or its depositors.
51. By way of giving the reasons for proposing to withdraw the
RBI Director from the Boards of Subsidiary Banks and instead
enable for nomination of Additional Directors under the newly proposed
Section 25B — which is similar to the amendments proposed in respect
of nationalised banks vide the Banking Companies (Acquisitions and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 — the Secretary, Financial Sector stated as follows during
evidence:—
“...Private sector banks do not have an RBI nominee. As you are
well aware, in the Banks Nationalisation Act amendment which
was passed by the Parliament recently, a view had been expressed—
there are both sides of the picture – that RBI, which is a regulator,
should not be having its own official sitting on the Board of a
particular bank. It leads to a certain element of conflict of interest.
That is why, the via media that was devised in consultation with
RBI and as per the recommendations of the hon. Standing
Committee that instead of having an RBI official, there will be an
RBI nominated person who has expertise and experience in
regulation or supervision of commercial banks so that when the

28
business of the bank is being discussed in the Board, he will be
the eyes and ears of the RBI, and from his experience of commercial
banking, will be able to advise the Board of the bank regarding
direction that they are proposing to take. That is why, in the public
sector banks, it has been decided to withdraw the RBI official as
a nominee and have somebody who will be a nominee yet not an
official, but only an experienced person.”
52. Echoing views, similar to those expressed when the Committee
considered the identical proposal in respect of nationalised banks, a
representative of All India Bank Employees Association stated as follows
during evidence:—
“About RBI role and also continuation of Directors on the Boards,
we feel there is absolutely no conflict of duty or interest in that.
Our experience is we are also part of Board in different banks.
Our representatives are there. We find that the Reserve Bank
nominees are playing very important role and they are able to
instantly correct certain things in the activities of the Boards. So
withdrawing them and even later on saying that we are monitoring
is not right. Why leave the dog out and then try to catch him?
Reserve Bank Directors must be there. He is able to play a very
effective role. There is no conflict of interest. In fact, continuation
of Reserve Bank Director is in no way conflicting. We find from
our experience since the nationalization of banks that they are very
effective and very useful on many occasions to take proper decisions
in the Board in relation to overall framework of the Reserve Bank
of India. It is very utility oriented and, therefor, should not be
discontinued.”
53. In this regard, the representative of State Bank of Hyderabad,
however, stated as under during evidence:—
“.....I feel that we are matured enough to manage ourselves without
induction of the RBI members....we can manage as well as we can
do even without the induction of the RBI nominees. But again, I
would like to emphasize, that yes, they are contributing meaning-
fully but the degree of contribution again depends as to who is the
representative sitting in the Board.”

29
54. In response to a query on the proposal for withdrawing RBI’s
nominee from the Boards, and instead enabling for nomination of
additional directors, when the situation warrants, the representative of
RBI stated as follows during evidence:—
“As regards the role of nominee director, he has to perform certain
immediate functions. The main thing is that we expect the nominee
director to bring his specialized knowledge and expertise to the
Boards. I think to that extent, the RBI nominee Directors are able
to play an important role and they do bring such expertise to the
Board because of the experience that they have of working with the
RBI.”
55. The representative also added:—
“The big problem is that we are also regulator of banks. Therefore,
that creates a conflict of interest. The main reason is that there are
several decisions which banks have to take in their commercial
interest. We do not want to be constrained in our regulation and
supervision of that bank because we have a nominee director in
the bank. The conflict of interest arises from the fact that we are
the regulator of the bank.”
56. In the written response to a question posed on the issue, the
Ministry of Finance, informed as follows:—
“Section 25(1)(b) of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 provides for an officer of the RBI to be nominated by the
Reserve Bank of India as a Director on the Board of such banks.
The desirability of a representative of the regulator and supervisor
of the banking system being on the Board of a bank has been
questioned. The proposal to remove RBI nominee director is based
on the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee on the
Financial System and the observation of the Joint Parliamentary
Committee, the main reason being the potential conflict of interest
between the decision-making and regulation. As far as the private
sector banks are concerned, the RBI has the power under Section
36 AB of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to appoint add itional

30
directors on the boards of such banks whenever the situation so
warrants. It would be desirable to incorporate a similar provision
in the Act also to provide for nomination of director by RBI as
considered necessary in the interest of banking policy or in the
public interest or in the interest of the subsidiary banks or its
depositors rather than to make it compulsory to have a serving
officer of the RBI as a member of the Board. Under normal
circumstances, the presence of RBI’s nominee might lead to conflict
of interest. However, in situation where the bank’s undergoing
stress, presence of RBI’s nominee is necessary to enable RBI to
closely monitor the bank with a view to protect the depositors’
interest. This also brings the provisions in line with the enabling
powers of the Reserve Bank in relation to the private sector banks.
This will enable adoption of selective approach in the case of
nomination of a director by the Reserve Bank. This is similar to
amendment made to Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer
of Undertakings) Act, 1970/80 which was passed by both the
Houses of Parliament.”
57. The Committee considering the fact that in the case of
nationalised banks, the proposals of the Banking Companies (Acquisi-
tion and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 which was passed by Parliament recently,
provides that, in lieu of the proposal to do away with the nomination
of a serving officer of RBI on the Boards, one person, ‘possessing
necessary expertise and experience in matters relating to regulation of
supervision of commercial banks’ would be nominated as Director on
the Boards by the Central Government, on the recommendation of
the Reserve Bank. Questioned whether it was agreeable to the
Government to incorporate a similar provision in the subsidiary banks
amendment Bill, the Ministry of Finance, in a written response, informed
as follows:—
“Yes, it is proposed to amend the existing provision similar to the
amended provision of Bank Nationalisation Act rather than deleting
section 25(1)(b) as proposed in the Bill.”

31
58. In response thereto, the Reserve Bank too stated as
follows:—
“Yes, we agree to the incorporation of a similar provision in the
present Bill. It is proposed to replace clause (b) of section (1) of
Section 25 with the following:—
One director, possessing necessary expertise and experience in
matters relating to regulation or supervision of commercial banks,
to be nominated by the Central Government on the recommendation
of the Reserve Bank.”
59. In terms of the existing provisions of Section 25(1)(a), the
Chairman of the State Bank of India functions as the ex-officio
Chairman of the subsidiary banks. The proposed amendment to the
Section seeks to entitle the Chairman of SBI to nominate an official
of the State Bank to function as the Chairman of a subsidiary bank.
A case was made out before the committee for entitling the officials
of the subsidiary banks too for being considered for nomination as
Chairman in terms of the newly proposed Section 25(1)(a). As per
the Government’s submission, however, it was argued on the other
hand, that it would be preferable to choose an official of the SBI
for this post as he ‘serves as an important link between State Bank
of India and the Subsidiary Banks’. In terms of the existing
stipulations, the executives of the Associates and Subsidiaries
Department of SBI are adequately represented on the Boards of the
subsidiary banks, and the Managing Director of a subsidiary bank
is drawn from the SBI or the cadres of the subsidiary banks. The
Committee are not convinced of the reasoning advanced by the
Government on confining the ‘nomination process’ of the Chairman
of the subsidiary banks in terms of the proposed Section 25(1)(a)
to the officials of the State Bank of India. Also, as per the information
furnished to the Committee, an official equivalent in rank to that
of the Managing Director of a subsidiary bank could be chosen for
nomination as Chairman of a subsidiary bank. The Committee are
of the view that extending the scope of the proposed Section 25(1)(a)
to include the executives of the subsidiary banks also to be

32
considered for the post would not affect the cohesive nature of the
SBI Group of Banks. The Committee are, therefore, inclined to
recommend for a re-look at the proposed provision so as to include
the executives of subsidiary banks also for being considered for
nomination as Chairman of a subsidiary bank.
60. With specific reference to the proposal to do away with
the nomination of an official of the Reserve Bank as Director on
the Boards of the subsidiary banks by deleting Section 25(1)(b) —
which has been proposed on account of possible conflict of interest —
the related proposals, as made applicable to nationalised banks,
provide a via media. In terms of the proposals as made applicable
to nationalized banks, in lieu of doing away with the Reserve Bank’s
nominee, an official with ‘experience and expertise in regulation or
supervision of commercial banks’ would be nominated to serve on
the Boards by the Central Government on the recommendation of
the Reserve Bank. In response to the Committee’s questioning on
the need for incorporating a similar provision in the Subsidiary Banks
Laws, whereby and official with ‘experience and expertise in
regulation or supervision of commercial banks’ could be nominated
to serve on the Boards in lieu of doing away with the Reserve Bank’s
nominee, both the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank have
expressed agreement. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that
similar changes, on lines with the related proposal pertaining to
nationalized banks be carried out in Section 25(1)(b) instead of doing
away with it.

33
Clause 22 — Insertion of New Section 40A (Transfer of Unpaid or
Unclaimed Dividend to Special Dividend Account).
61. Clause 22 — Insertion of new Section 40A regarding transfer
of unpaid or Unclaimed Dividend to Special Dividend Account reads as
follows:
“After section 40 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘40A.  (1)  Where, after the commencement of the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2006, a dividend
has been declared by the subsidiary bank but has not been
paid, or claimed, within thirty days from the date of declaration,
to or by any shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend,
the subsidiary bank shall, within seven days from the date of the
expiry of such period  of thirty days, transfer the total amount of
dividend which remains unpaid, or unclaimed within the said
period of thirty days, to a special account to be called “unpaid
dividend account of ................................(Name of the subsidiary
bank)“.
Explanation —  In this sub-section, the expression “dividend which
remains unpaid” means any dividend the warrant in respect thereof
has not been encashed or which has otherwise not been paid or
claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared by
the subsidiary bank before the commencement of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2006,
remains unpaid at such commencement, the subsidiary bank
shall, within a period of six months from such commencement,
transfer such unpaid amount to the account referred to in sub-
section (1).
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid dividend account of the
subsidiary bank in pursuance of this section, which remains
unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of
such transfer shall be transferred by the subsidiary bank to the

34
Investor Education and Protection Fund established under sub-
section (1) of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956.’
(4) Money transferred under sub-section (3) to the Investor
Education and Protection Fund shall be utilized for the purposes
and in the manner specified in section 205C of the Companies Act,
1956”.
62. By way of giving the rationale behind the proposed addition
of Section 40A to the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, the
Ministry of Finance, in a written submission stated as under:—
“At present, there is no provision in the Act to deal with unclaimed
or unpaid dividend. It has, therefore, been decided to propose
insertion of a new section to enable the subsidiary banks to transfer
such dividend to Investors Education and Protection Fund on the
lines of the provisions of Companies Act, 1956. This is in line
with the amendment proposed in Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 and aimed
at bringing similarity among all banks regarding transfer of
unclaimed dividend. The new section would bring the provisions
in respect of unclaimed dividend at par with those of Companies
Act.”
63. The Committee had, while considering the related proposal as
envisaged to be made applicable to the nationalised banks vide, the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and
Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 noted that in terms
of the explanation under Section 205 (c) of the Companies Act ‘no claim
shall lie against the funds or the company in respect of individual
amounts which were unclaimed and unpaid for a period of seven years
from the dates that they first become due for payment and no payment
shall be made in respect of any such claims’.
64. On the specific aspect of the prohibition placed on the
shareholders to stake claim on unpaid dividends after the lapse of the
seven years limitation, the Indian Banks’ Association, on lines with the
suggestion made by them on the earlier occasion, when the Committee

35
considered the Bill pertaining to nationalised banks, expressed the
following view point:
“It is respectfully submitted that this provision is against public
interest. There can be situation where for genuine reasons a person
is unable to make a claim in respect of dividend payable to him
and to totally bar any such claim after a period of 7 years is
unreasonable. There is a need to modify this provision by adding
a further sub-section stating that it shall be permissible for any
person to make a claim in respect of any unclaimed dividend
credited to the fund from the concerned bank and if such claim
on verification is found to be genuine and payable the bank
shall pay the same with interest and claim reimbursement from the
fund. While amendment to Section 205C of the Companies Act
may not be feasible by making a change in the present Bill
under consideration it will be permissible to make the
provisions of Section 205C applicable to the unclaimed
dividends of subsidiary banks of SBI with a modification as
suggested above. The amendment of Section 205C can be taken up
separately”.
65. Questioned on the suggestion made by IBA for providing
legitimate space to the shareholders to the unclaimed dividends, the
Ministry of Finance had, on the earlier occasion, informed that the
‘Government agrees to the suggestion’. Asked, once again to respond to
the IBA’s suggestion on the need for adding a separate sub-section in
the present Bill, whereby a shareholder could stake claims on the unpaid
dividend even after the seven year time stipulation, the Ministry of
Finance, in a written reply stated as follows:—
“...bona fide  claimants to unpaid dividends transferred to the
Investor Education and Protection Fund, after the expiry of the seven
years time stipulation can only be made after enabling provisions
are made in the Companies Act, 1956. The Preliminary Draft Bill
relating to amendment of the Companies Act, 1956 provides for
entitling the claimants to apply to the ‘fund’ for refund of the
amounts. This will be applicable to the subsidiary banks.

36
The suggestion of IBA to add a separate sub section to the proposed
Bill whereby a claim in respect of any dividend credited to the fund
should be payable by the bank concerned (which would
subsequently claim reimbursement from the IEPF), would require
amendment which will be in conflict with the provisions of section
205C and hence the amendment may have to be in supersession
of the provision of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956.
Whereas the investors of the subsidiary banks will get the benefit
of getting the unclaimed dividend, the same will not be available
to the investors of the private sector banks”.
66. The Committee note that in terms of the existing
provisions of Section 205(c) of the Companies Act, 1956, the
unclaimed dividend amounts on the books of subsidiary banks, which
would be transferred to the Investor Education and Protection Fund
(IEPF) as per the proposals of Section 40A of the Bill, will cease
to be payable after the lapse of seven years following the transfer.
In response to the suggestion placed before the Committee by the
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) expressing the need for incorporating
a separate sub-section to the proposed Section 40 A, whereby a
shareholder could, owing to bona fide  reasons, and subject to
verification, claim his dividend dues even after the seven year
limitation, the Ministry of Finance have, inter-alia, informed that
enabling provisions to this effect have been proposed in the
preliminary draft Bill relating to amendment of the Companies Act,
1956.
67. The Committee are convinced of the need for providing
legitimate space for bona fide claimants to their dividend dues even
after a lapse of the seven years limitation. They, therefore, desire
that appropriate enabling provisions, as informed to have been
proposed, be necessarily incorporated in the revised Companies Law
Bill so as to ensure that legitimate claimants are not deprived of
their rightful dues.

37
Clause 28 – Amendment of Section 63 (Power of the State Bank
to make regulations)
68. Clause 28 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws)
Amendment Bill, 2006 reads as follows:—
“In section 63 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “provisions of this Act”, the
words “provisions of this Act or any other law for the time
being in force” shall be substituted.
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(fa) the procedure for issuing the certificates of shares;
(fb) the procedure with respect to increase, whether by
public issue or by preferential allotment or private
placement, the issued capital by issue of equity or
preference shares;
(fc) the manner of acceptance of share money in installments,
the manner of making calls and the manner of forfeiture
of unpaid shares and their reissue;”;
(ii) for clause (g), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(g) the maintenance of share registers, and the particulars
to be entered in such registers in addition to those
specified in sub-section (1) of section 21, the safeguards
to be observed in the maintenance of the register of
shareholders on computer floppies or diskettes or any
other electronic form, the inspection and closure of the
registers and all other matters connected therewith;
(ga) the manner in which every individual registered share-
holder nominate, an individual to whom all his rights
in the shares shall vest in the event of his death under
sub-section (1) of section 18A;

38
(gb) the manner in which, the joint holders may nominate an
individual to whom all their rights in the shares shall
vest in the event of the death of all the joint holders under
sub-section (2) of section 18A;
(gc) the manner in which nomination is varied or cancelled
under sub-section (3) of section 18A;
(gd) the manner in which every individual registered as
the holder of the shares to make nomination where
nominee is a minor to appoint, any person to become
entitled to the shares in the event of his death during the
minority of the nominee under sub-section (4) of section
18A;
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words “made under this Act”, the
words “made under this section” shall be substituted”.
69. The proposals of clause 28 seek to amend section 63 of the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 relating to power
of the State Bank of India to make regulations. The amendment
proposals seek to include within the scope of section 63, certain
matters in respect of which the State Bank of India may make the
regulations.
70. With specific reference to the provisions of Section 63 of
the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, whereby the ‘State
Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank make in respect
of a subsidiary bank, regulations’, the Reserve Bank, in their
Memorandum submitted to the Committee made the following sugges-
tion:—
“At present, in terms of section 63, the power to make regulation
in subsidiary banks is entrusted to State Bank of India (with the
approval of Reserve Bank) whereas in case of nationalised banks
[section 19 of Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970/80] and the State Bank (section 50 of State
Bank of India Act, 1955), it is entrusted to the Board of Directors
after consultation with Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction
of the Central Government. In order to maintain uniformity among

39
the banking statutes and to allow more autonomy, it is proposed
that the Board of Directors of the subsidiary banks may be
empowered to make regulations with the approval of Reserve Bank
by amending section 63 of the Act.”
71. Asked to respond to the above-mentioned suggestion of the
Reserve Bank for entitling the Boards of Subsidiary banks to make
regulations, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply stated as
follows:—
“The proposal of the Reserve Bank may be considered to maintain
uniformity among the banking statutes and to allow more
autonomy to the Boards of the subsidiary banks”.
72. While tendering evidence, the Secretary, Financial Sector too
informed the Committee that this proposal of the Reserve Bank was
acceptable to the Government.
73. In terms of the existing provisions of Section 63 of the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, the regulation
making powers with regard to the subsidiary banks vest in the State
Bank of India, with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India. The
Committee, however, find that in response to the submission made
to them by the Reserve Bank on the need for amending Section
63 of the said Act so as to empower the Board of Directors of the
Subsidiary Banks to make regulations with approval of Reserve Bank
of India, the Ministry of Finance have expressed concurrence. The
suggestion for amending the existing provisions, as made by the
Reserve Bank, is intended to give more autonomy to the subsidiary
banks and bring forth uniformity among the banking statutes viz.,
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
Act, 1970/1980 and the State Bank of India Act, 1955, in terms of
which the Board of Directors of nationalized banks and SBI
respectively, are vested with the regulation making powers. The
Committee are also convinced of the need for enabling adequate
autonomy and independence to the Boards of the subsidiary banks.
They, therefore, desire that, as agreed to, appropriate changes be
carried out in the existing provisions of Section 63.

40
Amendment of Section 34 — Meetings of the Board of Directors
74. Section 34 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 contains provisions relating to the meetings of the Board of Directors
of the subsidiary banks. The proposal for amending Section 34 of the
Act for enabling the subsidiary banks to hold Board meetings through
video conferencing on lines with the amendment proposals — envisaged
in respect of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 for enabling SBI to
hold Board meetings through video conferencing came from the Reserve
Bank.
75. The related suggestion, as made to the Committee by the
Reserve Bank, reads as under:—
“State Bank of India has suggested amendment to State Bank of
India Act, 1955 for enabling the bank to hold board meetings
through video conferencing. We have examined the suggestion and
advised Government of India to consider the same subject to the
condition that the Central Government may in consultation with the
Reserve Bank, by a notification in the official Gazette, specify the
powers which shall not be exercise in a meeting of the Board of
Directors held through video conferencing or such other electronic
means. This is in line with the provisions contained in section
90(1)(B) of the preliminary draft of Companies Bill, 2006 seeking
amendment to Companies Act, 1956. It is, therefore, proposed that
similar amendment to section 34 of the State Bank of India
(subsidiary banks) Act, 1959 may also be made to enable them to
hold board meetings through video conferencing or any other
electronic means subject to aforesaid condition.”
76. Questioned about the factual position on the proposal
pertaining to amending the State Bank of India Act, 1955 for enabling
holding of board meetings of the Bank through video conferencing,
and the need for incorporation of similar provisions in Section 34 of
the subsidiary banks laws, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply,
stated:—
“The Cabinet has approved the amendment proposed to Section 31
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 so as to enable the bank to
hold board meetings through video conference or such other
electronic means subject to the provision that Central Government

41
will specify the powers which will not be exercised in such
meetings. It is also proposed to consider the directors present in the
meeting through video conferencing for the purpose of voting. The
proposal is based on a new section proposed i.e., Section 90(1)(B)
of the preliminary draft of the Companies Bill, 2006 seeking
amendment to Companies Act, 1956. The amendment to Companies
Act will help the private sector banks to hold such meeting through
video conferencing or through such other electronic media.”
77. Expressing agreement to the proposal for incorporating similar
provisions in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, the
Ministry of Finance, also informed as follows:—
“... in order to maintain uniformity among the banks with regard
to these provisions, it is preferable to insert similar provisions in
the State Bank of India Act and SBI (subsidiary banks) Act, 1959.
This is expected to provide an effective, cost efficient, time saving
and convenient decision making process.”
78. The proposal for amending Section 34 of the Act, with
a view to enable the subsidiary banks to hold board meetings through
video conferencing was placed before the Committee by the Reserve
Bank and accepted for incorporation by the Government. The
Committee note from the information furnished in this regard that
in terms of the amendments proposed separately to the State Bank
of India Act, 1955, the SBI would be entitled to hold board meetings
through video conferencing or such other electronic means. As
enabling the boards of the subsidiary banks to hold board meetings
through video conferencing would provide a cost effective and time
saving means of decision making process, as agreed to by the
Government, the Committee desire that appropriate changes, on the
lines of the related proposals pertaining to the State Bank of India
be carried out to this effect in Section 34 of the Act.
 N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December , 2006 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana , 1928  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

42
42
NOTE OF DISSENT
The statement of objects and reasons for seeking enactment of the
Amendment Bill under consideration are two-fold viz.
(i) to remove the difficulties faced by the shareholders; and
(ii) to facilitate increase of the capital of subsidiary banks.
But the provisions of the Amendment Bill seek to make far-reaching
changes in the structure of the subsidiary banks.
For instance, presently there is no cap on the State Bank of India
holding in the subsidiary banks. It may vary from a minimum of
55 per cent to a maximum of 100 per cent even. But the Amendment
Bill seeks to freeze the percentage of share-holding in subsidiary banks
by the State Bank of India to 51. At the same time, the Amendment Bill
seeks to raise the cap on voting rights of the shareholders other than the
State Bank of India from 1 to 10 per cent.
The difficulties faced by the shareholders of the subsidiary banks
(other than the State Bank of India) in so far as they relate to lack of
dematerialization facility and transferability can be removed without an
Amendment to the Act. The extent shares held by persons other than State
Bank of India could be held/transferred in a dematerialised form within
the framework of Securities and Exchange Board of India. But citing these
difficulties, the Amendment Bill seeks to remove the cap on shareholding
by any person to 200 in terms of number of shares and 1 per cent in
terms of voting rights. These are not warranted in my opinion.
The Ministry of Finance in their written reply furnished to the
Standing Committee had, inter-alia, stated:—
“The Government is also proposing/examining to have a compre-
hensive Act which will regulate all the public sector banks in order
to have uniformity in approach among these banks.”

43
The Government thinking in this matter is, admittedly, influenced
by the recommendation of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account
Convertibility that “separate legislative frameworks for groups of public
sector banks should be abrogated”.
When this proposal is under consideration of the Government there
is no need, in my opinion, to bring about comprehensive changes in the
subsidiary Banks Act, as is presently attempted.
I, therefore, suggest that the Amendment Bill confines itself to two
limited provisions viz.
(i) increasing the authorized capital of subsidiary bank to a
modest level of Rs. 100 crore; and
(ii) enabling the State Bank of India, as a holding company, to
nominate the Chairman of the Board of Subsidiary Bank.
Even in respect of (ii) above, I am of the view that the nomination
should be by the Board of State Bank of India and not by the Chairman,
and it should be open for the Board of State Bank of India to consider
any official of the subsidiary banks for appointment as Chairman.
I, therefore, suggest that the investment consider a limited
amendment covering the above two aspects only and all other matters
covered by the Amendment Bill may be revisited, through a consultative
process, at the time of bringing in a Comprehensive Act covering all
public sector banks.
In view of the above, I record my dissent.
Sd/-
Chittabrata Majumdar

44
ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 19th September, 2006 from 1030
to 1150 hrs. and 1210 to 1330 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
13. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
15. Shri Rupchand Pal
 6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
 7. Shri A.R. Shaheen
 8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
19. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
12. Shri Yaswant Sinha
13. Shri Mahendra Mohan
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
44

45
PART-I
(1030 to 1150 hrs.)
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Special Secretary (FS)
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) briefed the Committee on certain
aspects of the provisions of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks
Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. Thereafter, the representatives made a
powerpoint presentation on the various provisions of the Bill. The
Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the
information with regard to queries of the Members, which was not
readily available with them, might be furnished to the Committee later
on.
4. The briefing was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-II
(1210 to 1330 hrs.)
6. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

46
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 26th October, 2006 from 1030 to
1135 hrs. and 1150 to 1250 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Vijoy Krishna
14. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
15. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
16. Shri Rupchand Pal
 7. Shri K.S. Rao
 8. Shri A.R. Shaheen
 9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
12. Shri Mahendra Mohan
13. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
46

47
PART I
(1030 to 1135 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1.1.1.1.1. Indian Banks’ AssociationIndian Banks’ AssociationIndian Banks’ AssociationIndian Banks’ AssociationIndian Banks’ Association
Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Adviser — Legal
2.2.2.2.2. All India Bank Officers’ AssociationAll India Bank Officers’ AssociationAll India Bank Officers’ AssociationAll India Bank Officers’ AssociationAll India Bank Officers’ Association
(i) Shri Alok Khare, President
(ii) Shri N.S. Virk, Vice President
(iii) Shri S. Nagarajan, Deputy General Secretary
3.3.3.3.3. All India Bank Officers’ ConfederationAll India Bank Officers’ ConfederationAll India Bank Officers’ ConfederationAll India Bank Officers’ ConfederationAll India Bank Officers’ Confederation
(i) Shri Amar Pal, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Chandraprasad, Deputy General Secretary
4.4.4.4.4. All India Bank Employees’ AssociationAll India Bank Employees’ AssociationAll India Bank Employees’ AssociationAll India Bank Employees’ AssociationAll India Bank Employees’ Association
(i) Shri C.H. Venkatachalam, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Ramanand, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri C.M. Puri, General Council Member
5.5.5.5.5. Bank Employees Federation of IndiaBank Employees Federation of IndiaBank Employees Federation of IndiaBank Employees Federation of IndiaBank Employees Federation of India
(i) Shri S. Bardhan, General Secretary
(ii) Shri M.L. Malkotia, Joint Secretary
6.6.6.6.6. National Confederation of Bank EmployeesNational Confederation of Bank EmployeesNational Confederation of Bank EmployeesNational Confederation of Bank EmployeesNational Confederation of Bank Employees
(i) Shri V.K. Gupta, Vice President
(ii) Shri Profullo Kumar Patnaik, General Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the (i) Indian Banks’ Association, (ii) All India Bank
Officers’ Association, (iii) All India Bank Officers’ Confederation,

48
(iv) All India Bank Employees Association, (v) Bank Employees
Federation of India and (vi) National Confederation of Bank Employees
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction
55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. The Members raised queries which
were replied to by the representatives.
4. The evidence was concluded.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART II
(1150 to 1250 hrs.)
5. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

49
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th October, 2006 from 1030 to
1145 hrs. and 1200 to 1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
13. Shri Vijoy Krishna
14. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
15. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
16. Shri Rupchand Pal
17. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
18. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
19. Shri A.R. Shaheen
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Shri Mahendra Mohan
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
49

50
PART-I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1. State Bank of Travancore
Shri K. Sitaraman, Managing Director
2. State Bank of Mysore
Shri P.P. Pattanayak, Managing Director
3. State Bank of Hyderabad
Shri Amitabh Guha, Managing Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the (i) State Bank of Travancore, (ii) State Bank of Mysore, and (iii) State
Bank of Hyderabad to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. The Members raised queries which
were replied to by the representatives.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-II
(1200 to 1230 hrs.)
6. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

51
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 6th November, 2006 from 1030
to 1130 hrs., 1145 to 1300 hrs. and 1430 to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri Rupchand Pal
15. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
16. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
17. Shri K.S. Rao
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10 Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
15. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
51

52
PART-I
(1030 to 1130 hrs.)
** ** ** ** **
PART-II
(1145 to 1340 hrs.)
WITNESSES
2.2.2.2.2. State Bank of IndiaState Bank of IndiaState Bank of IndiaState Bank of IndiaState Bank of India
1. Shri O.P. Bhatt, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Yogesh Agarwal, Managing Director
3. Shri Y. Vijaya Nand, Deputy Managing Director
4. Shri Mohan Dass, Deputy General Manager
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the State Bank of India to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. The Members raised queries which
were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman then directed the
representatives to furnish written replies to the points in respect of which
information was not readily available with them at an early date.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Witnesses then withdrew.
PART-III
(1430 to 1630 hrs.)
7. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

53
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7th November, 2006 from
1030 to 1130 hrs. and 1215 to 1315 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
13. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
14. Shri Rupchand Pal
15 Shri Prakash Paranjpe
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri Mahendra Mohan
19. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
10. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
53

54
PART-I
(1030 to 1130 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Reserve Bank of IndiaReserve Bank of IndiaReserve Bank of IndiaReserve Bank of IndiaReserve Bank of India
(i) Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor
(ii) Shri Prashant Saran, Chief General Manager — Incharge,
DBOD
(iii) Shri Subrat Das, Deputy General Manager, DBOD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. The Members raised queries which
were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman then directed the
representatives to furnish written replies to the points in respect of which
information was not readily available with them at an early date.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Witnesses then withdrew.
PART-II
(1215 to 1315 hrs.)
6. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

55
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th November, 2006 from
1500 to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
13. Shri Rupchand Pal
14. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
15. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
16. Shri K.S. Rao
17. Shri A.R. Shaheen
18. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
19. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
12. Shri Mahendra Mohan
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
55

56
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Secretary (Financial Sector)
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA), Banking
Division
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
in connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives of the Ministries.
The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available
with them might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned .

57
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th December, 2006.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
13. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
14. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
15. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
16. Shri Rupchand Pal
17. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
18. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekher — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
57

58
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft report
on the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill,
2006. The Committee, after deliberation, adopted the draft Report with
the modifications/amendments shown in Annexure-II.
4. As one of the Members did not agree to some of the
recommendations contained in the draft Report, he desired to submit a
Note of Dissent. The Chairman informed him that he could send his Note
of Dissent by 12 December, 2006.
5. ** ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** ** **
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report
in the light of suggestions received from the Members and also make
consequential changes arising out of factual verification and present the
same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

59
59
ANNEXURE-II
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS
LAWS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2006]
Page Para Amendment/Modification
29 60 For
“The Committee, accordingly, recommend
that on lines with the related proposal
pertaining to nationalised banks, appropriate
changes to this effect be carried out in Section
25(1)(b) instead of doing away with it.”
Read
“The Committee accordingly, recommend that
similar changes, on lines with the related
proposal pertaining to nationalised banks, be
carried out in Section 25(1)(b) instead of doing
away with it.”