24 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2005-06) 
         FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE ACTUARIES BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
TWENTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
August, 2005/Bhadra, 1927 (Saka) 

 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
(2005-06) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
THE ACTUARIES BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  29.8.2005 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on     29.8.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
August, 2005/Bhadra, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE           
 
 
INTRODUCTION               
 
 
REPORT               
 
 
 
  
    MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 13TH, 15TH JULY,  
1ST and 22nd  AUGUST, 2005 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
THE ACTUARIES  BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2005-2006    
 
 
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
              MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 

29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.  Dr (Smt) P.K. Sandhu   Additional Secretary 
      2.  Shri R.K. Jain    Deputy Secretary 
      3.  Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar   Under Secretary 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, Chairman of the  Standing Committee on Finance having been 
authorised to submit the Report  on thei r behalf, present this Twenty-Fourth  
Report on the Actuaries Bill, 2005. 
 2. The Actuaries Bill, 2005, introduced in Lok Sabha on 19 th March, 
2005  was referred to the Committee on 13 th May, 2005 for examination and 
report thereon, by the Hon’ble Speaker , Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 3.  The Committee received wr itten views and suggestions on the 
provisions of the Bill from (i) Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA), (ii) the Actuarial Society of Indi a (ASI), (iii) the Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), and (iv) Shri R.K. Daruwalla, Former 
President of the Actuarial Society of India. 
4. At their sitting held on 15 th July, 2005 the Committee took oral 
evidence of the representatives of (i ) Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA), (ii) Life Insurance Co rporation of India and (iii) Actuarial 
Society of India.  
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 1 st August, 2005, took oral 
evidence of the representa tives of the Ministry of  Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Insurance Division).  

6. The Committee considered and a dopted the draft report at their 
sitting held on 22 August, 2005.  
 7.  The Committee wish to express th eir thanks to the representatives of 
(i) Ministry of Finance, (ii) Insurance Regulatory and Development  Authority   
(IRDA),  (iii) Life Insurance  Corporation of India (LIC), (iv) Actuarial Society 
of India, and (v) Shri R.K. Daruwalla,  Former President of the Actuarial 
Society of India for the co-operation extended in placing before them their 
considered views and perceptions on th e subject and for furnishing written 
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection with the 
examination of the Bill.   
 8.  For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type.  
 
NEW DELHI;                MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. 
KHANDURI 
25 August, 2005                                                     Chairman, 
3 Bhadra,1927(Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 
Background 
Following the enactment of the Insu rance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) Act, 1999 and the cons equent establishment of IRDA on 
19.4.2000, the insurance sector stood ope ned up for competition. In addition to 
the six nationalized insurance companies which were transacting the business of 
insurance, twenty one private sector co mpanies are presently in the business in 
the country. 
2.  The Actuarial Science is consider ed to be the backbone of insurance 
operations, particularly so, in the area of life insurance. However, with the 
passage of time, the scope of the actu arial profession has extended to other 
sectors, particularly those, where long term contracts/liabilities are involved. The 
demand for qualified actuaries is expected  to increase in th e mixed scenario 
where private and government insurance companies are operating. 
3. Conventional responsibilities of Ac tuaries in the life and general 
insurance businesses include designing and pricing of policies, monitoring 
the adequacy of the funds to provide  the promised benefits, recommending 
fair rate of bonus where applicable, valuation of the insurance business, 
ensuring solvency margins and other insurance risks like legal liability, loss 
of profit, etc. Actuaries also define th e risk factors, advise on the premia to 
be charged and re-insurance to be  purchased, calculate reserve for 
outstanding claims and carry out fina ncial modeling. An Actuary works as 
consultant either individually or in partnership with other Actuaries in multi-
disciplines like insurance, information technology, taxation, employees 

benefits, risk management, investment  etc. Evidently, the scope of the 
functions and duties of an Actuary has increased considerably under the 
changed conditions. 
4.   As pointed out above, the a dvent of new insurance companies 
with the opening of the insurance sector has brought the Actuarial profession 
into focus. As per the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(Appointed Actuary) Regulations 2000, every insurance company shall have 
an “Appointed Actuary”. The duties and obligations of  an appointed actuary 
are as follows:- 
(a) Rendering actuarial advice to the management of the 
insurer, in particular in the areas of product design and 
pricing, insurance contract wording, investments and 
reinsurance; 
(b) Ensuring the solvency of  the insurer at all times; 
(c) Complying with the provisio ns of the Section 64V of the 
Insurance Act, 1938 in regard to  certification of the assets 
and liabilities that have been valued in the manner required 
under the said section; 
(d)  Complying with the provisi ons of the Section 64VA of the 
Insurance Act in regard to maintenance of required solvency 
margin in the manner required under the said section; 

(e) Drawing the attention of mana gement of the insurer, to any 
matter on which he or she thinks that action is required to be 
taken by the insurer to avoid:- 
(i) any contravention of the Act; or 
(ii) prejudice to the interests of policyholders; 
(f) Complying with the Authority’s directions from time to 
time; 
(g) In the case of the Insu rer carrying on life insurance 
business:-  
(i) to certify the actuarial report and abstract and other 
returns as required under Section 13 of the Act; 
(ii) to comply with the provisions  of Section 21 of the Act in 
regard to further information required by the Authority; 
(iii) to comply with the provisions of Section 40B of the Act 
in regard to the bases of premium; 
(iv) to comply with the provisi ons of the Section 112 of the 
Act in regard to recomme ndation of interim bonus or 
bonuses payable by life insure r to policyholders whose 
policies mature for paymen t by reason of death or 
otherwise during the intervaluation period; 

(v) to ensure that all the requi site records have been made 
available to him or her for the purpose of conducting 
actuarial valuation of liabilities and assets of the insurer; 
(vi) to ensure that the premium rates of the insurance 
products are fair; 
(vii) to certify that the mathem atical reserves have been 
determined taking into account the guidance notes issued 
by the Actuarial Society of India and any directions given 
by the Authority; 
(viii) to ensure that the polic yholders’ reasonable expectations 
have been considered in the matter of valuation of 
liabilities and distribution of surplus to the participating 
policyholders who are entitled for a share of surplus; 
(ix) to submit the actuarial advice in the interests of the 
insurance industry and the policy holders; 
(h) In the case of the insure r carrying on general insurance 
business to ensure:- 
(i) that the rates are fair in respect of those contracts that are 
governed by the insurer’s in-house tariff; 
(ii) that the actuarial princi ples, in the determination of 
liabilities, have been used in th e calculation of reserves for 

incurred but not reported claims (IBNR) and other reserves 
where actuarial advice is sought by the Authority; 
(i) Informing the Authority in writing of his or her opinion, 
within a reasonable time, whether:- 
(a) the insurer has contravened the Act or any other Acts; 
(b) the contravention is of such  a nature that it may affect 
significantly the interests of th e owners or beneficiaries of 
policies issued by the insurer; 
(c) the directors of the insurer ha ve failed to take such action as 
is reasonably necessary to enable him to exercise his or her 
duties and obligations under this regulation; or 
(d) an officer or employee of the insurer has engaged in conduct 
calculated to prevent him or he r exercising his or her duties 
and obligations under this regulation. 
The Actuarial Society of India 
5.  The Actuarial Society of Indi a (ASI), which was established in 
1944 and registered in 1982 under th e Societies Registration Act, 1860 
presently manages the affairs of the act uarial profession in India. The ASI 
has been conducting examinations in line with the international pattern.  The 
Society works closely with the Institute of Actuaries, London and the 
International Actuarial Association.  

6.  The total number of Members of ASI as on 30.6.2005 was 4326. Details 
of the membership of the Society is as under:- 
Class of Members Resident in India Resident in Rest 
of the World 
Total 
Fellows 137 66 203 
Associates 128 8 136 
Students 3918 40 3958 
Honorary Fellows 3 3 6 
Affiliates 6 17 23 
Total 4192 134 4326 
 
7.  The professions of Chartered Accountants, Cost and Works 
Accountants and Company Secretarie s are governed through the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949; Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and the 
Company Secretaries Act, 1980 respectively. 
8.  Unlike the case of these professions, there continued to be lack of a 
legislation with regard to Actuarial pr ofession in India. As per the Ministry 
of Finance, this was perhaps not felt necessary so far, due to the nationalized 
set up under which the insurance sect or functioned and the consequent 
limited scope for qualified actuaries in th ese organizations. In the absence of 
a legislation as applicable to the prof essions of Chartered Accountants, Cost 
and Works Accountants and Company S ecretaries, actuarial consultancy on 
private/individual basis continued to be restricted. 
9.  In order to streamline, regul ate and develop the profession of 
actuaries on healthy lines, the Govern ment has proposed to establish a 
professional body having a statutory character similar to the enactments 

relating to the professions of Char tered Accountants, Cost and Works 
Accountants and Company Secretaries. 
The Actuaries Bill, 2002 
10.  As per the information furnishe d by the Ministry of Finance, the 
Cabinet, in its meeting held on 18 th September, 2002 considered and 
approved the proposal to introduce a Bill in Parliament to regulate and 
develop the profession of actuaries. C onsequently, the Actuaries Bill, 2002 
for this purpose was introduced by the Government in the previous Lok 
Sabha on 16.12.2002, which was referred to the then Standing Committee on 
Finance (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) for examination and report.  
11.  The then Standing Committee on Finance, in their Report which 
was presented to the Lok Sabha on 9.12.2003, recommended the following 
two modifications:-  
(1) The word “Actuary” should be defined in the proposed 
Act itself. 
(2) Relevant Clause of the Bill [Clause 2(2)] may be suitably 
amended to explicitly include employees of the Companies in 
the definition of “Actuary in practice”. 
12.  The Actuaries Bill, 2002, how ever, could not be taken up for 
consideration owing to the dissolution of the Thirteenth Lok Sabha.  

 
 
 
The Actuaries Bill, 2005 
 
 
13.  The Actuaries Bill, 2005 wa s introduced in Lok Sabha on 
19.03.2005 and referred to the St anding Committee on Finance for 
examination and report on 13.05.2005. Th e Bill incorporates the provisions 
of the earlier Bill which lapsed along- with the recommendations of the then 
Standing Committee on Finance. In add ition to the provisions of the earlier 
Bill, the Actuaries Bill, 2005 includes prov isions for: settlement of disputes 
regarding election to the Council through a ‘Tribunal’; constitution of a 
Disciplinary Committee; appointment of a ‘Prosecution Director’ for 
enquiring into complaints against members; an ‘Appellate Authority’ 
constituted under Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and establishment of a 
‘Quality Review Board’.   
The Institute of Actuaries of India  
14.  The Actuaries Bill, 2005 pr oposes to dissolve the Actuarial 
Society of India and establish a profe ssional body, namely, the Institute of 
Actuaries of India (IAI) and transfer  the assets and liabilities of the said 
Society to the proposed IAI.  The Institute, to be constituted under the 
proposed Bill will have the responsibility of conducting examinations for the 
profession of Actuaries, regulating the profession including aspects relating 
to professional misconduct,  and creating necessary facilities for the growth 

and training of the members of the profes sion. It is expected to function as a 
self-financing and self-supporting bo dy without any budgetary support from 
the Government. 
15.   The proposed Bill, inter alia, includes provisions for maintenance 
of a register of actuaries by the Institu te,  who are to be divided into four 
classes, namely, Fellow, Associate, Student and Affiliate Members. 
16.  A Council of the IAI is proposed  to be set up for the management 
of its affairs and for disc harging the functions assi gned to it.  The Council 
will have a minimum of eight, and not more than twelve persons, elected by 
the Fellow and Associate members fro m amongst Fellow Members.  The 
Government shall nomina te one person to the Council from the IRDA and 
not more than three persons with kno wledge of life insurance, general 
insurance, finance, economics, law, accountancy or any other discipline. 
17.  The Council would elect a President, Vice-President, and a Honorary 
Secretary.  One third of the members of the Council shall retire at every annual 
general meeting by rotation and will be eligible for re-election.  The Council 
would appoint an Executive Director, a treasurer and such other officers and 
employees depending upon the need . The Council would constitute a 
Disciplinary Committee consisting of the President or the Vice-President of the 
Council as the Presiding Officer and two Members of the Council elected by the 
Council and two Members to be nominated  by the Central Government. A fund 
would be established unde r the management and control of the Council. The 
actuaries would be entitled to practice in India only after obtaining a certificate of 
practice from the Council on payment of the prescribed annual fee.  

18.  The Committee received written views/suggestions on the various 
provisions of the Bill from (i) Insu rance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) (ii) Actuarial Societ y of India (ASI) (iii) Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC) (iv) Shri R. K. Daruwalla,  Past President of the 
Actuarial Society of India (v) Shri R.  Ramakrishna, Actuary and (vi) Shri. 
Nalin Kapadia, Actuary.  
19. The Committee took oral  evidence of the representatives of (a) the 
Ministry of Finance, (Department of Economic Affairs-Insurance Division) (b) 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority and (c) Life Insurance 
Corporation of India and (d) the Actuarial Society of India (ASI) to enlighten 
themselves in various aspects of the proposed legislation.  
20.  The representatives of ASI have, in a written submission made to 
the Committee and also while deposing be fore the Committee, raised issues 
in objection to the Actuaries Bill, 2005.  The objections expressed by the 
ASI to the proposed Bill were mainly centered on the following contentions: 
(a) The actuarial profession will function best if organized 
under a self-regulatory non-governmental  framework; 
(b) No financial assistance to the proposed IAI from the 
Government under the proposed Bill; 
(c) Lack of flexibility in governance under the Act of 
Parliament could seriously  handicap the growth and 
functioning of the actuarial profession. 

21.  While the ASI has expre ssed opposition to the proposed 
enactment, on the other hand, Shri R.K.  Daruwalla, Former President, ASI 
and former Chairman, GIC along with fourteen other signatories, who 
included senior practising members of th e actuarial profession, in a written 
submission made to the Committee, ex pressed the opinion that converting 
the ASI into an Institute incorporated by an Act of Parliament, would not 
only benefit the actuarial profession in particular, but also the country in 
general. 
22.  The point wise response of the Ministry of Finance to the 
objections raised by the ASI on the proposed Bill are as under :- 
(a) The objective of the proposed Bill was to bring the actuarial 
profession at par with other professions such as CA, ICWA, etc. It 
is fact that the actuarial profession has not been given due 
importance/publicity over the last 60 y ears. This is reflected in the 
small number of actuaries at present in the country. With the 
opening of the insurance sector this profession has come into 
limelight and it is the right time  to streamline the profession by 
setting up an Institute of Actuaries with professional and visionary 
outlook. 
(b) The other comparable professiona l bodies are self-financing and it 
would not be appropriate to sustain the new body under the 

governmental assistance. In order to develop the efficiency and 
professional competitiveness it is e xpedient to allow them to take 
control of their finances and other operations. 
(c) The proposed Bill gives enough freedom to IAI to perform its 
functions. The Council, which would be responsible for managing 
the affairs of the Institute, would comprise of 8-12 elected 
members. There will be 4 nomi nated members – one from IRDA 
and three by the Government from different disciplines. In terms 
of percentages the nominated Government members constitute 
25% of the total members which is in line with the proposed 
composition of membership of ICAI, ICS & ICWA. Moreover, the 
attempt is not to provide inflexibility in governance of the institute 
but to bring varied experience to the Council for its operational 
efficiency. 
23.  The Committee, upon consider ing the views e xpressed by the 
representatives of various institutions and bodies, including the ASI as well as the 
clarifications given by the Ministry of Fi nance, are of the opi nion that regulating 
the actuarial profession on the lines of the professions  of Chartered Accountants, 
Cost and Works Accountants and Company Se cretaries inter alia by setting up a 
professional statutory body vi z. IAI would cert ainly help in the advancement of 
the profession and also contribute in improving the status of actuaries. 
24.   In the course of their interactio n with the representa tives, particularly 
of the Insurance sector regulator, IRDA and the Ministry of Finance, certain 

provisions of the Actuaries Bill, 2005 cam e to notice, which Committee felt,  
needed to be amended / modified to better serv e the avowed objective of 
regulating and developing the profession of Actuaries.  Such provisions and the 
recommendations and observations of the Committee thereon are detailed in the 
subsequent paragraphs of the report. 
 
Clause 2 (Definitions) 
25. Clause 2 defines the various e xpressions used in the Bill and in 
particular, the expression “Actuary” which the Bill intends to deal with as 
under: 
The Clause reads as follows:- 
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- 
 
(a) "Actuary" means a person skilled in determining the present 
effects of future contingent events  or in finance modelling and risk 
analysis in different areas of insura nce, or calculating the value of life 
interests and insurance risks, or designing and pric ing of policies, 
working out the benefits, recomme nding rates relating to insurance 
business, annuities, insurance a nd pension rates on the basis of 
empirically based tables and include s a statistician engaged in such 
technology, taxation, employees' benefits and such other risk 
management and investments; 
(b) "Actuarial Society" means the Actuarial Society of India 
registered under the Societies Regis tration Act, 1860 and the Bombay 
Public Trusts Act, 1950; (21 of 1860 Bombay Act No. XXXIX of 
1950.) 
(c) "appointed day" means the da te on which the Institute is 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(d) "Authority" means the Appellate Authority referred to in 
section 32; 

(e) "Board" means the Quality Review Board constituted under 
sub-section (1) of section 44; 
(f) "Council" means the Council of the Institute as referred to in 
section 12; 
(g) "fellow" means a fellow member of the Institute; 
(h) "Institute" means the Ins titute of Actuaries of India 
constituted under section 3; 
(i) "member" means an individual whose name appears in the 
register of members maintained by the Institute; 
(j)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(k) "register" means the register  of members maintained by the 
Institute under this Act; 
(l)  "specified" means specified by regulations made under this 
Act; 
(m) "Tribunal" means a Tribunal established under sub-section 
(1) of section 16; 
(n) "year" means the period co mmencing on the 1st day of 
April of any year and ending on the 31st day of March of the 
succeeding year. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the 
Institute shall be deemed "to be in  practice" when individually or in 
partnership with Actuaries in practic e as a member or  an employee of 
a company, he, whethe r or not in consideration of remuneration 
received or to be received,-- 
(i) engages himself in actuarial profession; or 
 

(ii) offers to perform or pe rforms services involving the 
application of actuarial techniques in the fields of insurance, pension, 
investment, finance and management; or 
(iii) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the 
Council, are or may be rendered by an actuary in practice; or 
(iv) is in employment of a person engaged in one or more of the 
activities mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above; 
and the words "to be in prac tice" with their grammatical 
variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. 
 
26. Though Clause 2(1)(a) of the Actuaries Bill, 2005 defines the 
expression “Actuary” as recommended by the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2002-03), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority suggested that 
to make the meaning of the expression  in consonance with that of other 
professional bodies in the world, “Actua ry” should be defined as “Fellow of the 
Institute”.  This, the IRDA felt, beca use mere possession of knowledge does not 
make a person to be called an actuary unless he/she holds the ‘pass’ in the 
examinations prescribed by the Institute as per its Rules. 
27.  Questioned on the view point expressed by IRDA on the need to revise 
the definition of the expression, ‘Actuary’ in Clause 2(1) (a) and specifically, the 
need for ensuring that the definition was cl early indicative of the individuals, that 
is, the Actuary’s association with, or  recognition by or accreditation to the 
Institute of Actuaries, which entitles hi m to practice, the representative of 
Ministry of Finance,  inter alia, st ated during evidence that following the 
recommendation of the earlier Standing Committee on Finance, the definition of 
‘Actuary’ as given in Clause 2(1) (a) was culled out after extensive consultations.  
The representative also stat ed that the matter could be  looked into in detail and 
the views of the Ministry conveyed to the Committee. 

28.    Upon considering the matter, the Ministry of Finance, in their 
post evidence submission stated that the suggestion for revising the 
definition of ‘Actuary’ in Clause 2(1) (a) was proposed to be incorporated, 
by adding the phrase ‘and who is a member of the Institute and the 
expression ‘actuarial science’ shall be construed accordingly’ to the 
definition of ‘Actuary’ as given in clause 2(1) (a). 
29. In regard to the definition of ‘Actuary in Practice’ as contained 
in Clause 2(2) of the Bill, the Life Insurance Corporation of India had, inter-
alia submitted before the Committee that the provision may restrict the 
actuaries of the corporation, whose operations include administering a large 
number of gratuity and pension schemes where actuarial advice was 
provided. 
30.  Questioned in this regard, in the course of evidence, the  
representatives of the Ministry of Finance assured that the matter would be 
apprised in detail.  Subsequently, the Ministry in their post evidence reply 
informed as under: 
“The contents of the provisions of clause 40 with 
reference to LIC has been considered. To remove doubts in this 
regard, the following explanation is proposed to be inserted 
after Clause 2(2):- 
Explanation:  For the purposes of sub-section (2) the 
expression “Company” would include Public Financial 
Institutions as defined in section 4 A of the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).” 
 
Definition of Actuary [Clause 2 (1)] 
 
31. The Committee note that the Gove rnment have chosen to define 
the expression, ‘Actuary’ in Clause 2(1) (a) on the basis of the recommendation 
made by the Standing Committee on Finance of 2003 on the earlier Bill viz. the 
Actuaries Bill, 2002, which lapsed.  Though the definition, which, inter alia, 
describes an Actuary to be ‘a person skilled in determining the present effects 
of future contingent events’ brings out the professional role expected of an 
Actuary, mainly on the basis of the suggestion received from the IRDA, the 
Committee noted that the description does not touch upon the Actuary’s 
association with or recognition by  the professional body of the Institute of 
Actuaries (IAI), which is proposed to be set up to regulate the profession.  The 
Committee, therefore, questioned the Ministry in this regard.  Upon examining 
the matter, the Ministry have informed that it was proposed to revise the 
definition of ‘Actuary’ in Clause 2(1) (a) by adding the phrase,  ‘and who is a 
member of the Institute and the expression ‘actuarial science’ shall be construed 
accordingly’. 

32. The Committee are of the view th at the proposed rephrasing of the 
definition of the expression, ‘Actuary’ in Clause 2 (1) (a), as agreed to by the 
Government would be appropriate as it brings out the individual’s association 
with the Institute of Actuaries as well as the essence of actuarial science.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the definition of ‘Actuary’ be rephrased 
as proposed. 
Definition of “Actuary in Practice” [Clause 2 (2)] 
 
 33.   The Committee note that as suggested by th em, the Ministry have 
expressed agreement to add an explanation under Clause 2(2) on the definition 
of ‘Actuary in Practice’ to clearly spec ify that the expression ‘company’ would 
mean to include Public Financial Ins titutions.   Though the Government have 
included ‘employees of companies’ with in the ambit of definition of ‘Actuary 
in Practice’ in Clause 2(2) of the Bill – as recommended by the earlier 
Committee of 2003 – the Life Insurance Cor poration of India had, in particular, 
expressed apprehensions th at the provision may hamp er their operations in 
servicing gratuity and pension schemes.  With the addition of the explanation 
under Clause 2(2), whereby, the expre ssion ‘company’ would mean to include 
Public Financial Institutions, it would be abundantly clear  that actuaries 
employed in corporations such as the LIC, would, in no way be barred in 
issuing certificates pertaining to gratuity and pens ion schemes.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the explanation, as propos ed, be added   under 
Clause 2(2). 

 
Clause 9:  (Certificate of Practice) 
 
34.   Clause 9 reads as follows:- 
 
(1) No member of the Institute shall be entitled to practic e, unless he has 
obtained from the Council a certificate of practice. 
(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practice shall make an 
application in such form and pay such  annual fee, for certificate of practice 
as may be specified and such fee shall be payable on or before the first day 
of April in each year. 
(3) The certificate of practice obtai ned under sub-section (1) may be 
cancelled by the Council under such circumstances as may be specified. 
 
35. It was brought to the notice of  the Committee that the curricular 
requirements of the Actuarial profession  were such that the qualification of 
‘Associateship’ was granted to a person after he passes the initial examinations, 
which essentially cover theoretical asp ects and the qualification of ‘fellowship’ 
was granted only after he passes all examinations, which cover advanced 
applications and practical aspects. 
36.  In this regard the Committee, inter alia sought to know from the 
Ministry of Finance whether the provision s of Clause 9, which entitle a person to 
practice only after he obtains a ‘certificate of practice’ from the Council take into 
account the specificities of the Actuarial profession. 

37.  Upon examining the matter, the Ministry informed that it was 
proposed to modify Clause 9(1) of the Bill regarding ‘certificate of practice’ to 
read as under : 
“No Member of the Institute shall be entitled to practice, 
unless he fulfils the qualifications as may be specified and 
obtains from the Council a certificate of practice” 
 
38.   It has also been informed that Clause 57(2)(g) relating to the form in 
which an application may be made for grant of a certificate of practice in terms of 
Clause 9(2) was proposed to be amended as under:- 
“Qualifications required for a certificate of practice under 
sub-section (1) and the form in which an application may be 
made under sub-section (2) of section 9” 
39.   It has been brought  to the notice of the Committee that the specifics 
of the Actuarial curriculum were su ch that a person was awarded the 
qualification of ‘Associateship’ after he passes the in itial examinations, and the 
qualification of ‘fellowship’ after he passes all examina tions, which cover 
advanced applications and practical aspects.  As the Committee felt that the 
proposed Council of the Institute of Actuaries shoul d determine the 
qualifications required to be met to entitle  a person to obtain a certificate of  
practice, the Ministry have, inter alia proposed to modify Clause 9(1) to specify 
that ‘no member of the Institute shall be entitled to practice, unless he fulfils the 
qualifications as may be sp ecified and obtains from the Council a certificate of 
practice’.  The Committee recommend that the modifications in Clause 9(1), as 
proposed, which would inter alia entitle the Council to specify the 
qualifications required to be fulfilled by a person to practice as an actuary be 
carried out. 
 
Clause 12 – (Composition of Council of Institute) 

 
40.  Clause 12 reads as under: 
“(1) There shall be a Counc il of the Institute for the 
management of the affa irs of the Institute a nd for discharging the 
functions assigned to it by or under this Act. 
(2) The Council shall be compos ed of the following persons, 
namely :- 
(a) a minimum of eight and not more than twelve persons from 
amongst fellow members to be elected  by the fellow and the associate 
members of the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
(b) (i) one person from the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority constitute d under the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 1999 nominated by the Central 
Government; and 
(ii) not more than three pers ons having knowledge in the field 
of life insurance, general insu rance, finance, economics, law, 
accountancy or any other discip line which in the opinion of the 
Central Government, would be useful  to the Council, to be nominated 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that till such time as th e Council is constituted under 
this Act, the Executive Committee of the Actuarial Society shall 
discharge all the functions and sh all have all the powers of the 
Council. 
(3) No person holding an office of profit under the Central 
Government or a State Government , as the case may be, shall be 
eligible for election to the Council under clause (a) of sub-section (2). 

(4) One-third of the members of the Council referred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) sh all retire at every annual general 
meeting of the Institute by rotation but shall be eligible for re-election. 
(5) Any person nominated under cl ause (b) of sub-section (2) 
shall hold office during the pleasur e of the President for a period of 
five years from the date of nomina tion and shall be eligible for re-
nomination.” 
 
(i) Nomination of Members to the Council: 
 
41.  In terms of Clause 12(2) (a), th e Council of the proposed Institute is to 
be composed of a minimum of 8 and not more than 12 persons from amongst 
fellow members to be elected by the fe llow and the associate members of the 
Institute.  Questioned whether the pr oportion of Government nominees on the 
Council was not very high and whether it was not essential to prescribe the 
procedure of nomination in the law itself,  a representative of the Ministry of 
Finance stated as under during evidence:- 
“There are 8 to 12 elected members.  There are four 
nominated members – one member  is from the IRDA and three 
members are to be nominated by the Government from different 
disciplines.  Here, I would like to simply point out that in the case of 
the Institute of Chartered Accountan ts of India, the Institute of 
Company Secretaries of India and the Institute of Cost and Works 
Accountants of India, the num ber of elected Members are 24 
members for ICAI, 12 members for ICWAI and 12 members for 
ICSI.  Out of the total, 20 to  25 per cent are nominated by the 
Government.  It is there in the stat ute today.  They have proposed an 
amendment that 25 per cent of the total members have to be 
nominated by the Government.  Th e amendment is already being 

processed by the Department of Co mpany Affairs.  In the revised 
strength, the Council will have 30 elected members in the case of 
ICAI, 15 elected members in the case of ICSI and 15 elected 
members in the case of ICWAI.  The Central Government will 
nominate 10 members in the case of ICAI, 5 members in the case of 
ICWAI and 5 members in the case of  ICSI.  Against a maximum of 
12 elected members, we have kept  four members for nomination.  
We have not changed it.”   
42.  In reply to a query on the pr oposal to have as many as four 
Government nominees on the Council, including one person from IRDA, and that 
too without any mandatory consultation with  the Council, the Secretary, Ministry 
of Finance, inter alia, stated during evidence: 
“…it is mentioned that they will have knowledge in the field 
of life insurance, general insuranc e, finance, economics, law etc… 
the purpose of this really is to see that the Council is represented 
by a body of people who has so me knowledge of the subject 
because election will, of course, throw up people who are 
knowledgeable, but this ensures that people have definite, precise 
knowledge in these respective fields. That is why it has been put. It 
is not to exercise control per se because they will be people with 
specific knowledge in these fields of activity.” 
43.  Emphasising on the need to en sure that the proposed Institute of 
Actuaries functions as a Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO), on the specific 

issue of Government nominees in the Council in terms of Clause 12(b)(i) 
and (ii), the IRDA, in their memorandum, inter alia, submitted as follows:- 
“We suggest that the Council should be vested with the 
powers to nominate members instead of empowering the 
Government to nominate member s. To ensure that the Council 
does not misuse this power, it may be provided that not more than 
3 or 4 members can be nominated by the Council from any of the 
following: IRDA, SEBI, RBI, Govern ment of India, ICAI and any 
other Regulatory Body in the Fina ncial Sector. The Council will 
decide which of the Institutio ns they would approach for 
nomination and the selection of th e person should be left to the 
Institutions.” 
44.  On the method or procedure for representation of Government 
nominees in the Council, the Chairman, IRDA, stated during evidence: 
 “With regard to the nominated members, the suggestion that I 
have made is that there can be a pool.  There may be a number of 
institutions, but we limit what thos e institutions are.  The institution 
will decide what institution is  required for their particular 
profession.  For example, today, if  the pension is going to come up 
in a big way and the actuaries are going to be associated in a large 
way with the pension activity, in th at particular year the ASI would 
say, we would like to have some  representative from the Pension 
Regulatory Authority.  In one ye ar, it may be IRDA, it may be 
Government but if they are working very closely on the asset 

liability match, they might like to  have somebody from the ICAI.  
Like that, they will decide what ar e the institutions from whom they 
would like to have representations for that particul ar term, make a 
representation to the Government  and then say, please make a 
representation to the head of that particular office.  Who should be 
nominated is entirely left to the head  of that particular office.  They 
are not going to say ‘X’ or ‘Y’ s hould be made member.  But we 
want a representation from this in stitution.  The head of the 
institution will decide who should represent that particular 
organisation.” 
45.  Asked to furnish their opinion on the suggestion mooted by IRDA to 
allow the proposed Council to  have a say in the selection of Members to be 
nominated by way of consultation or by  allowing the Council to select bodies 
such as IRDA, SEBI etc., who in turn would propose or nominate the members to 
the Council, the Ministry, in their post-evidence reply stated: 
“This observation has been duly deliberated upon.  It may be 
stated that the Government usually consults the Statutory bodies and 
other stakeholders befo re nominating its representatives to such 
bodies and it might make the proce ss rigid and time consuming if 
such a consultation is made mandato ry in the Act itself.  Besides, 
Government nominees are responsible  for taking care of policies in 
the working of statutory bodies.  Thus, clause 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Bill 
may be retained as such.  The suggestion regarding consultation 
shall be kept in view while prescribing the procedure through rules.” 
 
46.  The Committee note that in term s of Clause 12 (2) (b) (i) and 
(ii) one person ‘from the Insu rance Regulatory and Development 
Authority’ and three persons ‘havin g knowledge  in th e field of life 

insurance, general insu rance, finance, economics, law, accountancy or 
any other discipline’ which may be c onsidered to be useful would be 
nominated by the Central Government to serve on the Council of the 
Institute of Actuaries.   The pr oportion of nominee members in the 
Council – whose total strength may, in terms of Clause 12 (2) (a), vary 
from a minimum of eight and not more than twel ve persons elected from 
amongst fellow members of the Institute  – is said to be in consonance 
with the percentage of nominee me mbers proposed for the Councils of 
the Institute of Chartered Accountan ts, Company Secretaries and Cost 
and Works Accountants. 
47.  While the proposal to ke ep the proportion of nominee 
members in the Council of the Institute of Actuaries in line with that of  
the Councils of other pr ofessional bodies su ch as that of  the Chartered 
Accountants is understand able, what the Committee do not find to be 
tenable is the Ministry’s reluctance to prescribe in the proposed law, the 
‘procedure of nomination’ to the Council which provides for a mandatory 
system of consultation.  Though the IRDA as well as the ASI have inter 
alia emphasised on the need to put in place a system of consultation in 
the matter of selection of Governme nt nominees to serve on the Council, 
the Ministry have stated that to ha ve such a system prescribed in the 
proposed Bill would make the proces s ‘rigid and time consuming’. The 
Ministry have, however informed that  the Government ‘usually consults 
the Statutory bodies and other stak eholders before  nominating its 
representatives to such bodi es’. The Ministry have also informed that the 
emphasis paid by the Committee in en suring consultation would be kept 
in mind while prescribing the pr ocedure of selecting Government 
nominees to serve on the Council th rough rules.  Th e Committee desire 
that if not by way of law, the rules relating to the procedure for selection 

of Government nominees  in the Council should inevitably provide for a 
mandatory system of consultation.   
 
(ii) Term of Office of Nominated Members: 
48.  Clause 12(5), which relates to the term of office of the members 
nominated to the Council by the Central Government reads as under: 
“Any person nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
shall hold office during the pleasure  of the President for a period 
of five years from the date of nom ination and shall be eligible for 
re-nomination.” 
49.  The term ‘President’ as inferring to mean the ‘President of the 
Council’ occurs in several of the provisions of the Bill.  As the phrase ‘ during 
the pleasure of the President’ as shown in  Clause 12(5) inferred a reference to 
the ‘President of India’ and not to the ‘President of the Council’, the 
Committee, during the course of eviden ce, sought to know whether it was not 
necessary to add the words, “of India” after the word, “President” in Clause 
12 (5). 
 50.  In response to the query posed,  a representative of the Ministry of 
Finance stated: 
 “It seems we have missed this.  I got it.  We have to 
mention it in the definition itself that what do we mean by 
President wherever it is used in the Bill.” 
51.  Consequent to examining the matter  further, the Ministry, in their post 
evidence reply informed that it was propos ed to revise Clause 12(5) on the term 
of nominated members to read as under: 
“Any person nominated under cl ause (b) of sub-section 
(2) shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of 

his nomination unless removed earlier by the Central 
Government:   
Provided that he shall be gi ven an opportunity of being 
heard before such removal.” 
 
52.  The Committee observe that in te rms of the provisions of Clause 12 
(5), any person nominate d by the Central Government  to serve on the Council 
under Clause (b) of sub section (2) ‘ shal l hold office during the pleasure of the 
President’.  Though the intended reference in the clau se is to the President of 
India, it could be construed to refer to the President of  the Council.  This is so, 
mainly because the expression , ‘President’ as intending to refer to the President 
of the Council occurs in se veral provisions of the Bill.  Upon que stioning in this 
regard, the representative of the Minist ry admitted before the Committee that 
they had ‘missed this point’ and that th e meaning of the e xpression, ‘President’ 
as it occurs in various provisions would be  defined in clear te rms in the Bill.   
The Ministry subsequently proposed to reword the provisions of Clause 12 (5) by 
withdrawing the reference to  the President and instead stipulate that a nominated 
member of the Council ‘shall hold office fo r a period of five years from the date 
of his nomination unless re moved earlier by the Central Govern m e n t ’ .    T h e  
Committee, while expressing agreement with  the rewording of the provisions of 
Clause 12(5) proposed by th e Ministry can not also he lp noting that there has 
been an element of sloppiness in formulating the provisions.  The Committee also 
desire that the Government  assess, in clear terms, the need for defining the 
expression ‘President’ as it occurs in th e various provisions of the Actuaries Bill, 
2005. 
 
Clause 22: (Finances of Council) 
53.  Clause 22 reads as under:- 

 “(1) There shall be established a fund under the management and 
control of the Council in to which shall be paid all moneys (including 
donations and grants) received by the Council and out of which shall be 
met all expenses and liabilities incurred by the Council. 
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing 
to the credit of the fund in any Central or State Government security as it 
may deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of such 
investments and maximum returns thereon. 
(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund 
distinguishing capital account from revenue account. 
(4) The annual accounts of the Instit ute shall be subject to audit by 
a Chartered Accountant in practice within the meaning of the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) to be appointed annually by the 
Council: 
Provided that no member of the Council who is a Chartered 
Accountant or a person who is in part nership with such member shall be 
eligible for appointment as an auditor under this sub-section. 
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not 
later than the 30th day of September of the year next following, the 
Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India, a copy of the 
audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year and copies of 

the said accounts and report sha ll be forwarded to the Central 
Government and to all the members of the Institute. 
(6) The Council may borrow from a scheduled bank, as defined in 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, (2 of 1934.) or  from any public 
financial institution-- 
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account 
on the security of the fund or on the security of any other asset, for the 
time being belonging to it; or 
(b) for the purpose of meeting current liabilities, pending the 
receipt of income, by way of temporary loan or overdraft. 
Explanation.--The expression "public financial institution" means a 
financial institution specified in sec tion 4A of the Companies Act, 1956. 
(1 of 1956.)” 
54.  The Committee, during the cour se of evidence sought to know 
the rationale for seeking to restrict  investment of the credits to the 
Council’s fund to Central and State G overnment securities [in terms of 
Clause 22(2)] and why prudent invest ments -  which c ould be with the 
prior approval of the Central Government - in other money market 
instruments which may fetch higher returns could not be allowed to 
made. 

55.  In this regard, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as 
below :- 
“As per Clause 22(2) the Council may invest the corpus of ASI 
in Central and State Government S ecurities ‘for the time being’ only 
till the institute is set up and starts its operation.” 
56.  The Ministry subsequently  reconsidered the matter and 
informed, in a written response, that it was proposed to reword clause 
22(2) on investment of funds to read as under: 
“(2) The Council may invest  any money for the time 
being standing to the credit of the fund in any security as it may 
deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of 
such investments and maximum returns thereon.” 
“Explanation:- “Securities” has th e meaning assigned to it in 
section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 
1956” as amended from time to time.” 
 
57.  The Committee observe  that Clause 22 (2) inter alia provides that the 
Council may ‘invest any mone y for the time being standi ng to the credit of the 
fund in any Central or Stat e Government security’.  Qu estioned as to  why it is 
sought to restrict the inve stment of the corpus of funds to Central and State 
Government securities, the Ministry responded by informing that by using the 
phrase ‘for the time being’ in the Clause , it was intended to mean that the 
prescribed pattern of inve stment would be a transiti onal measure till such time 

the Institute of Actuaries is set up and comme nces its operations.  The Ministry 
have further – after examining the provisions in detail – informed the Committee 
that they propose to amend clause 22 (2) inter alia by stipulating that the corpus 
of funds could be invested prudently in any ‘security’ as meant under section 2 of 
the Securities Contracts (Regulati ons) Act, 1956.  Th e Committee express 
agreement with the m odification of the provisions of  Clause 22 (2) as proposed 
by the Ministry. 
58.  The Committee also feel that th e meaning of the term ‘for the time 
being’ relating to the pattern of investment to be followed in the interim to the 
setting up of the Council, c ould be made more specific  by replacing these words 
with ‘till such time the Council is set up and commen ces its operations’.  The 
Committee therefore, desire that the Gove rnment consider  amending Clause 22 
(2) to specify in clear terms that the pa ttern of investment prescribed under the 
provisions would be applicable till such time the Council is set up. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. 
KHANDURI 
25 August, 2005                                                     Chairman, 
3 Bhadrapada,1927(Saka)                         Standing Committee on Finance 

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (2004-05) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 13th  July, 2005 from 1030 to 1200 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi   
3.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
1. Shri Bir Singh Mahato  
2. Shri Rupchand Pal 
3. Shri K.S. Rao 
4. Shri Lakshman Seth 
5. Shir G.M. Siddeshwara 
6. Shri Ajit Singh 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri R.P. Goenka 
9. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary  
2.  Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs – Insurance Division)  
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary (Economic Affairs) 

2. Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary(Financial Sector) 
3. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary (Banking and Insurance) 
4. Shri Lalit Kumar, Deputy Secretary (Insurance) 
 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs – Insurance Division) to 
the sitting of the Committee and invite d their attention to the provisions 
contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs – Insurance Division) briefed the Committee on the various 
provisions contained in the Actuaries B ill, 2005. Members asked clarificatory 
questions which were replied to by the representatives. 
4.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
 The witnesses then withdrew 
 
The Committee then adjourned  

Minutes of the Thirty-Ninth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance( 2004-05) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, 15th  July, 2005 from 1030 to 1215 hrs  
        PRESENT 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan  
8. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Dr.(Amt.) P.K. Sandhu - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Actuarial Society of India  
Shri Liyaquat Khan, President 
Life Insurance Corporation of India 
1. Shri A.K. Shukla, Chairman 
2. Shri G.N. Agarwal, Chief (Actuarial) 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
1. Shri C.S. Rao, Chairman 
2. Shri P.A. Balasubramanian, Consulting Actuary 
3. Shri K. Subrahamanyam, Executive Director (Actuary) 
 

2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from Actuarial 
Society of India, Life Insurance Corpor ation of India and Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority to the sitting of the Committee and invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the 
Speaker. 
3. Then the Committee heard the view s of the witnesses on the various 
provisions of the Actuaries Bill, 2005. Members asked clarificatory questions 
which were replied to by th e witnesses. The Chairman, then, directed them that 
the information with regard to queries of the Members which were not readily 
available might be furnished to the Committee later on. 
4.  The evidence was concluded 
5.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
                The witnesses then withdrew 
 
     The Committee then adjourned 
 

MINUTES OF THE FORTIETH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (2004-05) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 1st August, 2005 from 1500 to 1615 hours. 
         PRESENT 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
32. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
33. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
34. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
35. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
36. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
37. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
38. Shri Rupchand Pal 
39. Shri K.S. Rao 
40. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
41. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
2. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary (Banking & 
Insurance) 
3. Shri Lalit Kumar, Deputy Secretary (Insurance)  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman  welcomed the representatives 
of the Ministry of Finance (Departm ent of Economic Affairs) to the 
sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions 
contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 

3. The Committee then took oral evidence of 
representatives of the Ministry of  Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs) on the Actuaries Bill, 2005. 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the representatives of 
Ministry of Finance to furnish notes on certain points raised by the 
Members to which replies were not readily available with them during 
the discussion. 
5. The evidence was concluded. 
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
7.   XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Minutes of the Third sitting of Standing Committee on Finance (2005-06) 
The Committee sat on Monday, 22nd August, 2005 from 1500 to 1630 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri K.S. Rao 
7. Shri Lakshman Seth 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX   
 
3.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX   
 
4.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX   
 
  5.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX   
           

6. Thereafter, the Committ ee considered and adopted the draft reports on 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
First Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry 
of Finance (Departments of Economic A ffairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment) 
and (ii) the Actuaries Bill, 2005 without any modification/amendment.  
7. The Committee authorised the Chai rman to finalise the Reports and 
to make verbal and othe r consequential changes arising out of the factual 
verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Bill, No. 41 of 2005] 
 
 
THE ACTUARIES BILL, 2005 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
 
PREAMBLE 
to provide for regulating and developi ng the profession of Actuaries and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fift y-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:-- 
 
. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— 
 
(1) This Act may be called the Actuaries Act, 2005.  
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
 

(3) It shall come into force on su ch date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be  construed as reference to the 
coming in to force of that provision. 
 
. 
2. Definitions. 
 
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- 
 
(a) "Actuary" means a person skilled in determining the present 
effects of future contingent events or  in finance modelling and risk analysis 
in different areas of insurance, or calculating the value of life interests and 
insurance risks, or designing and pricing of policies, working out the 
benefits, recommending rates relating to insurance business, annuities, 
insurance and pension rates on the basi s of empirically based tables and 
includes a statistician engaged in su ch technology, taxation, employees' 
benefits and such other risk management and investments; 
(b) "Actuarial Society" means the Actuarial Society of India registered 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trusts 
Act, 1950; (21 of 1860 Bombay Act No. XXXIX of 1950.) 
(c) "appointed day" means the da te on which the Institute is 
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(d) "Authority" means the Appellate Authority referred to in section 
32; 

(e) "Board" means the Quality Re view Board constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 44; 
(f) "Council" means the Council of th e Institute as referred to in 
section 12; 
(g) "fellow" means a fellow member of the Institute; 
(h) "Institute" means the Institute of Actuaries of India constituted 
under section 3; 
(i) "member" means an individual w hose name appears in the register 
of members maintained by the Institute; 
(j)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(k) "register" means the register  of members maintained by the 
Institute under this Act; 
(l)  "specified" means specified by regulations made under this Act; 
(m) "Tribunal" means a Tribunal esta blished under sub-section (1) of 
section 16; 
(n) "year" means the period commenc ing on the 1st day of April of 
any year and ending on the 31st day of March of the succeeding year. 
 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in th is Act, a member of the Institute 
shall be deemed "to be in practice" wh en individually or in partnership with 
Actuaries in practice as a member or an employee of a company, he, whether 
or not in consideration of remuneration received or to be received,-- 
 
(i) engages himself in actuarial profession; or 
(ii) offers to perform or performs se rvices involving the application of 
actuarial techniques in the fields of in surance, pension, investment, finance 
and management; or 

(iii) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are 
or may be rendered by an actuary in practice; or 
(iv) is in employment of a person engaged in one or more of the 
activities mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above; 
 
and the words "to be in practice" w ith their grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
INSTITUTE OF ACTUARIES OF INDIA 
 
3. Incorporation of Institute 
(1) With effect from such date as  the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, all persons whose names are 
entered in the register of the Actu arial Society at the commencement of 
this Act and all persons who may thereafter have their names entered in the 
register to be maintained under this Ac t, so long as they continue to have 
their names borne on the register, ar e hereby constituted a body corporate 
by the name of the Institute of Actuarie s of India and all such persons shall 
be known as members of the Institute. 
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal 
and shall have power to  acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and shall by its name sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Institute sh all be situated at such place as 
may be decided by the Central Government. 
 
. 
4. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Actuarial Society. 
 
On the appointed day,-- 
 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Actuarial Society shall stand 
transferred to, and vested in, the Institute; 
 

Explanation.-- The assets of the Actuarial Society shall be deemed to 
include all rights and powers and all properties, whether movable or 
immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits and all other 
interests and rights in, or arising out of, such properties as may be in the 
possession of the said Society a nd all books of accounts and other 
documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include 
all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind; 
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (a), all debts, 
obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters 
and things engaged to be  done by, with or fo r the Actuarial Society 
immediately before that day, for or in connection with the purpose of the 
said Society, shall be deemed to ha ve been incurred, entered into or 
engaged to be done by, with or for, the Institute; 
(c) all sums of money due to the Actuarial Society immediately 
before that day shall be deemed to be due to the Institute; and 
(d) all suits and other legal proceed ings instituted or which could 
have been instituted by or against the Actuarial Society immediately before 
that day may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Institute. 
 
. 
5. Objects of Institute 
 
The objects of the Institute shall be to -- 
 
(a) promote, uphold and develop the standards of professional 
education, training, knowledge, practice and conduct amongst Actuaries; 
(b) promote the status of the Actuarial profession; 

(c) regulate the practice by the members of the profession of 
Actuary; 
(d) promote, in the public intere st, knowledge and research in all 
matters relevant to actuarial science and its application; and 
(e) do all such other things as ma y be incidental or conducive to the 
above objects or any of them. 
 
. 
6. Entry of names in register 
 
(1) Any of the following persons sh all be entitled to have his name 
entered in the register, namely:-- 
 
(a) any person who immediately be fore the appointed day was an 
associate or a fellow (including an honorary fellow) of the Actuarial 
Society; 
(b) any person who ha s passed the examina tion conducted by the 
Actuarial Society and has completed training either as specified by the said 
Society or as specified by the Council, except any such person who is not a 
permanent resident of India; 
(c) any person who has passed su ch examination and completed 
such training, as may be specified for membership of the Institute; 
(d) any person who has passed such other examination and 
completed such other training outsid e India as is specified as being 
equivalent to the examination and training specified under this Act for 
membership of the Institute: 
Provided that in the case of any person belonging to any of the 
classes mentioned in this sub-secti on who is not permanently residing in 

India, the Central Government or the Council may impose such further 
conditions as it may deem necessary or expedient in the public interest. 
(2) Every person mentioned in clau se (a) of sub-section (1) may 
have his name entered in the register  without the payment of any entrance 
fee. 
(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in 
clauses (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall have his name entered in the 
register on an application being made  and granted in the specified manner 
and on payment of such fees, as may be specified. 
 
(4) The Council shall take such st eps as may be necessary for the 
purpose of having the names of a ll persons belonging to the class 
mentioned in clause (d) of sub-section (1) entered in the register before the 
appointed day. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Council 
may confer on any person honorary fellow membership, if the Council is 
of the opinion that such person has made a significant contribution to the 
profession of Actuary and thereupon the Council shall enter the name of 
such person in the regist er but such person shall not have any voting rights 
in any election or meetings of the Institute and shall not also be required to 
pay any fee to the Institute. 
 
. 
7. Associates and fellows. 
 
(1) The members of the Institute shall be divided into two classes 
designated respectively as associates and fellows. 

(2) Any person other than a person to whom the provisions of sub-
section (3) apply, shall, on his name  being entered in the register, be 
deemed to have become an associate and as long as his name remains so 
entered, shall be entitled to use the letters "AIAI" after his name to indicate 
that he is an associate. 
(3) Any person who was a fellow of  the Actuarial Society and who 
is entitled to have his name entered in  the register under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 6 shall be entered in the register as a fellow. 
(4) Any person whose name is entered in the register as fellow shall, 
so long as his name remains so entered, be entitled to use the letters "FIAI" 
after his name to indicate that he is a fellow. 
 
8. Honorary, affiliate and student members. 
 
(1) The Council may choose, in such  manner as may be specified , 
any person of eminence in matters re lating to and of interest to the 
profession of Actuary as an honorary me mber of the Institute provided that 
he is not practicing as an Actuary. 
 
(2) Any person, who is a fellow member, or is a holder of 
membership considered equivalent to the fellow membership of the 
Institute, of any other inst itution similar to the Institute, whether within or 
outside India, may be admitted as an affiliate member for such period, and 
on such terms and conditions as may be specified. 
(3) Any person who enrolls himself for examination of the Institute, 
and possesses such academic qualifica tions as may be specified, may be 
admitted as a student member of the Institute on such terms and conditions 
as may be specified. 

(4) An honorary member or an affiliate member or a student member 
shall have no right to vote on any matt er or resolution in any meeting of 
the Institute. 
 
. 
9. Certificate of practice. 
 
(1) No member of the Institute shall be entitled to pr actice, unless he 
has obtained from the Council a certificate of practice. 
(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practice shall make an 
application in such form and pay such annual fee, for certificate of practice 
as may be specified and such fee shall be payable on or before the first day 
of April in each year. 
(3) The certificate of practice obta ined under sub-section (1) may be 
cancelled by the Council under such circumstances as may be specified. 
 
10. Members to be known as Actuaries. 
 
Every member of the Institute in practice shall, and any other 
member may, use the designation of an Actuary and no member using such 
designation shall use any other description whether in addition thereto or in 
substitution therefor: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to 
prohibit any such member from adding a ny other description or letters to 
his name, if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other Institute, 
whether in India or elsewh ere, as may be recognised in this behalf by the 
Council, or any other qualification that  he may possess, or to prohibit a 

firm, all the partners of which are memb ers of the Institute and in practice, 
from being known by its firm name as Actuaries. 
 
. 
11. Disqualifications. 
 
Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 6, a person shall not 
be entitled to have his name entered in, or borne on, the register if he- 
 
(a) has not attained the age of twen ty-one years at the time of his 
application for the entry of his name in the register; or 
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; 
or 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) being a discharged insolvent,  has not obtained from the court a 
certificate stating that his insolv ency was caused by misfortune and 
without any misconduct on his part; or 
(e) has been convicted by a comp etent court whether within or 
outside India, of an offence involving moral turpitude a nd punishable with 
imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical nature, committed by him 
in his professional capacity unless in respect of the offence committed he 
has either been granted a pardon or, on an application made by him in this 
behalf, the Central Govern ment has, by an order in writing, removed the 
disqualification; or 
 
(f) has been removed from the member ship of the Institute on being 
found on inquiry to have been guilty of a professional or other misconduct: 

Provided that a person who has been removed from the membership 
for a specified period shall not be en titled to have his na me entered in the 
Register until the expiry of such period. 
 
. 
12. Composition of Council of Institute. 
 
(1) There shall be a Council of the Institute for the management of 
the affairs of the Institute and for di scharging the functions assigned to it 
by or under this Act. 
 
(2) The Council shall be composed of the following persons, namely 
:-- 
 
(a) a minimum of eight and not more than twelve persons from 
amongst fellow members to be electe d by the fellow and the associate 
members of the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed; and 
(b) (i) one person from the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority constituted under the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999) no minated by the Central Government; 
and 
(ii) not more than three persons having knowledge in the field of life 
insurance, general insurance, finan ce, economics, law, accountancy or any 
other discipline which in the opinion of  the Central Government, would be 
useful to the Council, to be nomin ated in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
 

Provided that till such time as the Council is constituted under this 
Act, the Executive Committe e of the Actuarial Soci ety shall discharge all 
the functions and shall have all the powers of the Council. 
(3) No person holding an offi ce of profit under the Central 
Government or a State Government, as  the case may be, shall be eligible 
for election to the Council under clause (a) of sub-section (2). 
 
(4) One-third of the members of the Council referred to in clause (a) 
of sub-section (2) shall retire at every annual genera l meeting of the 
Institute by rotation but shall be eligible for re-election. 
 
(5) Any person nominated under clau se (b) of sub-section (2) shall 
hold office during the pleasure of the President for a period of five years 
from the date of nomination and shall be eligible for re-nomination. 
 
13. Annual General meetings. 
 
The Council shall every year hold an  annual general meeting of the 
Institute to elect its members under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 
12, or to discuss any matter which it deems fit, and not more than fifteen 
months shall elapse between the date of one annual genera l meeting of the 
Institute and that of the next: 
 
Provided that from the appointed da y the Institute may hold its first 
annual general meeting with in a period of not more than eighteen months 
and if such general meeting is held within that period, it shall not be 
necessary for the Institute to hold any general meeting in that year: 
 

Provided further that the Central Government may, for sufficient 
reasons, extend the time within which any general meeting shall be held. 
 
14. Re-election to Council. 
 
(1) A member of the Council electe d under clause (a) of sub-section 
(2) of section 12 shall be eligible for re-election but not for more than three 
consecutive terms. 
(2) A member of the Council, who is or has been elected, as 
President under sub-section (1) of section 17, shall not be eligible for re-
election as a member of the Council. 
 
 
 
15. Settlement of disputes regarding election. 
 
In case of any dispute regarding any election under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 12, the aggrie ved person may make an application 
within thirty days from the date of  the declaration of  the result of the 
election to the Council which shall fo rward the same forthwith to the 
Central Government. 
 
. 
16. Establishment of Tribunal. 
 
(1) On receipt of any application under section 15, the Central 
Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a 

Presiding Officer and two other Member s to decide such dispute and the 
decision of such Tribunal shall be final. 
 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment,-- 
 
(a) as a Presiding Officer of th e Tribunal unless he has been a 
member of the Indian Legal Service a nd has held a post in Grade I of the 
service for at least three years; 
(b) as a Member unless he has been  a member of the Council for at 
least one full term; and 
(c) as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India or any othe r post under the Central Government 
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India. 
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and 
Members of the Tribunal, their pl ace of meetings, remuneration and 
allowances shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council. 
 
17. President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary. 
 
(1) The Council shall, at its first meeting, elect three of its members 
from amongst persons referred to In clau se (a) of sub-section (2) of section 
12, to be respectively the Preside nt, Vice-President and Honorary 
Secretary thereof, and as often as  the office of the President, Vice-
President and Honorary Secretary fa lls vacant, the Council shall choose 
another member in the same manner: 

Provided that the Chairperson of  the Council of the Actuarial 
Society shall continue to hold such office as President after the 
commencement of this Act, until such time as a President is elected under 
the provisions of this sub-section. 
 
(2) The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Council. 
(3) The President, the Vice-President or the Honorary Secretary 
shall hold office for a period of two years from the date on which he is 
chosen provided that he continues to be a member of the Council. 
(4) The President and the Vice-Presi dent shall, notwithstanding the 
expiration of his terns, continue to hold office until his successor enters 
upon his office. 
(5) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
President, the Vice-President shall act as the President until a new 
President is elected in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill 
such vacancy and enters upon his office. 
          (6) When the President is  unable to discharge his functions owing to 
absence, illness or any other cause, th e Vice-President shall discharge his 
functions until the President resumes his duties. 
 
. 
18. Resignation from membership and filling up of casual vacancies. 
 
(1) Any member of the Council may at any time resign his 
membership by writing under his hand a ddressed to the President, and the 
seat of such member shall become  vacant when such resignation is 
accepted and notified by the Council. 

 
(2) A member of the Council, othe r than a member nominated under 
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of secti on 12 shall be deemed  to have vacated 
his seat if he is declared by the C ouncil to have been absent without 
sufficient reason from three consecutive meetings of the Council, or of any 
of the Committees constituted by the Council, and of which he is a 
member or if his name is, for any cause, removed from the register under 
the provisions of sections 24 and 30. 
(3) If the seat of a member becomes vacant before the expiry of his 
term of membership, the resulting cas ual vacancy may be filled up by the 
Council in such manner as may be specified: 
Provided that any person filling th e casual, vacancy shall hold the 
membership of the Council till vacancy  is filled up in accordance with 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 12. 
(4) No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the 
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the 
constitution of the Council. 
 
. 
19. Functions of Council. 
 
(1) The duty of carrying out the functions under the provisions of 
this Act shall be vested in the Council. 
(2) in particular and without pr ejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, the functions of the Council shall include-- 
 
(a) the holding of examination of  the candidates for enrolment and 
specifying fees therefor; 

(b) the specifying of qualifications for entry in the register; 
(c) the recognition of foreign qualif ications and training for the 
purposes of enrolment; 
(d) the granting of or refusal to gr ant the certificate of practice under 
this Act; 
(e) the maintenance and publication of a register of persons qualified 
to practice as Actuaries; 
(f) the levy and collection of fees from members, students, 
examinees and other persons; 
(g) the removal of names from the re gister and the restoration to the 
register of names which have been removed; 
 
(h) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of 
professional qualifications of members of the Institute; 
(i) to issue guidelines for the ob servance of the members, including 
the student members; 
(j) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the 
Central or State Governments and to  receive bequests, donations and 
transfer of movable or immovable properties from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be; 
(k) co-operating with educational or other institutions in any part of 
the world having objects wholly or partly similar to those of the Institute 
by exchange of members and genera lly in such manner as may be 
conducive to achievement of their common objects; 
(l) instituting and awarding fellowships, scholarships, prizes and 
medals; 
(m) giving gifts, grants, donati ons or benefactions to other 
institutions or bodies having objects similar to those of the Institute; 

(n) carrying out, by financial a ssistance to persons other than 
members of the Council, or in any ot her manner, research in the actuarial 
science; 
(o) the maintenance of a library and publication of books, journals 
and periodicals relating to actuarial science; 
(p) the exercise of disciplinary powers conferred by this Act; 
(q) establishing such regional counc il or councils as may be decided 
from time to time and fixing their headquarters; and 
(r) doing all such things as may be necessary, incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the Institute. 
 
. 
20. Staff, remuneration and allowances. 
 
(1) For the efficient performance of its functions, the Council may-- 
(a) appoint an Executive Director, a Treasurer and such other 
officers and employees as it deems neces sary and fix their salaries, fees, 
allowances and other conditions of service; and 
 
(b) fix the allowances of the President, the Vice-President, the 
Honorary Secretary and other members of the Council and its Committees, 
in such manner as may be specified. 
 
(2) The Executive Director of the Council shall be entitled to 
participate in the meetings of the Council but shall not be entitled to vote 
thereat. 
 
. 

21. Committees of Council. 
 
(1) The Council may constitute su ch committees from amongst its 
members, and co-opt therein persons who are not members of the Institute, 
as it deems necessary for the purpose of  carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
 
(2) Every committee constituted under this section shall elect its own 
Chairman : 
 
Provided that-- 
 
(i) where the President is a member  of such committee, he shall be 
the Chairman of such committee, and in  his absence, the Vice-President, if 
he is a member of such committee, shall be its Chairman; and 
(ii) where the President is not a member of such committee but the 
Vice-President is a member, he shall be its Chairman. 
(3) The committees shall exercise su ch functions and be subject to 
such conditions as may be specified. 
 
22. Finances of Council. 
 
(1) There shall be established a fund under the management and 
control of the Council into which sha ll be paid all m oneys (including 
donations and grants) received by the Council and out of which shall be 
met all expenses and liabilities incurred by the Council. 
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing 
to the credit of the fund in any Central or State Government security as it 

may deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of such 
investments and maximum returns thereon. 
(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund 
distinguishing capital account from revenue account. 
(4) The annual accounts of the Institute  shall be subject to audit by a 
Chartered Accountant in practice within the meaning of the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) to be appointed annually by the 
Council: 
Provided that no member of th e Council who is a Chartered 
Accountant or a person who is in part nership with such member shall be 
eligible for appointment as an auditor under this sub-section. 
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not 
later than the 30th day of Septembe r of the year next following, the 
Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India, a copy of the 
audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year and copies of 
the said accounts and report shall be forwarded to the Central Government 
and to all the members of the Institute. 
(6) The Council may borrow from a sc heduled bank, as defined in 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, (2 of 1934.) or from any public 
financial institution-- 
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account 
on the security of the fund or on the security of any other asset, for the time 
being belonging to it; or 
(b) for the purpose of meeting curre nt liabilities, pending the receipt 
of income, by way of temporary loan or overdraft. 
Explanation.--The expression "public  financial institution" means a 
financial institution specified in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956. (1 
of 1956.) 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
REGISTER OF MEMBERS 
 
23. Register. 
 
(1) The Council shall maintain in the specified manner a register of 
the members of the Institute. 
 
(2) The register shall include the following particulars about every 
member of the Institute, namely :-- 
 
(a) his full name, date of birth, domicile, residential and professional 
addresses; 
 
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the register; 
 
(c) his qualifications; 
 
(d) whether he holds a certificate of practice; and 
 
(e) any other particulars which may be specified. 
 
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may 
be specified a list of members as on the 1st day of April each year, and 
shall, if requested to do so by any such member, send him a copy of such 
list, on payment of such amount as may be specified. 

 
(4) Every memb  er of the Institute  shall, on his na me being entered 
in the register, pay such annual member ship fee as may be specified by the 
Council. 
24. Removal of name from Register. 
The Council may, by order, remove from the register the name of 
any member of the Institute--- 
 
(a) who is dead; or 
 
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or 
 
(c) who has not paid any specified fee required to be paid by him; or 
 
(d) who is found to have been subject to, at the time when his name 
was entered in the register, or w ho at any time thereafter has become 
subject to, any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 11; or 
 
(e) who for any other reason has c eased to be entitled to have his 
name borne on the register. 
25. Re-entry in register. 
The Council may, re-enter the name  of a member, whose name has 
been removed from the register for reasons mentioned in clauses (b), (c), 
(d) and (e) of section 24, by an orde r, and on paying such fees, and after 
satisfying such conditions and requirements as may be specified. 
 
. 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
MISCONDUCT 
 
 
26. Disciplinary Committee. 
 
(1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee consisting 
of the President or the Vice-President of the Council as the Presiding 
Officer and two members of the C ouncil elected by th e Council and two 
members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the 
persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, education, 
economics, business, finance, accountancy or public administration : 
 
Provided that the Council may cons titute more regional Disciplinary 
Committees as and when it deems fit. 
 
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under the 
provisions of this Act shall follow su ch procedure and submit the report to 
the Council within such time as may be prescribed. 
 
. 
 
27. Appointment of Prosecution Director. 
 
(1) The Council may, by notification, appoint a Prosecution Director 
and such other employees for maki ng inquiries in respect of any 
information or complaint received by it under the provisions of this Act. 

 
(2) In order to make inquiries unde r the provisions of this Act, the 
Prosecution Director shall follow such procedures as may be prescribed. 
 
. 
 
28. Authority, Council, Discip linary Committee and Prosecution 
Director to have power of civil court. 
 
For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the 
Authority, the Council, the Discip linary Committee and the Prosecution 
Director shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, (5 of  1908) in respect of the following 
matters, namely:-- 
 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
 
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and 
 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit. 
 
. 
 
29. Action by Council on Disciplinary Committee’s report. 
 
(1) On receipt of a report from the Disciplinary Committee, if the 
Council is satisfied that the member of the Institute is guilty of any 

professional or other misconduct, it sh all record its findings accordingly 
and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 30. 
 
(2) In case the Council is not sa tisfied with the report of the 
Disciplinary Committee and is of the opinion that it requires further 
inquiry, it may refer the report agai n to the Disciplinary Committee for 
such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of the Council. 
 
(3) If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary 
Committee, it may direct the Prosecution Director to make an appeal to the 
Authority. 
 
. 
 
30. Member to be afforded opportunity of being heard. 
 
Where the Council is of the opinion  that a member is guilty of a 
professional misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it shall afford to the 
member a reasonable opportunity of being heard before making any order 
against him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following 
actions, namely : -- 
 
(a) reprimand the member; or 
 
(b) remove the name of the member from the register permanently or 
for such period, as it thinks fit. 
 

Explanation.--For the purposes of this section "member of the 
Institute" includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the date 
of the alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be a member of the 
Institute at the time of the inquiry. 
 
. 
 
31. Professional misconduct defined. 
 
For the purpose of this Act,  the expression "professional 
misconduct" shall be deemed to include  any act or omission mentioned in 
the Schedule or as may be prescribed, but nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit or abridge in any wa y the power conferred or duty cast 
on the Council to inquire in to the conduct of any member of the Institute 
under any other circumstances. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
APPEALS 
 
32. Constitution of Authority. 
 
The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section (1) of section 
22 A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, (38 of 1949) shall be 
deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act subject 
to the modification that for clause (b) of said sub-section (1), the following 
clause has been substituted, namely:-- 
 
"(b) the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part-
time Members from amongst the persons who have been members of the 
Council of the Institute of Actuaries for at least one full term;" 
 
33. Term of Members of Authority. 
A person appointed as a Member sha ll hold office for a term of five 
years from the date on which he enters  upon his office or until he attains 
the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier. 
 
34. Allowances and conditions of services of Members of Authority. 
(1) The allowances payable to, a nd other terms and conditions of 
service of the Members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
(2) The allowances to the Member s shall be paid by the Council in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
  

          35. Procedure, etc., of Authority. 
 
The provisions of section 22D a nd section 22F of the Chartered 
Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) shall apply to the Appellate Authority 
in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the 
discharge of its functions under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 
 
36. Officers and other staff of Authority. 
 
(1) The Council shall make availabl e to the Authority such officers 
and other staff members as may be n ecessary for the efficient performance 
of the functions of the Authority. 
 
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the 
officers and other staff members made available to the Authority shall be 
such as may be specified. 
 
37. Appeal to Authority. 
 
(1) Any member of the Institut e aggrieved by any order of the 
Council imposing on him any of the pe nalties referred to in section 30, 
may within thirty days of the date on which the order is communicated to 
him, prefer an appeal to the Authority: 
 
Provided that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty da ys, if it is satisfied that the member 
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
 

(2) The Authority may, after calli ng for the records of any case, 
revise any order made by the Council under section 30 and may-- 
 
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order; 
 
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the penalty 
imposed by the order; 
 
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary Committee for such further 
inquiry as the Authority considers prop er in the circumst ances of the case; 
or 
 
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit: 
 
Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside 
unless the Council has been given an opportunity of being heard and no 
order imposing or enhancing a penalty  shall be passed unless the person 
concerned has also been given an opportunity of being heard. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER VI 
 
PENALTIES 
 
38. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc. 
 
Subject to the provisions of section 10, any person who,-- 
 
(a) not being a member of the Institute,-- 
 
(i) represents that he is a member  of the Institute in any of the 
manners mentioned in section 7; or 
 
(ii) uses the designation "Actuary"; or 
 
(iii) uses the letters "AIAI" or "FIAI" after his name; or 
 
(iv) practices the profession of an Actuary; or 
 
(b) being a member of the Institute , but not having a certificate of 
practice, represents that he is in practice, or practices as an Actuary, 
 
shall be punishable on first convic tion with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees, and on a ny subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both. 
 
. 

 
39. Penalty for using name of Institution, awarding degrees of 
actuarial science, etc. 
 
(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall-- 
 
(a) use a name or a common seal whic h is identical with the name or 
the common seal of the Institute or so nearly resembles it so as to deceive 
or as is likely to deceive the public; or 
 
(b) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any 
designation which indicates or pur ports to indicate the position or 
attainment of any qualification or competence in actuaryship similar to that 
of a member of the Institute; or 
 
(c) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession of 
Actuaries. 
 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, 
without prejudice to any other proceedings, which may be taken against 
him, be punishable with fine, which may extend on first conviction to fifty 
thousand rupees and on any subseque nt conviction with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or, with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any University or 
other institution established by law or to any body affiliated to the Institute. 
 

. 
 
40. Companies not to engage in actuarial practice. 
 
(1) No company, whether incorporat ed in India or elsewhere, shall 
practice as Actuaries. 
 
(2) Any company contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) 
shall be punishable on first convicti on with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, and on any subsequent  conviction with fine which may 
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees. 
 
. 
 
41. Unqualified person not to sign documents. 
 
(1) No person other than a fellow me mber of the Institute shall sign 
any document on behalf of an Actuar y in practice or a firm of such 
Actuaries in his or its professional capacity. 
 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, 
without prejudice to any other proceed ings which may be taken against 
him, be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may exte nd to one lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
 
. 

 
42. Offences by companies. 
 
(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of its busine ss at the time of the commission of 
the offence shall be deemed to be gu ilty of the offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his kn owledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed w ith the consent or connivance of, or 
that the commission of the offence is a ttributable to any neglect on the part 
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
 
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section -- 
 
(a) "company" means a ny body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
 

(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
 
. 
 
43. Sanction to prosecute. 
 
No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a complaint 
made by or under the order of the Council or of the Central Government. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER VII 
 
QUALITY REVIEW BOARD 
 
44. Establishment of Quality Review Board. 
 
(1) The Central Government shall,  by notification, constitute a 
Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairman and not more than four 
Members: 
 
Provided that in case the Board is constituted with two Members, 
one each shall be nominated by the Board and the Central Government, 
respectively. 
 
(2) The Chairman and Members of  the Board shall be appointed 
from amongst the persons having eminen ce and experience in the field of 
law, education, economics, business, finance, accountancy or public 
administration. 
 
(3) Two Members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council 
and other two Members shall be nominated by the Central Government. 
 
. 
 
45. Functions of Board. 
 
The Board shall perform the following functions, namely :-- 
 

(a) to fix standards for the servi ces provided by the members of the 
Institute; 
 
(b) to review the quality of services  provided by the members of the 
Institute including actuarial audit services; and 
 
(c) to guide the members of the In stitute to improve the quality of 
services and adherence to the various statutory and other regulatory 
requirements. 
 
46. Procedure of Board. 
 
The Board shall follow in its meeting and in discharging its 
functions such procedure as may be prescribed. 
 
47. Terms and conditions of Chairman and Members of Board. 
 
The terms and conditions of serv ice of the Chairman and the 
Members of the Board, their place of meetings, remuneration and 
allowances shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
48. Expenditure of Board. 
 
The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the Council. 
 
. 
 
 

 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
DISSOLUTION OF THE ACTUARIAL SOCIETY OF INDIA 
REGISTERED UNDER THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT 
 
49. Dissolution of Actuarial Society of India. 
 
On the appointed day,-- 
 
(a) the Society known as the Actuarial Society of India registered 
under the Societies Registration Act,  1860 (21 of 1860) and the Bombay 
Public Trusts Act, 1950 (XXXIX of 1950) shall stand dissolved and 
thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or 
proceedings against the dissolved societ y or against any officer thereof in 
his capacity as such officer except in so far as may be necessary, for 
enforcing the provisions of this Act; 
 
(b) the right of every member to, or in respect of, the dissolved 
society shall be extinguished, and thereafter no member of the society shall 
make, assert or take any claims or demands or proceedings in respect of 
that society except as provided in this Act. 
 
. 
 
50. Provisions respecting employees of dissolved society. 
 

(1) Every person employed in the dissolved society and continuing 
in its employment immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, 
as from such commencement, become an employee of the Institute, shall 
hold his office or service therein by  the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
retirement benefits as he would have  held the same under the dissolved 
society if this Act had not been passed,  and shall, continue to do so unless 
and until his employment in the Institute is terminated or until his 
remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by the 
institute. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in  any other law for the time being in force, the 
transfer of the services of any employee of the dissolved society, to the 
Institute shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under 
that Act or other law, and no such claims shall be entert ained by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER IX 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
51. Maintenance of more than one offices by Actuary. 
 
(1) Where an Actuary in practice or  a firm of such Actuaries has 
more than one office within or outside India, each one of such offices shall 
be in the separate charge of a fellow member of the Institute: 
 
Provided that the Council may in su itable cases exempt any Actuary 
in practice or firm of such Actuaries from the operation of this sub-section. 
 
(2) Every Actuary in practice or a firm of such Actuaries 
maintaining more than one office shall send to the Council a list of offices 
and the person in charge thereof an d shall keep the Council informed of 
any changes in relation thereto. 
 
. 
 
52. Reciprocity. 
 
(1) Where any country, notified by the Central Government in this 
behalf in the Official Gazette, prev ents persons of Indian domicile from 
becoming members of any institution si milar to the Institute or from 
practicing the profession of Actuar ies or subjects them to unfair 
discrimination in that c ountry, no subject of any such country shall be 

entitled to become a member of the Inst itute or practice the profession of 
Actuaries in India. 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council may 
specify the conditions, if any, subject  to which foreign qualifications 
relating to actuarial science shall be recognised for the purposes of entry in 
the register. 
 
. 
 
53. Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
 
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, from 
time to time, give to the Council such general or special directions as it 
thinks fit, and the Council shall, in th e discharge of its functions under this 
Act, comply with such directions. 
 
 
(2) If, in the opinion of the Cen tral Government, the Council has 
persistently made default in giving effect to the directions issued under 
sub-section (1), it may, after giving an  opportunity of being heard to the 
Council, by notification, dissolve th e Council, whereafter a new Council 
shall be constituted in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act with 
effect from such date as may be decided by the Central Government. 
 
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a notification under 
sub-section (2) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the constitution of a 
new Council in accordance with the provis ions of this Act, authorise any 

person or body of persons to take over the management of the affairs of the 
Council and to exercise such functio ns as may be mentioned in the 
notification. 
 
. 
 
54. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
 
No suit, prosecution or other lega l proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Council or  the Disciplinary Committee or the 
Tribunal or the Authority or the Boar d or the Prosecution Director or any 
officer of that Government, Council,  Committee, Tribunal, Authority or 
Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act or any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made 
thereunder. 
 
. 
 
55. Members, etc., to be public servants. 
 
The Chairperson, Presiding Officer , Chairman, Members and other 
officers and employees of the Author ity, Tribunal and Board, and the 
Prosecution Director shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.(45 of 1860) 
 
. 
 
56. Power of Central Government to make rules. 

 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular and without pr ejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such rule s may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely :-- 
 
(a) the manner of election and nomin ation in respect of members to 
the Council under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
 
(b) the terms and conditions of se rvice of the Presiding Officers and 
Members of the Tribunal, place of me eting, remuneration and allowances 
to be paid to them under sub-section (3) of section 16; 
 
(c) the procedure of inquiry and submission of report by the 
Disciplinary Committee under sub-section (2) of section 26; 
 
(d) the procedure of inquiry by the Prosecution Director under sub-
section (2) of section 27; 
 
(e) any act or omission which may be determined as professional 
misconduct under section 31; 
 
(f) the allowances, terms and conditio ns of service of the Members 
of the Authority and the manner of payment of allowances by the Council 
under section 34; 
 

(g) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings and 
discharging its functions under section 46; and 
 
(h) terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and Members of 
the Board under section 47. 
 
. 
 
57. Power to make regulations. 
 
(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government and subject to the previous  publication, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular, and without pr ejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-- 
 
(a) the examination and training for the purposes of clauses (b), (c) 
and (d) of sub-section (1) of section 6; 
 
(b) the manner of making an app lication under sub-section (3) of 
section 6; 
 
(c) the fees payable under sub-secti on (3) of section 6, sub-section 
(2) of section 9, clause (a) of sub-s ection (2) of section 19, sub-section (4) 
of section 23; 
 

(d) the manner in which the honorar y member may be chosen under 
sub-section (1) of section 8; 
 
(e) the terms and conditions on wh ich an affiliate member may be 
admitted under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
 
(f) the academic qualifications for admission of a student member 
under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
 
(g) the form in which an applica tion may be made under sub-section 
(2) of section 9; 
 
(h) the filling up of a casual vacan cy of the Council, as required 
under subsection (3) of section 18; 
 
(i) the transaction of business by th e Council for the discharge of its 
functions mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 19; 
 
(j) terms and conditions of the se rvices under sub-section (1) of 
section 20; 
 
(k) the functions and conditions of the committees under sub-section 
(3) of section 21; 
 
(l) the manner in which the register  of the members of the Institute 
and other particulars to be maintain ed under sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
section 23; 
 

(m) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Institute 
may be published under sub-section (3) of section 23; 
 
(n) the conditions and requirements and payment of fee for re-entry 
in the register under section 25; 
 
(o) salaries and allowances and c onditions of service of the officers 
and other staff member of the Author ity under sub-section (2) of section 
36; 
 
(p) the conditions subject to whic h foreign qualifications may be 
recognised under sub-section (2) of section 52; and 
 
(q) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed 
under this Act. 
 
58. Power of Central Government to issue directions for making or 
amending regulations. 
 
(1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it 
may, by order in writing, direct the C ouncil to make any regulations or to 
amend or revoke any regulations alr eady made within such period as it 
may specify in this behalf. 
 
(2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within 
the specified period, the Central Government may itself make the 
regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Council. 
 

59. Laying of rules and regulations. 
 
Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each  House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive se ssions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as  the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
 
60. Power to remove difficulties. 
 
(1) If any difficulty arises in givi ng effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Govern ment may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not incons istent with the provisions of this 
Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after 
the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
. 

 
THE SCHEDULE 
 
(See section 31) 
 
PART I 
 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute in 
practice 
 
An Actuary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he-- 
 
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as an Actuary unless 
such person is also an Actuary in pr actice and is in partnership with or 
employed by himself; or 
 
(2) pays by way of remuneration to an employee, pays or allows or 
agrees to pay or allow, directly or  indirectly, any share, commission or 
brokerage in the fees or profits of his professional business, to any person 
other than a member of the Institute or  a partner or a retired partner or the 
legal representative of a deceased partner; or 
 
(3) enters into partnership with a ny person other than an Actuary in 
practice or a person resident outside India who but for his residence abroad 
would be entitled to be admitted as  a member under clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 6 or whose qualifications are recognised by the 
Central Government or the Council for the purpose of permitting such 

partnership, provided the Actuary shares in the fees or profits of the 
business of the partnership both within and outside of India; or 
 
(4) secures either through the services of a person who is not an 
employee of such Actuary or who is not  qualified to be hi s partner or by 
means which are not open to an Actuary, any professional business; or 
 
(5) accepts an assignment as Actu ary previously held by another 
Actuary without first communicating with him in writing; or 
 
(6) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept in respect 
of any professional employment fees which are based on a percentage of 
profit or which are contingent upo n the findings or results of such 
employment, except as permitted under any regulation made under this 
Act; or 
 
(7) engages in any business or occ upation other than the profession 
of Actuaries unless permitted by the Council so to engage: 
 
Provided that nothing contained he rein shall disentitle an Actuary 
from being a director of a company; or 
 
(8) accepts a position as an Actuary previously held by some other 
Actuary in practice in such conditions as to constitute undercutting; or 
 
(9) allows a person not being a memb er of the Institute in practice, 
or a member not being his partner to si gn on his behalf or on behalf of his 
firm, any valuation report or financial statement; or 

 
(10) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional 
engagement to any person other than his client so engaging him, without 
the consent of such client, or otherwis e than as required by any law for the 
time being in force; or 
 
(11) certifies or submits in his name , or in the name of his firm, a 
valuation report or a fina ncial statement unless the examination of such 
statement and the related records has been made by him or by a partner or 
an employee in his firm or by another Actuary in practice; or 
 
(12) expresses his opinion or valuation report s or financial 
statements of any business or any ente rprise in which he, his firm, or a 
partner in his firm has a substantial interest, unless he has disclosed the 
interest also in his report; or 
 
(13) fails to disclose a material  fact known to him in a valuation 
report or a financial statement, but di sclosures of which is necessary to 
make the valuation report or the fina ncial statement not misleading where 
he is concerned with such valuation re port or the financial statement in a 
professional capacity; or 
 
(14) fails to report a material mi sstatement known to him to appear 
in a valuation report or financial stat ement with which he is concerned in a 
professional capacity; or 
 
(15) is grossly negligent in the conduct of his professional duties; or 
 

(16) fails to obtain sufficient information to warrant the formation of 
an opinion in regard to any matter c ontained in any valuation report or 
financial statement prepared by him or on his behalf; or 
 
(17) fails to invite attention to  any material departure from the 
generally accepted procedure or prof essional work applicable to the 
circumstances, in any valuation report  or financial statement prepared by 
him or on his behalf. 
 
.PART II 
Professional misconduct in  relation to the members of the Institute 
in service 
 
A member of the Institute (other th an a member in practice) shall be 
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he being an employee of 
any company, firm or person,-- 
 
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay directly or indirectly to any 
person any share in the emoluments of the employment undertaken by him; 
or 
 
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profits or gains by 
way of commission or gratification; or 
 
(3) discloses confidential informati on acquired in the course of his 
employment except as and when require d by law or except as permitted by 
his employer. 
 

 
PART III 
Professional misconduct in  relation to members of the Institute 
generally 
 
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he-- 
 
(1) includes in any statement, return  or form to be submitted to the 
Council any particulars knowing them to be false; or 
 
(2) not being a fellow member of  the Institute acts himself as a 
fellow member of the Institute; or 
 
(3) does not supply the information called for or does not comply 
with the requirements asked for by the Council or any of its Committees; 
or 
 
(4) contravenes any of the provisions  of this Act or the regulations 
made thereunder or any guidelines issued by the Council under clause (i) 
of sub-section (2) of section 19; or 
 
(5) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be specified by the 
Council. 
 
. 

 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
1. The insurance sector has already been opened to private sector with the 
enactment of the Insuran ce Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. 
In addition to the six nationalized insura nce companies, which were transacting 
insurance business, twenty-one priv ate sector companies have started 
transacting insurance business in the country. 
2. Traditional responsibilities of Actu aries in life and general insurance 
business include designing and pricing of policies, monitoring the adequacy of 
the funds to provide the promised be nefits, recommending fair rate of bonus 
where applicable, valuation of the insurance business, ensuring solvency margin 
and other insurance risks like  legal liability, loss of prof it, etc. They also define 
the risk factors, advise on the premia to be charged and re-insurance to be 
purchased, calculate reserve for outstan ding claims and carry out financial 
modeling. An Actuary works as consultant  either individually or in partnership 
with other Actuaries in multi-discip lines like insurance, information 
technology, taxation, employees benefit,  risk management, investment, etc. 
Evidently, the scope of the functions and duties of an Actuary has increased 
considerably under the changed conditions. 
3. At present, the Actuarial Society of India, which is registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 and the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 
manages the affairs of the actuarial profession in India. It is proposed to 
regulate the profession of Actuaries through an enactment on the same lines as 
the professions of Chartered Accountan ts, Cost and Works Accountants and 
Company Secretaries are regulated under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, 
the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and the Company Secretaries Act, 
1980, respectively. 

4. The Institute of Actuaries of India, to be c onstituted under the 
proposed Bill will have the responsibility  for conducting examinations for the 
profession of Actuaries, regulating the profession including professional 
misconduct, and creating necessary facilities for the growth and training of the 
members of the profession. It is also proposed to dissolve th e Actuarial Society 
of India and transfer the assets and liabilities of the said Society to the proposed 
Institute of Actuaries of India. The B ill, inter alia, makes provision for an 
Appellate Authority, a Tri bunal, a Quality Review Board,  etc., for the purposes 
of the Bill. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
P. 
CHIDAMBARAM. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th February, 2005. 

 
 
Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2 defines the various expr essions used in the Bill and in 
particular, the expression "Actuary" which the Bill intends to deal with. 
 
Clause 3 provides for the incorpora tion of the Institute of Actuaries 
of India. It also provides that the head office of the Institute shall be at such 
place as the Central Government may decide. 
 
Clause 4 provides for the transfer and vesting of assets, obligations 
and liabilities of the Actuarial Society of  India to the Institute of Actuaries 
of India. 
 
Clause 5 seeks to enumerate the basic objects of the Institute relating 
to various aspects of the actuary, the actuarial profession and actuarial 
science. 
 
Clause 6 provides as to persons w ho are entitled to have their names 
entered in the register of the Institute of Actuaries of India. 
 
Clause 7 seeks to designate the me mbers of the Institute into two 
classes i.e. as associates and fellows. 
 
Clause 8 provides for choosing of  honorary members, admission of 
affiliated members and student memb ers in such manner as may be 
specified. 
 

Clause 9 seeks to provide that no member of the Institute shall 
practice without obtaining a certifi cate of practice from the Council and 
also makes provision for cancellation of certificate of practice under 
specified circumstances. 
 
Clause 10 deals with the use of de signation of an actuary and other 
related conditions. 
 
Clause 11 seeks to provide for the disqualifications regarding entry 
of names of persons in the register of the members of the Institute of 
Actuaries of India. 
 
Clause 12 provides for the co mposition of the Council of the 
Institute of Actuaries of India wh ich shall be responsible for the 
management of its affairs and for disc harging the functions assigned to the 
Council by or under the Bill. 
 
Clause 13 seeks to provide for th e annual general me etings of the 
Institute to elect its members or to discuss any matter which it deems fit. 
 
Clause 14 makes provisions with respect to re-election of a member 
to the Council and restricts his consecutiv e terms in the Council to three. It 
further provides that the President of the Council cannot be re-elected as a 
member. 
 
Clause 15 provides for settlement of  disputes regarding election to 
the Council. 
 

Clause 16 provides for establishm ent of a Tribunal by the Central 
Government to decide disputes regarding election to the Council. 
 
Clause 17 seeks to provide for the election of President, Vice-
President and Honorary Secretary of the Council and their term of office. 
 
Clause 18 provides for the resi gnation from membership of the 
Council and filling up of the causal vacancies. 
 
Clause 19 vests in the Council the duty of carrying out the functions 
under the provisions of the Bill and seeks to enumerate its various 
functions. 
 
Clause 20 seeks to provide for appoi ntment of staff of the Council, 
fixation of their salaries and allo wances and the allowances of the 
President, the Vice-President, the Honorary Secretary and its other 
members and that of the Committees. 
 
Clause 21 seeks to provide fo r the constitution of various 
committees of the Council. 
 
Clause 22 seeks to provide for th e establishment of a fund to be 
managed by the Council, its  maintenance and aud iting of annual accounts, 
and causing to be published the aud ited accounts and the report of the 
Council at the end of each year. 
 

Clause 23 require the Council to main tain a register of the members 
of the Institute containing specific par ticulars about every member in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations. 
 
Clause 24 seeks to provide for the removal of the name of a member 
from the register of the Institute in certain cases. 
 
Clause 25 seeks to provide for the ma nner of re-entry of the name of 
a member in the register of the Institute of Actuaries of India. 
 
Clause 26 provides for constitution of Disciplinary Committee by 
the Council which may make inquiry re lating to any professional or other 
misconduct of any member of the Ins titute and submit a report in this 
regard. 
 
Clause 27 authorises the Council to  appoint a Prosecution Director 
and such other employees for maki ng inquiries in respect of any 
information or complaint received by it against any member of the 
Institute. 
 
Clause 28 provides that the Authority, the Council, the Disciplinary 
Committee and Prosecution Director shal l have the powers of a civil court 
which are necessary for the purposes of an inquiry. 
 
Clause 29 provides for action by the Council on the report of 
Disciplinary Committee and for appeal to the Appellate Authority if the 
Council disagrees with such report. 
 

Clause 30 provides for a member of  the Institute to be afforded 
opportunity of being heard before ma king any order or taking any action 
against him. 
 
Clause 31 seeks to describe  the expression "professional 
misconduct". 
 
Clause 32 provides that the Appe llate Authority constituted under 
sub-section (1) of section 22 A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, 
shall be deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Bill. 
 
Clause 33 provides for the term of office of the members of the 
Appellate Authority. 
 
Clause 34 provides that the a llowances and other terms and 
conditions of service of members of th e Appellate Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules. 
 
Clause 35 provides that the procedures etc. of the Appellate 
Authority in the discharge of its fu nctions shall be governed by section 
22D and section 22F of the Chartered Accounts Act, 1949. 
 
Clause 36 provides for making ava ilable officers and other staff to 
the Authority, and to specify by regulations their salary and allowances and 
other conditions of service. 
 
Clause 37 seeks to provide for an appeal by an aggrieved member 
against the order of the Council. It also provides for an opportunity of 

hearing to the Council before modificati on of its order, and to the person 
concerned before an order imposing or  enhancing penalty is passed against 
him. 
 
Clause 38 provides for penalty for falsely claiming to be a member 
of the Institute, or being a member of the Institute, but not having a 
certificate of practice, represents or practices as an Actuary. 
 
Clause 39 provides for the penalty for using the identical name or 
common seal of the Institute or awar d of degree or diploma, etc., of 
actuarial science in contravention of the provisions of this Bill. 
 
Clause 40 prohibits companies fr om practicing the profession of 
actuaries and provides penalty for contravention. 
 
Clause 41 prohibits any person ot her than a fellow member of the 
Institute from signing any document on be half of an Actuary in practice or 
a firm of such Actuaries and provide s for penalty for violation of these 
provisions. 
 
Clause 42 seeks to provide for liabilities of persons in respect of the 
offences committed by a company. 
 
Clause 43 prohibits prosecution of any person, except on a 
complaint made by, or under the or der of, the Council or the Central 
Government. 
 

Clause 44 provides for establishment of Quality Review Board to 
review the quality of services provided by the members of the Institute of 
Actuaries of India. 
 
Clause 45 enumerates the functions of the Quality Review Board. 
 
Clause 46 is an enabling provision under which the procedure to be 
followed by the Quality Review Board in  discharging its functions can be 
prescribed. 
 
Clause 47 provides for prescribing the terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairman and the members of the Board, their remuneration 
and allowances and the place of meetings, etc. 
 
Clause 48 provides that the expenditu re of the Board shall be borne 
by the Council. 
 
Clause 49 seeks to provide fo r the dissolution of the existing 
Actuarial Society of India. 
 
Clause 50 seeks to provide for transf er of services of the employees 
of the Actuarial Society to the Instit ute of Actuaries of India on the same 
tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights 
and privileges as to retirement benefits  as they would have held under the 
dissolved society; and that such tr ansfer shall not entitle any such 
employee to any compensation under th e Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or 
any other law and that such claim sh all not be entertained by any court, 
tribunal or other authority. 

 
Clause 51 seeks to provide for ma nning more than one offices of 
Actuary or a firm of Actuaries within or outside India by putting each 
offices in separate charge of a fellow member of the Institute and to keep 
the Council informed of any changes in the list of offices and person 
incharge thereof. 
 
Clause 52 seeks to provide for reci procity to the subjects of other 
countries in case persons of Indian  domicile are prevented from becoming 
members of similar Institution in that country, and for recognition of 
foreign qualifications relating to actuarial science. 
 
Clause 53 seeks to empower the Central Government to issue 
directions to, or dissolve the Council. It also provid es that in the event of 
such dissolution, pending the constitution of a new council, it may 
authorise any person or body of person s to exercise such functions of the 
council as it may direct by notification. 
 
Clause 54 seeks for protection of action taken in good faith by the 
Central Government, Council, Authority  and such other statutory bodies 
under the Bill. 
 
Clause 55 provides for Chairperson, Members etc. of the Authority, 
Tribunal and Board and the Prosecution Director to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
 

Clause 56 empowers the Central Gove rnment to make rules to carry 
out the provisions of the Bill. It enum erate matters with respect to which 
the Central Government shall have the powers to make rules under the Bill. 
 
Clause 57 seeks to empower the Council to make regulations for 
carrying out the provisions of this Bill with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and subject to the previous publication in the Official 
Gazette. It also enumerate matters re lating to which such powers may be 
exercised. 
 
Clause 58 seeks to empower the Cen tral Government to direct the 
Council to make regulations or to amend or revoke such regulations where 
it considers expedient so to do, within a specified period and in the event 
of failure or negligence to comply with such directions the Central 
Government may itself make, amend or revoke the regulations made by the 
Council. 
 
Clause 59 seeks to provide for laying of rules and regulations before 
each House of Parliament. 
 
Clause 60 seeks to empower the Ce ntral Government to remove the 
difficulties that may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill or in 
its implementation, within a specified period. 
 
The Schedule to the Bill seeks to define professional misconduct and 
categorises the misconduct into three parts such as professional misconduct 
in relation to (1) Members of the Ins titute in practice, (2) Members of the 
Institute in service and (3) Members of the Institute generally. 

 
. 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Central Government proposes to establish a professional body 
by converting the existing Actuarial Soci ety of India into the Institute of 
Actuaries of India under clause 3 of the Bill. The new Institute is expected 
to be self-financing and self-sup porting and does not envisage any 
budgetary support from the Central Government. 

 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 56 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill in its implementation. Clause 
57 empowers the Council of the Institute  of Actuaries of India to make 
regulations generally for the purpose of  carrying out the provisions of the 
Bill. 
 
The regulations made by the Council under this Bill shall be subject 
to the condition of previous publication and approval of the Central 
Government. These matters are of procedural character. The rules and 
regulations made under the Bill will have to be laid before each House of 
Parliament and they will be subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
. 
 

ANNEXURE 
 
EXTRACT FROM THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS ACT, 1949 
 
(38 OF 1949) 
 
* * * * * 
 
22A. Appeals. (1) Any member of  the Institute aggrieved by any 
order of the Council imposing on him a ny of the penalties referred to in 
sub-section (4) of section 21, may, within thirty da ys of the date on which 
the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the High Court; 
 
Provided that the High Court may entertain any such appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty da ys, if it is satisfied that the member 
was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
 
(2) The High Court may, on its own motion or otherwise, after 
calling for the records of any case, revise any order made by the Council 
under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 21 and may-- 
 
(a) confirm, modify or set aside, the order; 
(b) impose any penalty or set aside,  reduce, confirm, or enhance the 
penalty imposed by the order; 
(c) remit the case to the Council for such further inquiry as the High 
Court considers proper in the circumstances of the case; or 
(d) pass such other order as the High Court thinks fit: 

Provided that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside 
unless the Council has been given an opportunity of being heard and no 
order imposing or enhancing a penalty  shall be passed unless the person 
concerned has also been given an opportunity of being heard. 
 
Explanation.--In this section "H igh Court" and "member of the 
Institute" have the same meanings as in section 21. 
 
* * * * * 
 