 4 
         
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
          
  
HA SECRETARIAT 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20  August, 2004 
 
August, 2004/Sravana, 1926(Saka)
                                           
                                                      
LOK SAB
NEW DELHI 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
            
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     
 
INTRODUCTION     
 
REPORT.      
 
BUDGET PROVISION  
 
NATIONAL STATISTICAL COMMISSION      
   
MODERNISATION OF STATISTICAL SYSTEM IN INDIA  
 
CENTRAL STATISTICAL ORGANISATION – STATISTICAL  
ACTIVITIES 
 
PROJECT MONITORING DIVISION – TIME AND COST OVER-RUN   
 
MAJOR WORK  
 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES       
 
OTHER CHARGES       
 
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON   
   11 August,  2004             
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
   19 August,  2004            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
                               MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.R. Antulay 
3. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
6. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
9. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
10. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
11. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
12. Shri Rupchand Pal 
13. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
14. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
15. Shri K.S. Rao 
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
17. Shri Lakshman Seth 
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
19. Shri Ajit Singh 
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
21. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri P.D.T. Achary - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. S andhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
     4.    Shri R.K.  Kakkar  - Under Secretary 
 
(iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Fi nance having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation. 
2.   The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation were laid on the Table of the House on 14 July, 2004. Under Rule 331E 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in Lok Sabha, the Standing 
Committee on Finance are required to cons ider the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministries/Departments under their jurisdicti on and make Reports on the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
3.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation at their sitting held on 11 August, 2004 in 
connection with examination of the Demands for Grants (2004-2005).  
 4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 
19 August, 2004. 
5.   The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation for the co-operation ext ended by them in 
furnishing written replies and for placing th eir considered views and perceptions before 
the Committee. 
6.  For facility of reference, the ob servations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I ;          M A J. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                              Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

Report 
Introductory 
 
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme  Implementation came into existence 
as an independent Ministry on 15.10.1999 after the merger of the Department of 
Statistics and the Department  of Programme Implementation. The Ministry has two 
wings, one relating to Statistics and the ot her regarding Programme Implementation. 
The Statistics Wing consists of the Cent ral Statistical Organisation (CSO), the 
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and the Computer Centre. The 
Programme Implementation Wing has four Divisions, namely, (i) Twenty Point 
Programme Division, (ii) Infrastructure M onitoring Division, (iii)  Project Monitoring 
Division and (iv) Member of Parliament Local Area Development  Scheme Division. 
Detailed Demands of the Ministry have been included in Demand No. 90.  
 2.  The detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation were laid in Parliament on 12th July, 2004. 
 
 3.   In the present Report, the Committee have examined following issues:- 
 
(i) Budget Provision 
(ii)  National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
(iii) Modernisation of Stat istical System in India 
(iv) Central Statistical Organisa tion – Statistical Activities 
(v) Project Monitoring Division – Time and Cost Over-run 
(vi) Major Work 
(vii) Professional Services 
(viii) Other Charges 
  

Demand No. 90 
Budget Provision 
 
4.   The Ministry has furnished the following statement  showing Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and Ac tuals For 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 
Budget Estimates for 2004-2005 
 
(Rs. In lakhs) 
 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
 B.E. R.E. Actuals BE RE Actual BE RE Expected 
expenditure 
BE 
 
Non-Plan 14366.00 14000.00 13490.09 14917.00 13881.00 13336.29 14555.00 13869.00 13854.60 14038.00 
%age 
increase 
11.32 3.63 2.07 3.84 -0.85 -1.14 -2.43 -0.09 3.89 -3.55 
Plan 16000.00 3938.00 3005.91 12800.00 4138.00 3395.39 6878.00 4289.00 2922.34 13533.00 
%age 
increase 
0.00 12.26 4.63 -20.00 5.08 12.96 -46.27 3.65 -13.93 96.76 
MPLADS 158000.00 173000.00 180000.00 158000.00 158000.00 160000.00 158000.00 158000.00 168200.00 158000.00 
%age 
increase 
 
0.00 -5.46 -13.46 0.00 -8.67 -11.11 0.00 0.00 5.13 0.00 
TOTAL 188366.00 190938.00 196496.00 185717.00 176019.00 176731.68 179433.00 176158.00 184976.94 185571.00 
 
1. %age increase (+) decrease (-) has been calculated usin g respective figures of the current and previous year. 
 
 
5.  The Ministry in their summary and analysis of Demands for Grants (2004-05) has 
mentioned as below:- 
 
BUDGET 2004-2005 
 
The demands for grants under Demand No. 90 for the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation includes a budget proposal of  Rs. 1855.71 crore for the 
year 2004-05. The demand under Revenue is Rs. 1834.87 crore a nd under Capital Rs. 
20.84 crore. The Ministry proposes to und ertake 16 Plan Schemes with an estimated 
expenditure of Rs. 1694.49 cr ore under Plan Revenue and Rs . 20.84 crore under Plan 
Capital. 
NON-PLAN 
The Ministry’s Non-Plan budget of Rs. 140.38 crore is primarily salary oriented as 
the primary function of the St atistics Wing is conduct of surv eys and collection, analysis 
and dissemination of data, which is a staff intensive function. 
The ISI is engaged in integrat ed programme of research , training and practical 
application of statistics in di fferent disciplines through a larg e number of projects. By an 
Act of Parliament, known as the ISI Act (No.  57) of 1959, the Institute was declared as 

an Institute of National Im portance and was conferred with the right to hold 
examinations and grant degrees and diplomas in statisti cs and allied disciplines. By the 
‘Indian Statistical Institut e (Amendment) Act 1995, the Institute has also been 
empowered to conduct courses, besides st atistics, in Mathematics, Quantitative 
Economics, Computer Science a nd other subjects related to Statistics. Grants-in-aid to 
ISI are released on the basis of the recommendations of a Statutory Committee set up 
under Section 8(1) of the ISI Act. From the budget of the Ministry, an amount of Rs. 
3789 lakh , 26.99% of the Non-Plan Budget during 2004-05 is proposed to be released 
as grants-in-aid to the Institute. 
Trend of Non-Plan exp enditure indicates an increase  in expenditure from Rs. 
138.69 croe in 2003-2004 (ar RE) to Rs. 140.38 crore, which works out to an increase 
of 1.22%. 
PLAN 
The Plan budget proposal in  BE 2004-05 is Rs. 1715. 33 crore to be spent on 
MPLAD Scheme and 15 other Pl an Schemes. MPLAD Scheme has a budget provision 
of Rs. 1580.00 crore Rs. 135.33 crore has been proposed for 15 other Plan Schemes. 
The proposed expenditure under  grants-in-aid of Rs. 1655.30 crore includes Rs. 
1580 crore for MPLAD Scheme, Rs. 14.30 crore for ISI Calcutta for its Plan Schemes 
(excluding Rs. 75.00 lakh for North-East ern region which has been shown under the 
lump sum provision) and Rs. 61 crore for carrying out 5th Economic Census. 
On the basis of the instructions on Zero Based Budgeting, the Plan Schemes of 
the Xth Plan have been formulated by amal gamation/modifying/droppinig the Plan 
Schemes of the Ixth Plan. Tw o new Plan Schemes viz. Tier-I of Modernisation of 
Statistical System in India with an allocation of Rs. 6.3 crore and Fifth Economic Census 
with an allocation of Rs. 69.5 crore during 2004-05 are expected to take off during the 
current financial year. Appendix-IV provides information on the Plan provision actual 
and expected expenditure durin g 2002-03 and 2003-04 of th e Xth Plan and BE 2004-
05. Appendix-V provides a brief on the targets of the Plan Schemes and the 
achievements during 2003-04. 
Excluding MPLAD scheme, for 15 Plan Schem es the % utilization of funds is 
expected to be 96.10% of RE allocation during 2003-04. Including MPLAD scheme, the 
% utilization of Plan funds dur ing 2002-03 is expected to be 102.98% of RE allocation. 
The higher % utilization is due to an addit ional demand of Rs. 102 crore over & above 

RE allocation of Rs. 1580 cror e, projected in t he third supplementary and by way of re-
appropriation. The overall % ut ilization of RE budget for 2003-04 (Plan & Non-Plan) is 
expected to be 97.52%. 
6.  During the course of  oral evidence of the Ministry, the Committee enquired 
about the violent variation in the budget provis ion of the Ministry since 2001-02 and felt 
that excessive money has been asked for the year 2004-05 whic h is unusual in 
comparison to last years BE, RE and Actuals. The Secretary in his reply stated that-  
“at the time of making Budget Estimates in November, about the next year, you 
over anticipate the kind of th ings that you will be able to  do. You make a provision 
accordingly. But at that moment, you keep in view the revision of the current year’s 
Budget as well, so that the Revised Estima tes for the current year are now being made 
in the light of the experience of about seven to eight months of expenditure.” 
7.  The Secretary further added :- 
“If you are to look at the actual expendi ture compared to the Revised Estimates, 
the situation would not be that bad. There would be changes, but the situation would not 
be that bad. But if you would lo ok at the comparison with Budg et Estimates, the original 
estimates, then the situation is exactly as the hon. Member pointed out.” 
 
8. When asked as to whether  the Budget Estimates for the year 2004-05 i.e. Rs. 
135 crore  would be utilized properly.  
The Secretary, during the oral evidence stated that :- 
“the Ministry will make every effort to c ontinue with this allo cation and will spend 
it. We have planned it. Our best efforts will be put in that direction.” 
9.  While replying to a question as to why the IT was not shown as a separate 
head in their demands. The Secretary during oral evidence stated as under :- 
  “That is distributed over several heads, it is component of many schemes 
here.” 
10.  When pointed out that other Departments kept it in  a separate head called IT 
and in that case it would be easy to figure it out the demand of expenditure on IT. The 
Secretary in his reply stated “- 
“that we do not have it so explicitly but we are the oldest IT users. The 
computer center of our Department was amongst the first.” 
The Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as under :- 

“The total Plan expenditure on 16 Plan schemes in the first quarter from 
1st April 2004 to 30 th June, 2004 is Rs. 183.46 crore, out of which 
expenditure on MPLAD Scheme is Rs. 177.50 crore. Hence, the 
expenditure on rema ining 15 schemes for which an allocation of Rs. 
135.33 crore has been made in the budget is Rs. 5.96 crore. It may be 
mentioned that out of the budget allocation of Rs. 135.33 crore for 15 
schemes, there is a budget allocation of Rs. 75.8 crore for 2 new schemes 
viz. ‘Fifth Economic Census’ and Tie r-1 of ‘Modernisation of Statistical 
system in India’ under which expendi ture cannot be incurred from Vote-
on-Account until the Parliament passe s the budget, as the new schemes 
are considered to be new instrument s of service. Hence, from the 
remaining budget allocation of Rs. 59.53 crore, an expenditure of Rs. 5.96 
crore has been made in the first quarter i.e upto 30th June, 2004. 
 
 

11.  The Committee note that there are violent fluctuations in the Budget 
allocations of the Ministry between Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates and 
Actuals leaving aside the provision for MPLADS. During the year 2001-02, BE was 
Rs. 160 crore and the Actual expenditure was only Rs. 30 crore. In the year 2002-
03, BE was Rs. 128 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 34 crore. In the year 
2003-04 BE was Rs. 69 crore whereas the expec ted expenditure is Rs. 29 crore. 
Government has again made provision of Rs. 135 crore for the year 2004-05. 
Although the Government has stated that the provisions have been made for 
various projects which could not take off in time but no w have been kicked off, 
yet the Committee are not convinced with the reply . 
12.  The Committee strongly recommend th at utmost care must be taken to 
avoid large variations in BE, RE and Ac tuals. While making budgetary provisions, 
the provisions should be made only for those schemes/projects which have 
either been kicked off or are likely to be taken up during that particular year. They 
are of the view that such unrealistic projections at BE stage deprive other 
Ministries/Departments of available funds. 
13.  From the budgetary provisions of the Ministry, the Committee take note 
with concern that the Ministry has not been making any separate provisions for 
the IT (information technology) and show its project ions separately in its 
Demands. They, therefore, feel that since the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation is IT driven, it should lay special emphasis on IT 
spendings. They also want th at in future the Ministry should come out with a 
separate head for IT. 
 

National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
 
14.  The Government of India had set up the National Statistical Commission, 
through Resolution No. M/13011/3/99-Admn. IV dated the 19 th January, 2000 of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. Dr. C. Rangarajan was appointed 
as the part-time Chairman of the Commission. 
 15.  The Commission submitted its Report on 5th September, 2001. The Report 
contains the recommendations for revamping the statistical system of the country 
through a five fold approach as listed below: 
•  Reform the administrative structure of  the Indian Statistical System and 
upgrading its infrastructure so as to ensure its autonomy. 
•  Improvement of the present system of collection of data, in relation to data 
that are currently being generated. 
•  Exploration of alternative techniques, in  relation to the existing statistics, if the 
present system for collecting data is under strain for whatever reasons. 
•  Identification of new data series t hat may be generated in keeping pace with 
he expanding economy. 
•  Evaluation of appropriate methodologies for collection of data, in relation to 
the new data requirements. 
  
An Empowered Committee has been constituted to expedite/monitor the 
processing of the recommendation of the NSC. 
16. Asked to furnish the outcome of the recommendations with regard to 
implementation the Ministry stated:- 
 
 The Empowered Committee constituted on 2 nd January, 2003 
under the Chairmanship of Secretar y of the Ministry, has held six 
meetings and reviewed the recommendat ions relating  to various  
Ministries and Departments in different groups. The reviews were aimed at 
assessing the steps taken by differ ent Ministries and Departments in 
processing the recommendations concerning them.   The status at the end 

of June, 2004 on proce ssing of NSC recommendati ons as per the review 
is as given below.   
a) Total number of recommendations = 623  
b) Number of recomm endations implemented = 178 
c) Number of recommendations  under processing including 
preparation of technical details = 225 
d)  Number of recommendations in which decisions have to be 
deferred/need further examination  = 193 
e)  Number of recommendations which cannot be implemented at 
present = 27 
  
 All the recommendations have been reviewed by the Committee. 
The Ministries and Departments have not accepted some of the 
recommendations due to practical difficulties.   About 150 
recommendations have to be im plemented by the   State 
Governments/UT’s and the Ministri es have not found many of them 
feasible to be implement ed within the present dec entralized statistical 
system. 
In order to give effect to the re commendations of the NSC, the National 
Statistical Commission Bill 2003 introduced in the Lok Sabha on 31-7-2003. 
It aimed at setting up a Commission as an effective co-ordination 
mechanism for determining statistical priorities, standardization of concepts 
and definitions and for ensuring credibility of statistics in the existing 
decentralized statistical system.  The NSC Bill 2003 was also referred to the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 26-8-2003 which was lapsed due to 
dissolution of Lok Sabha. 
 
17.  When asked as to whether the Govern ment intends to revive the Bill, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated:- 
 “ It is being considered to constitute the National Statistical 
Commission through a Government order as recommended by the 
Rangarajan Commission.” 

18.  The Committee are perturbed with the reply of the Government wherein 
they have stated that National Stat istical Commission (NSC) will be set up 
through an administrative order instead of an Act of Parliament in pursuance of 
recommendations of Rangarajan Commission. They recall that during 13 th Lok 
Sabha, a Bill for constituting the Nationa l Statistical Commission was introduced 
in Lok Sabha on 31 st July, 2003 and referred to them also for consideration but it 
lapsed on dissolution of Lok Sabha. It is not understood to the Committee as to 
why there is sudden change in the attit ude of the Government with regard to 
National Statistical Commission. They expect that such an important measure will 
be brought forward through a legislative proposal instead of rushing through by 
an administrative order. In their opin ion this move will not only provide  
Parliament an opportunity to deliberate on the Bill threadbare but also enhance 
the status of the National Statistical Comm ission itself. The Act of Parliament will 
provide National Statistical Commission statutory status.  
19.  Hence, they want that Governm ent should come out with a Bill for 
setting up of National Statistical Commissi on and refrain from rushing such an 
important measure of far reaching impli cations by issuing an administrative 
order. 

Modernisation of Statistical System in India 
 
20.  The Sub-Project Impl ementation Plan (SIP) for taking up some of the 
important studies under tier-1 of the projec t on ‘Modernisation of St atistical System in 
India’ has been accepted by the World B ank and the participation agreement with the 
Department of Economic Affairs has been signed.  The project includes the components 
(i) study for identifying the specific requi rements of strengthening State Statistical 
Bureaus; (ii) Study for the establishment of an all India Statistical Network; (iii) Study for 
the  creation and maintenance of a Business R egister; (iv) Surveys for the improvement 
of Service Sector Statistics;  and (v) Study for assessing the survey capabilities in the 
private sector.  The activities included u nder tier-1 are those which would produce  
visible results in a short span of time and ar e part of an integrated set of activities 
designed to improve the capacit y, reliability and relevance of  the statistical system in 
India to be implemented in tier-2.  Steps have also been initiat ed to implement the 
components included in the SIP. 
 
 21. The Ministry in their written reply whil e giving the status report has stated 
that : 
 
(i)  The Study of counseling capabiliti es of PVI Schemes is yet to be 
awarded. The World Bank procedures  for procurement of services 
are being followed.   World Bank Review Mission which visited 
during June 2004 reviewed the pr ogress of impl ementation and 
suggested to take following steps: 
• Closer monitoring of progress by increasing the frequency of 
Steering Committee meetings.  The suggestion has been 
accepted. 
• Have each of the task forces adopt a realistic timetable with 
achievable milestones at fix ed dates.  The timetables have 
been prepared. 
• The immediate drafting by each task-force of its 
understanding of its terms of re ference and how it proposes 

to achieve its objectives in the allotted time.  The Task 
Forces are presently engaged in this activity. 
• Adoption of and compliance with strict deadlines for all 
projects but particularly for the project in which an 
international consultant is involved. This is being done.  
• The assignment to each of the task forces of at least one full 
time person to function as the task force’s permanent staff. 
This is also being done within the constraints of Staff 
availability. 
As regards the difficulty being faced, the Mi nistry has stated that no difficulties as 
such are faced in the proj ect implementation. The proc edures laid down by the 
Government of India and the World Bank are being followed. 
22. In reply to a query about the time by which Tier II project would be 
implemented and what would be its comple tion, the Ministry has stated that 
development of Tier II of the project is de pendent on the outcome of the studies under 
tier-I.   
 
23.  The Ministry have further added:- 
 
(i)  The Sub-Project Implementation Plan for the Tier I activities of the 
Modernisation of Statistical Syst em in India has been developed 
with the following objectives: 
• Raising of staff skills 
• Produce visible results within a short time span. 
• Initiate a set of activities des igned to improve the capacity, 
reliability and relevance of the Indian Statistical System. 
• Complete the methodological st udies and advisory services to 
support tier-2 activities. 
The World Bank examines t he proposals and if acceptable 
gives its concurrence for its implem entation.  The project would be 
implemented under “Technical Assi stance for Economic Reforms” 
programme of Department of Ec onomic Affairs (DEA) for which 

World Bank has agreement with the DEA for providing financial 
assistance.  The total cost of the project is US $ 1,612,300.   The 
World Bank also provides technical assistance through fielding 
review missions consisting of international experts. 
(ii)  The status of implementation of  project is given below: 
 Component Present Status 
1 Study for identifying the specific 
requirements of Strengthening of 
State Statistical Bureaus. 
 
Consultancy agencies have 
been short listed for seeking 
proposals. 
2 Study for the Establishment of an 
all India Statistical Network. 
Consultancy agencies have 
been short listed for seeking 
proposals. 
 
3 Study for the creation and 
maintenance of Business 
Register. 
The short listed agencies 
have been asked to submit 
the proposals. 
 
4 Surveys for Improvement of 
Service Sector Statistics. 
Consultancy agencies have 
been short listed for seeking 
proposals. 
 
5 Study for assessing the survey 
capabilities of private sector. 
The method of implementing 
this component is being 
reviewed.  
 
24.   With regard to a query as to whether the project has been put on fast track, 
the Secretary of the Ministry during the oral evidence stated:-  
“There are five components. In the fi rst tier, the procedure was that we 
would set up task forces for each of these components consisting of 
experts and bureaucrats. These task forces would shortlist consultancy 
firms for doing the studies. In all t hese five component s, there are only 
pilot studies. Now, the task forces have met and shortlisted these 
consultants. Those have gone to the empowered committee, which is 
chaired by me, and we have approved those shortlists. Now, the work is to 
be awarded. We have only approved t he shortlists. Now the request for 
proposals has to be obtained from a ll those shortlisted firms. Those RFPs 

as they are called have been sent to the World Bank for their concurrence. 
We hope to get it in a month’s time. Thereafter, the bids would be received 
and awards would be made. I expect, it would take a coup le of months 
from now and then the actual work woul d begin on the fiel d. As I said, the 
completion of these studies is expect ed to be over by the end of 2005 
which means there would be about six mo nths’ delay in the original time 
schedule but that delay has taken plac e so far. Now there would be very 
little delay because we are keeping to the new time frame.” 
 
25.  When the attention of r epresentatives of the Ministry was drawn to the fact 
that inspite of huge allocation made in 2002 -03, no amount was spent under the head. 
The representative of the Ministry stated as under:- 
“the second level to which I was coming  is that this happens because, for 
example, what Shri Venkaiah Naidu just now pointed out about 
modernization of statistical system in India is a World Bank project. The 
procedures that are required to go th rough in the World Bank project do 
take time. You always hope that those will be done on schedule and that 
the World Bank will also respond with the same alacrity. But sometimes it 
does not happen. Therefore, the Budget allocations, the original estimates 
become very high. When we find that  the progress in that regard, the 
negotiation in that regard has not fructi fied, at the Revised Estimates time, 
we do reduce those and then the expen diture appears to be in line with 
that.” 

26.  The Committee are well aware that Mode rnisation of Statistical System 
in India is a World Bank project. It is stretched in two phases namely tier-I and 
tier-II. They are given to understand that gr ound work in respect of tier-I of the 
project has been completed and the actual work will be commenced soon and the 
studies are expected to be over by the e nd of 2005. They desi re that Government 
should strictly adhere to the time schedule in right earnest so that tier-ii of the 
project which is dependent on the outcome  of the tier-I takes off in time. They 
want the Government to inform them periodically in this regard. 

 Central Statistical Organisation – Statistical Activities 
27.  The Central Statistical Organisati on (CSO) coordinates the statistical 
activities in the country and evolves st atistical standards. Its activities include 
compilation of National Acco unts, Index of Industrial Production, Consumer Price 
Indices for Urban Non-Manual Employees, Human Development Statistics including 
Gender Statistics, conduct of Annual Survey of Industries and Economic Census and 
imparting of training in Official Statistics. T he CSO also assists in  the development of 
Statistics in the States and Union Territories, and disseminates Energy, Social and 
Environment Statistics, and prepares the National Industries Classification. 
28.  The CSO coordinates statistical activities with Central Government 
Ministries/Departments, State Governments and other Statistical Agencies. The CSO 
participates in the inter- departmental meetings of the Working Groups, Technical 
Advisory Committees, Standing Committ ees constituted by the Central 
Ministries/Departments with a view to ensuring statistical standards, to avoid duplication 
of efforts and for promoting quality and timeliness of data. The CSO al so participates in 
the Committees of the State Go vernments and assists in the statistical data generation 
and dissemination activities. The CSO holds the Conferences of  Central and State 
Statistical Organisations (COCSSO). A Sta nding Committee takes follow up action on 
the recommendations of the COCSSO. 
29.   National accounts preparation as well as publication of national estimates of 
national product, government/private final c onsumption expenditure,  capital formation 
and saving along with consoli dated accounts of the nation and detailed accounts of the 
public sector transations are the important activities of the National Accounts Division of 
the CSO. Other activities are: (i) preparation of quarterly estimates of Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) at current and c onstant prices, (ii) estima tion of capital stock and 
consumption of fixed capital; (iii) estimati on of state level gross capital formation of 
supra-regional sectors of railways, communi cation, banking and insurance, and central 
government administration, and (iv) preparation of comparable estimates of state 
domestic product (SDP) at current prices for the use of Finance Commission and 
Planning Commission. 

30.  The Committee during the oral ev idence desired to know system of 
collection of data, it s credibility, reliability and depen dability and how these are being 
compiled, the Secretary in his reply stated as under:- 
“I would like to answer you by the firs t taking up the question of how we, the 
standard-setters, the people wh o lay down the norms ens ure that the Central 
Ministries such as Education, health, Environment, Telecom and some other 
Ministries, which are very im portant from the statistica l point of view, carry out 
their operations which are in keeping with these standards. 
Our experience is that in those Ministries where trained statis ticians are heading 
the statistical cells, they are directing t he operations of statistical cells and they 
are able to advise on the concepts, defin itions, methodology and supervisions so 
that then surveys and that data collection is subject to  the standard that is laid 
down by us. In those Ministries where it  is not so, we sometimes get a request 
that ‘we have done this particular survey but some other survey of your has given 
us an indirect inference as to the same parameter which is di fferent from ours 
and we do not like our results and so will yo u please reconcile’. But, by that time, 
the horses have already bolted. The metho dology of the two surveys is different. 
They do not conform to the standards that  we had laid down. The methodology 
that we had laid down is different. T hey did not consult us. To validate their 
methodology they want that the surveys are to be reconciled now. Now, to 
reconcile it, we will have to conduct anot her survey. In some cases, in the case 
of agriculture for example, where we hav e statistical experts sitting there we are 
not only able to guide them on these issu es but we are also able to persuade 
them to carry on test checks if the data ac tually collected on the ground is really 
there or not. We are able to get some test checks done. Where our people are 
not there, it is not done. I will be very candid. This is about the Central Ministries. 
I think that for improving the quality of data collection in the States, we have to be 
even more concerned. It is an even bigger  concern because a lot of statistical 
data is there. In fact, most of the st atistical data the administrative records 
generate on the ground in the States. If the block development officer has those 
figures and they go up to the Agricultur al Production Commissioner in the State 

capital, and this department or the dire ctorate of economics and statistics which 
comes under the Planning Department has no stature to get that information 
across, then what we have is a very di fficult situation. Whatever data were 
collected may not be report ed – the data reposted by the Agricultural Production 
Commissioner is the last wo rd at the level of the St ate Government. We also 
have to think about creating some systems as we have here. What we have 
here, we need to improve. 
One remedy that we are c ontemplating is to amend t he Collection of Statistics 
Act under which this Department has the legal power to obtain data from any 
citizen of the country through an order. Similar authority could be given to the 
State Government and we should also give it  to the Central Ministries so that at 
least data collection is ensured or at  least the quantum of data collection 
improves and then there has  to be an expert in statis tics as opposed to other 
disciplines who supervises or who is ab le to guide the operations at both the 
Central Government level and in the States at the State Government level. 
In fact, one of the components of the tier one of the World Bank project is exactly 
this. It is three-pronged. 
The first prong is to strengthen the State st atistical systems, which is in terms of 
infrastructural strengthening. The second one is to get the private sector involved 
in the collection of data. Sir, it is amazing that in such a large country, we tried to 
outsource some statistical functions an d we did not succeed because there are 
not enough people who can do the job as we want them to  do, that is according 
to the standards that we set. So, how to create those private sector capabilities is 
the other thing. Thirdly, we want exper tise of statistics which abounds in our 
Ministry to be shared with the Central Ministries and the States.” 
 
31.  When suggested that services of graduate and post gradu ate in different 
universities be utilized without recruiting th em and by involving pvt. organizations who 
might be voluntarily ready for collecting and preparation of data for the Ministry/ 
organization, the Secretary agreed it in principle an d submitted that this system has to 
be institutionalized.  

32. The Committee take serious note of the fact that though they have been 
impressing upon the need to have timely and qualitative collection of data in the 
past, no tangible improvement has so far been noticed. They ar e also concerned 
to find that different methodologies bei ng adopted by various Ministries for 
collection of data do not conform to the standards laid down by the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation.  The Central Statistical Organisation 
(CSO) working under the Ministry has reportedly been unable to maintain 
statistical standards due to ineffective statistical co-ordination with other Central 
Ministries/Departments, some  of which even do not h ave statistical cells and 
professional statisticians. The result ha s been that the surveys are conducted 
one after another at their ow n level resulting into collect ion of sub-standard data 
which can hardly be relied upon. As rega rds data collection in the States, the 
situation is even more pathetic. Most of  the statistical data in the States is 
generated at the level of Block Devel opment Officers and approved by the 
Agriculture Production Commissioner in th e State capital w ho is the final 
authority. The Committee are of the view that the main problem with regard to 
State statistical system relates to lack of  infrastructural faci lities which includes 
lack of qualified enumerators as well. Th ey are of the opinion that unless quality 
of data collection ,methodology of carrying out the operation and quality of 
enumerators is improved, the desired goal  of data collection can never be met. 
They are given to understand that under th e scheme ‘Modernisation of Statistical 
System in India’ being funded by World Ba nk the infrastructural facilities at the 
State level are going to be upgraded a nd the State Statistical  Bureaus will be 
strengthened. In view of th e fact that this project has already been delayed, the 
Committee desire that all earnest efforts should be made to ensure that the 
different components specified under the Project are achieved in a time bound 
manner so that the improvement could be effected in the present statistical 
system and uniform method of data collection can be achieved. They desire that 
Collection of Statistics Act which will b estow more powers on the Ministry with 
regard to collection of statistics should also be amended forthwith. 

Project Monitoring Division – Time and Cost Over-run 
33.  Project Monitoring Division (PMD) monitors all Central sectors projects of the 
Government costing Rs. 20 crores and above and review the impact of the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme. This Di vision has also be en charged with the 
responsibility of monitoring major infrastructu re projects in private/joint sector. The 
Division makes appraisal of the Projects fr om the point of view  of the state of 
preparedness, examines c auses of time and cost overrun of  the projects and identifies 
the bottlenecks in their implementation, thereby playing an important role as coordinator 
and facilitator. 
34.  When asked whether it is true that the time and cost overruns have been a 
major problem affecting the implementation of projects, the Mini stry in their written reply 
stated as under:-  
          Slippage in implementation of  projects in infr astructure sectors like roads, 
coal, railways, power etc. is due to time  and cost overruns.  On the overall 
basis, percentage cost overrun with re spect to original approved cost 
came down from 62% in March,’91 to 22.7%  in March,2004.  The overall 
cost overrun with respect to the latest  approved cost is only 6 to 7% and 
the time overrun ranges from 3 m onths to 171 months. There is a 
continuous decline in the extent of time and cost overruns.  This has been 
possible due to vigorous steps taken by the executing agencies following 
Cabinet directives for system improvement. 
(ii) : According to the analysis carried out by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation in respect of the projects on its monitor, a 
number of factors of delays have been observed.  De tails of these factors 
and the number of projects affected by them are as follows: 
Number of Railway Projects = 93 
Number of Projects Constraints 
34 Fund Constraints 
23 Land Problems  
1 Agreement 
10 Delay in Award of Contract 
4 Delay in Supply of Equipment  
10 Delay in Civil Works 
2 Law and Order Problem 

8 Slow progress 
1 Court Cases 
Others = 31 
Number of Projects Constraints 
2(1 each in Coal and Roa d
Transport) 
Fund Constraints 
8 (6 in Coal, 2 in Power) Land Problems  
2 (Coal) Environment clearance 
1 (I&B) Technology selection 
4 (1 in Civil Aviation, 2 i n
I&B, 1 in UD) 
Award of Contract 
2 (1 in Atomic Energy, 1 i n
Coal) 
Delay in Supply of Equipment  
5 (2 each in I&B and UD, 1 i n
Road Transport) 
Delay in Civil Works 
1 (Power) Geo-mining 
2 (Power) Law and Order Problem 
3 (1 each in Power, Roa d
Transport and UD) 
Slow progress 
1 (I&B) Court Cases 
 
The following additional reasons have also been cont ributing to time and 
cost overruns: (i) Lack of supporting infr astructure facilities, (ii) Delay in 
finalisation of detailed engineering, release of drawings and delay in 
availability of funds, (iii) Changes in scope, (iv) Industrial relations and law 
and order problems, (v) Delay and uncer tainty in feedstock supply, (vi) 
Pre-commissioning  troubles, (vii) Technology problems, and (viii) 
Geological surprises. 
Some causes of cost escalation in clude : (i) High cost of environmental 
safeguards and rehabilitation measures, (ii)Higher cost of land acquisition, 
(iii) Change in scope of the project, and (iv) Under-estimation of original 
cost. 
Measures taken to reduce time and cost overruns are as follows: 
1. Re-prioritisation of projects in the light of resource constraints. 
2. Formation of core management team  for every project costing Rs.50 
crore and above 
3. Formation of Empowered Committee in  each administrative Ministry / 
Department for departmental projects. 

4. Delegation of adequate financia l and administrative powers. 
5. Strengthening of moni toring at all levels. 
6. Regular review in the administrative Ministry at the level of Secretary. 
7. Strict appraisal and sanction of projects. 
8. Appointment of Nodal Project Officer co-terminus with the project 
completion period. 
9. Setting up of Standing Committees for fixation of responsibility for time 
and cost overruns. 
35.  In regard to an another query as to whether the number of Ministries who 
have constituted the Standing Committees and whether the Ministry has got any 
feed back from the Standing Committees of adm inistrative Ministries about specific 
reasons where time and cost over run and the number of cases where 
responsibilities has been fixed for the delay in implementation of the programme, the 
Ministry in their written reply stated as under:- 
As on June, 2004, 29 Standing Committ ees have been  set up in different 
Ministries and Departments to exami ne the reasons for time and cost 
overruns and to fix responsibility therefor.  
(ii) : Officers of this Ministry are r epresented as member s on the Standing 
Committees set up by the Administrative  Ministries. Officers participate in 
the proceedings to find out specific reas ons for time and cost overrun, as 
also fixation of responsibility. Out of 59 proposals posed to the Standing 
Committees for fixation of responsibility,  reports in respect of 35 projects 
have been finalised.  The reports of  the Standing Committ ees and Action 
taken by Ministries concerned form par t of the proposals for revised cost 
estimates of projects which have ti me and cost overruns.  These are 
submitted alongwith the Note for the P ublic Investment Board (PIB) and the 
Note for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.   The 
analysis of the findings of these Commi ttees for specific projects and the 
responsibilities fixed have been highlighted in the Table I below. 

Table - I 
 
PROJECTS REVIEWD BY THE STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry/Department, Name of 
the Projects 
Finding of the Standing 
Committee 
Remarks 
 
 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Aviation : 
 
Construction of Boeing 747 - 
400 Hangar (No.4) at Mumbai 
by Air India. 
 
 
Construction of New 
International Passenger 
Terminal Phase III by the  
Airport Authority of India. 
 
 
 
Coal : 
 
Dudichua Opencast Project, 
Northern Coalfields Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pootkee-Balihari underground 
project, (Bharat Coal 
Companies Ltd.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health & Family Welfare: 
 
National Institute of 
Biologicals, NOIDA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inadequate funds and delay 
in land acquisition led to 
occurrence of time and cost 
overruns in the project. 
 
Change in the scope of the 
project has been largely 
responsible for time and 
cost overruns in the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Funds constraints and delay 
in supply and 
commissioning of draglines 
and Coal Handling Plant 
Phase-I led to occurrence of 
time and cost overruns in 
the project. 
 
Time overrun experienced 
in the project is attributed to 
delay in sinking of two 
additional shafts, and delay 
in erection of head frame 
and building up of 
underground production to 
target level (0.68MTY) due 
to funds constraints. 
 
 
 
 
Delays in the project are 
attributed to system 
deficiencies, lack of 
experience, lack of 
institutional structure 
(project team), and absence 
of monitoring mechanism. 
 
 
Indian Air Lines which was 
occupying the area was 
responsible for delay in 
handing over of  land. 
 
The change in scope was 
conceived at the early stage 
by AAI, and was held 
responsible for inadequate 
project formulation. 
 
 
 
 
Committee held HEC and M/s 
Hyundai Heavy Industries Ltd. 
responsible for the occurrence 
of time and cost overruns, and 
recommended appropriate 
action against the said 
companies. 
 
Liquidated damages imposed 
on M/s TSL, M/s CEMENDIA 
and Ms HEC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee held the Ministry of 
Health responsible for system 
deficiencies. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
North Eastern Indira Gandhi 
Regional Institute of Health & 
Medical Sciences, Shillong. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fertilizers: 
 
Revamping of 
Ammonia/Urea/NPK Plants of 
Madras Fertilizers Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power : 
 
Rangit HEP, NHPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tehri Hydro Electricity 
Project. 
 
 
Occurrence of time and cost 
overruns has been largely 
on account of lapses on the 
part of the Ministry in 
respect of project 
formulation, planning and 
implementation.  Frequent 
changes in scope of the 
project have also 
contributed to the delay in 
completion of the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
Time overrun experienced 
in the project was attributed 
to the delay in supplies of 
major equipment, delay in 
piping fabrication and 
erections whereas cost 
overrun was associated 
with increase in interest 
charges during construction 
period, foreign exchange 
variations, and change in 
scope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lack of monitoring and 
supervision by NHPC led to 
many contractual problems 
which otherwise could have 
been avoided.  Moreover, 
original project report was 
not based on realisatic 
basis. 
 
 
The Committee felt that the 
time overrun in the project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee fixed 
responsibility on 3 previous 
CMDs of MFL, the present 
CMD, and the present GM 
(Corporate Planning) for 
ineptitude, and infighting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee felt that the 
management of NHPC and 
contractors have substantially 
contributed to time and cost 
overrun. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee concluded that 
time and cost overruns 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vindhyachal Additional 
Transmission System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nathpa Jhakri Transmission 
System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathalguri Transmission 
Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE of Moga-Bhiwani 
Transmission Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was mainly due to various 
agitations leading to 
stoppage of work, R&R 
package, and 
environmental aspects of 
the project.  
 
 
 
 
Since the project was 
completed within the 
stipulated completion 
schedule after the funding 
tie-up with the world Bank, 
the Committee felt that 
there was no time overrun 
in the project. 
 
The Committee felt that 
since the transmission 
system is linked to the 
commissioning of the 
generation project at 
Nathpa Jhakri, the 
transmission project has 
been deliberately delayed. 
 
 
 
Occurrence of time and cost 
overrun was attributed to 
the law and over prevailing 
in the North-eastern region, 
changes in scope arising 
out of geographical 
conditions, general price 
escalation, and increase in 
interest during construction 
(IDC). 
 
 
 
Committee was of the view 
that the project was 
approved without financial 
tie-up resulting in 2 years' 
delay.  Adverse law and 
order situation then in 
Punjab also delayed the 
project. Increase in cost 
experienced in the project are 
due to factors beyond the 
control of the project 
enterprise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kishenpur-Moga 
Transmission System, 
POWERGRID. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE of Uri Transmission 
System, POWERGRID. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nathpa Jhakri HEP, NJPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs  : 
(Now DNEA) 
 
Ranganadi Transmission 
Project, NEEPCO. 
 
 
 
 
 
was mostly on account of 
change in scope of the 
project. 
 
 
The Committee conducted 
that delay in execution was 
mainly due to the delay in 
testing by the contractor, 
and partly due to several 
contractual disputes leading 
to termination of the 
contract etc. The cost 
overrun is mainly due to 
general price escalation and 
due to increase in the 
interest during construction. 
 
 
Time overrun experienced 
in the project was mostly 
due to disturbed law and 
order conditions in the 
State, delay in land 
acquisition, and the Court 
order regarding tree felling. 
The cost overrun was 
mainly due to general price 
escalation, and very high 
erection charges quoted by 
the bidders. 
 
Time and cost overruns 
experienced in the project 
have largely been on 
account of natural 
calamities and geological 
surprises which were 
beyond control of NJPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee observed that 
nothing substantial was 
achieved during first five 
years of the project time-
cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee has recommended 
to Secretary, NEC to fix the 
responsibility on the officers of 
NEEPCO for not making 
substantial progress for the 
initial 5 years. 
Project since completed. 

 
 
18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 
 
 
 
Rokhia Gas - based Power 
Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Doyang, HEP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ranganadi, HEP. 
 
 
 
 
 
Doyang Transmission System 
NEEPCO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE of Regional Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Imphal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shipping & Ports 
 
Construction of New Port of 
Ennore near Chennai. 
 
 
There has been no cost 
overrun though there has 
been a time overrun of 9 
months. 
 
 
 
 
Committee observed that 
the responsibility for not 
updating the cost and time 
schedules (which were 
almost 2 years old) before 
obtaining the approval of 
the Government rested with 
NEEPCO and NEC.   
 
The responsibility for not 
updating the schedule and 
estimates for seeking Govt. 
approval rested with 
NEEPCO, NEC and MHA.  
 
Committee directed the 
Secretary NEC to fix 
responsibility for the slow 
progress on the part of 
NEEPCO during the period 
of 7 initial years till the 
project was transferred to 
POWERGRID. 
 
The committee held entire 
Management 
Committee/NEC 
responsible for not following 
professional project 
approach. No prior approval 
was secured for releasing 
funds beyond the 
sanctioned cost.  
Inadequate survey and soil 
investigations also led to 
time overrun in the project. 
 
Occurrence of time and cost 
overruns was attributed to 
delays in appointment of 
consultants and finalization 
 
 
The Committee felt that there 
is an urgent need for 
simplification of too many 
procedural require- ments 
often leading to delays in 
project sanction/ 
implementation. 
 
NEEPCO was held 
responsible for poor quality of 
DPR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The responsibility for the delay 
in award of major contracts 
from 6 months to 2.5 years lies 
with NEEPCO.  
 
 
M/s NEEPCO was held 
responsible for initial delays. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed responsibility  on the 
Administrative Ministry and 
Consultant. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanised Coal handling 
Plant, Pardeep Port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Road Transport & 
Highways: 
 
4-Laning and Strengthening 
of Mathura-Agra Section of 
NH-2 (Km 148.33-Km 199.66)
 
 
 
 
 
4-Laning and strengthening of 
NH-3 between km 573 and 
km 590.6 and construction of 
Bypass around Indore town in 
M.P. 
 
 
 
4- Laning and Strengthening 
of NH-1 between km 132.675 
to 212.161 in Haryana. 
 
 
 
 
 
of port layout and in award 
of major contracts.  The 
Committee concluded that 
time overrun of 10 months 
was due to elaborate ADB 
procedures for appointment 
of consultant. 
 
Project since completed. 
 
The Chairman of the 
Paradeep Port Trust was 
held responsible for failing 
to appoint a full-time Project 
Director.  The Committee 
recommended black listing 
of the consultant for not 
taking adequate steps for 
preparation of Railway 
Receival Design system 
which significantly 
contributed to time and cost 
overrun in the project. 
 
 
 
 
Committee felt that 
inexperience of domestic 
consultants and failure on 
the part of the U.P. PWD, 
sites not being free from 
encumbrances led to 
occurrence in the project.  
 
Committee concluded that 
the consultant for the 
project should be debarred 
for future projects for failure 
on his part to ensure proper 
supervision of work and 
proper survey of the site. 
 
Time and cost overruns 
experienced in the project 
are attributed to delay by 
the consultant to prepare 
detailed cost estimates, 
inadequate designs 
preparation by the 
consultant for ma
jor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consultant was held 
responsible for not taking 
adequate steps for Railway  
Receival Design System. 
Ministry of Shipping & Ports 
was held responsible for delay 
in appointment of Project 
Director. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD imposed on consultant for 
lack of supervision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on State 
PWD and Ministry for lack of 
monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
Railways and State PWD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4- Laning and Strengthening 
of NH-1 between km 212.20 
and 252.25 from Haryana - 
Punjab Border to Sirhind in 
Punjab. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE for 4-laning with 
strengthening of the existing 
2-lane pavement from Barwa 
Adda (km 398.75) to Barakar 
(km 441.44) on NH-2 in 
Jharkhand. 
 
 
 
 
Water Resources : 
 
Farakka Barrage project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE in respect of Pagaldiya 
Dam Project, Assam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steel: 
 
Kudremukh Iron & Steel 
Company (KISCO) Ltd., 
structures, and failure on 
the part of the Ministry to 
carry out periodic review of 
the progress. 
 
Reasons for time and cost 
overruns were attributed to 
inadequate survey by the 
contractor, delay in 
processing of RCE by the 
Ministry, delay in starting of 
work by Railways for 
Railway Over Bridge (ROB), 
and failure of the Punjab 
PWD to ensure sites being 
free from encumbrances. 
 
Committee observed that 
the DPR for the project 
submitted by the RITES 
was not as per the 
international standards, and 
was required to be revised 
as per ADB norms. This 
resulted in avoidable time 
overrun. 
 
 
 
Time and cost overruns 
experienced in the project  
were attributed to funds 
constraints, inadequate and 
ineffective monitoring, 
general price escalation, 
labour unrest, and 
arbitration cases at Farakka 
Barrage Project. 
 
Problems in land acquisition 
for R&R works and security 
considerations contributed 
to delay in completion of the 
project. The design was 
inadequate from the point of 
view of safety requirements. 
 
 
 
Time and cost overrun 
ex
perienced in the project 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry and Monitoring 
Committee held responsible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on RITES 
to prevent such events from 
recurring. 
 
Project since completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
inadequate funding and lack of 
monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No agency held responsible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on M/s 
DLF to whom the contract for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33. 
 
 
 
 
 
34. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. 
Karnataka. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mines 
 
National Judicial Academy, 
Bhopal. 
 
 
 
 
Bhash Bhavan, Department 
of Culture. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rolled Product Unit (erstwhile 
IAPL) of NALCO Project. 
were attributed to delay in 
finalisation of specifications 
for equipment on the part of 
KISCO, and the subsequent 
delay in supply of drawings 
to M/s DLF Industries. 
 
 
 
The project suffered due to 
open ended contract award 
to the architect.  The scope 
of project kept changing 
without any control. 
 
The project got delayed in 
obtaining clearance of 
Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation, non-availability 
of detailed design. 
 
Committee concluded that 
time and cost overruns in 
the project have resulted on 
account of factors beyond 
the reasonable control of 
NALCO.  As the project was 
complete and rolled 
products sold by NALCO 
since November 2002, time 
overrun of about 18 months 
may be condoned. 
CPP was awarded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Justice had no 
monitoring mechanism. The 
contract with the architect was 
revised with proper cap. 
 
 
 Responsibility fixed on CPWD 
along with     the consultant 
architect for delays and lack of 
monitoring. 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. Unit 
sold out.  
36.  When asked as to the reasons of Cost and Time Over-run, the Secretary 
in his oral reply stated as under:- 
“if you want me to go into specific proj ects, each one is a specific story and I 
can go into those stories as far as I know and I can get you more information 
in a day’s time. But particularly because you mentioned about the Sutlej 
project, the Nathpa-Jhakri project which is  very much in the news today, this 
project scope was changed on the way by the Government. So, the project 
started with, I think, two power houses . Ultimately, it has six units. So 
naturally the project costs had to go up. But the only thing I can tell you at a 
general level is that all these proj ect costs are approved costs by the 

Ministries concerned. So, for reasons ‘a’ to ‘e’, the government took all that 
into consideration and approved those things.” 
37.   The Secretary further stated as under:- 
“Let me first give you the list of reasons  why this project cost escalates. One 
is the change in scope. For any reason if there is a time overrun, that means 
that the project does not progress according to the milestones and then the 
cost will go up. 
The second is when you want to source equipment from foreign countries and 
there are hassles in that, then that causes time overrun and because of that 
the cost also goes up. Generally, the reasons are these. There are problem in 
procurement. Sometimes there is la w and order probl em. I mean, the 
Dulhasti, the other name you took just now, it is in Doda district. Most of the 
time there is a curfew and the work does not proceed. 
The representatives of the Ministry further stated as under:- 
…Quite often the project is approved without the DPR having been prepared. 
Now, if you do not prepare the DPR,  you are going to take two years 
preparing it. In the case of your er stwhile Ministry of Road Transport, the 
Ministry wanted the PIB to approve projects, I think, 70 sub-projects without 
preparing the DPR and PIB said, ‘no way, we will not approve it. We are 
ready to delegate this power to you, but  we will not approve without the DPR. 
So, sometimes the Government becomes very rational and sometimes not. In 
the case of railway projects, you have the well known example of Parliament 
being taken into confidence first and t he project being prepared later. The 
result is that we have 50 years worth of projects awaiting funding. So, as I 
said, there can be rational reasons and there can be non-rational reasons. 
…As per the charter of this Minist ry, we do carry policy notes to the 
Committee of Secretaries, pointing out  all these reasons and asking the 
Ministries to respond specifically to those and some circulars are issued. So, 
this policy analysis does take place in this Ministry. I would say, personally 
speaking that it should be much more t han it is done. But that is my personal 
view.”  

 
38.  On asking as to whether the Minist ry do object to any project where there 
has been inadequate funding from t he very beginning, the Secret ary in his reply stated 
as under: 
“We are not part of the decision making about that. We only monitor once the 
project is approved.” 

39.  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that many ambitious 
projects have been held up due to time and cost over-run, result ing in wastage of 
precious national wealth. This is despit e the fact that 29 Standing Committees 
have been set up in different Minist ries/Departments to look into this 
phenomenon in which the officers of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementaiton are also represented. These Committees despite looking into the 
specific reasons for time and cost over -runs also fix responsibility. Though the 
Standing Committee on Finance have repeat edly been emphasizing the need to 
minimize the delays by introducing an e ffective mechanism of monitoring in the 
past, not much improvement in the result s has been noticed so far. The same 
reasons are adduced time and again wh ile explaining the delays and cost 
escalations. This position is not acceptable to the Committee. They desire that 
the various factors which cause the delays should be identified and tackled in an 
effective manner on priority. 

Demand no. 90 
Detailed Demand No. 53 
Object Head wise 
 
Major Work 
 
(in thousands of Rs.) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2001-2002 13,60,00 3,72,00    2,98,21 
2002-2003 4,46,00 9,53,00               7,37,52 
2003-2004 13,03,00 5,81,45 1,38,25 
2004-2005 17,46,50   
 
40. In reply to a query with regard to m anifold increase in their BE during 2003-
04 in comparison to the Actual s during 2002-03, the Ministry  in their reply stated as 
under:- 
 “the higher allocation at BE stage during 2003-04 was due to provision 
for the construction of Central Trai ning Facility for creating necessary 
infrastructure for providing training to statistical personnel.  In BE 2003-
04 an amount of Rs. 7.15 crore wa s exclusively provided for the 
purpose under major works. 
 In anticipation of operationalisation of the Pl an Scheme “Modernisation 
of Statistical System in India”, in BE 2001-02, an allocation of Rs. 
10.00 crore was made under the object head “major works”.  Since the 
scheme could not be operationalised duri ng the year, at RE stage, the 
amount was reduced to Rs.20 lakh re sulting in overall reduction under 
the head at RE stage. During BE 2003-04, an allocation of Rs. 7.15 
crore was made under the budget  head in the plan scheme 
“Institutional Development and Capacity Building” for Construction of 
Central Training  Facility for the stat istical personnel of the country.  
However, since preparation and approval of the plan for construction of 
the building by Central Public Works Department (CPWD) was taking  

time, the budget under the head at RE stage was reduced to Rs.50 
lakh, resulting in overall reduction under the Head at RE stage.  
 
            During BE 2002-03, alth ough an initial alloca tion of Rs. 4.46 
crore was made under the head, ther e was no provision for acquiring 
land   for construction of Central Training Facility.  Since there was a 
distinct possibility of acquiring l and for the purpose from the Greater 
Noida Authority, Rs. 4. 28 crore additional allocation was made for the 
purpose in RE 2002-03 which raised the overal l budget   under the 
head.  The land was acquired in March,  2003 at a cost of Rs. 431.59 
lakh. 
           During the current year 2004-05, an alloca tion of Rs. 8.86 crore has 
been made for construction of Central Training Facility through Central 
Public Works Department.  This has resulted in sharp increase in BE 
allocation under the head during the current year.   
  The actuals for 2003-04 under the head are Rs. 138.25 lakh. 
 

 
41.  The Committee note that  there has been a manifold increase in the BE 
during 2003-04 in comparison to the Actuals during 2002-03. The main reason for 
higher allocation at BE stage during 2003-04 is due to provision for the 
construction of Central Training Facility for creating necessary infrastructure for 
providing training to statistical personnel.  In BE 2003-04, an allocation of Rs. 7.15 
crore was made under the budget head in the plan scheme “Institutional 
Development and Capacity Building” for Construction of Central Training  Facility 
for the statistical personnel of the country.  However, since preparation and 
approval of the plan for construction of  the building by Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD) was taking  time, the budget under the head at RE stage was 
reduced to Rs.50 lakh, resulting in overa ll reduction under the Head at RE stage.  
During BE 2002-03, although an initial allocation of Rs. 4.46 crore was made 
under the head, there was no provision fo r acquiring land   for construction of 
Central Training Facility.  Since there was a distinct possibility of acquiring land 
for the purpose from the Greater Noida Authority, Rs. 4.28 crore additional 
allocation was made for the purpose in RE 2002-03 which raised the overall 
budget   under the head.  The land was acqui red in March, 2003 at a cost of Rs. 
431.59 lakh.  During the current  year 2004-05, an allocati on of Rs. 8.86 crore has 
been made for construction of Central Training Facility through Central Public 
Works Department.  This has resulted in sharp increase in BE allocation under 
the head during the current year. 
 
42. The Committee therefore reco mmend that since the land for 
construction of Central Training Facility has now been acquired and an allocation 
of Rs. 8.86 crore has also been made the allocated budgetary provisions should 
be fully utilized for construction of the building and desired that the expenditure 
may be watched carefully and revised accordingly at RE stage so as to minimize 
the gap between RE and Actuals. 

 
Demand no. 90 
Detailed Demand No. 28 
Object Head wise 
 
Professional Services 
 
 
(in thousands of Rs.) 
BE RE Actual Year 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
2001-2002 18,01,70 7,80 3,26,20 16,37 80,51 8,94 
2002-2003 2,12,75 25,18 1,51,00 8,72 74,01 8,22 
2003-2004 7,41,75 8,72 2,98,00 7,85 29,59 4,42 
2004-2005 11,93,00 7,95     
 
43.   In reply to a query with regard to explaining the reasons for making higher 
allocation at BE (Plan) during the y ears 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 and then 
reducing the same at RE stage during 2001-02, 20 02-03 and 2003-04, the Ministry in 
their reply stated as under:- 
“In anticipation of operat ionalisation of the Plan Scheme, ‘Modernisation 
of Statistical System in India’, budget allocation of  Rs. 16.50 crore was made 
under the head in BE 2001-2002.  The National Statistical Commission 
submitted its report in Septem ber, 2001.  For incorporating the 
recommendations of the Commission, it was necessary to revise and 
reformulate the scheme.  Since the scheme could not be operationalised 
during the year, allocation under the head in the scheme was reduced to Rs. 
2.00 crore in RE 2001-02.  In antici pation of operationalisation of the scheme 
during 2003-04, an allocati on of Rs. 4.00 crore was made under the head in 
the scheme.  Since the operationalisation of the scheme was taking time, 
allocations under the head in the scheme were reduced to Rs. 0.7 crore in RE 
2003-04.  A number of studies were  envisaged to be conducted under the 
schemes, ‘Development of Social, En vironment and Price Statistics’ and 
‘Improvement of National Accounts Stat istics’.  For this budget allocation of 

Rs. 85 lakh and Rs. 35 lakh was made fo r the schemes respectively in BE 
2003-04.  However, the allocations were  reduced to Rs. 35 lakh and Rs. 10 
lakh respectively in RE 2003-04, as  few studies could be undertaken under 
the schemes. 
 The scheme has been operational ised during the current year 
2004-05.  An allocation of Rs. 5.95 crore has been made under the head in 
the scheme during 2004-05.   
The primary reason for underutilizat ion of funds in 2001-02 is non-
operationalisation of the pl an scheme “Modernisation of Statistical System in 
India”.    
   During 2002-03, certain studi es and projects under the Plan 
schemes “Institutional Development and Capacity Building in Programme 
Project Planning Implementation Moni toring and Performance Management 
of Infrastructure in Public and Priv ate Sector”,  “Development of Social 
Environment and Price Statistics” and ‘I mprovement of National Accounts 
Statistics’ as envisaged could not take place resulting in underutilization of 
funds. 
The actuals under the head during 2003-04 are as follows:- 
Rs. 29.59 Lakh (Plan) 
Rs.  4.42 Lakh (Non-Plan) 
As mentioned above, in anticipation of operati onalisation of the Plan 
Scheme “Modernisation of Statistical syst em in India” at  BE stage during 
2001-02 and 2003-04 substantial amounts were allocated under the head in 
the Plan scheme. Becaus e of non-operational isation of the scheme, the 
budget was reduced at RE st age and no expenditure c ould take place under 
the head in the scheme.  This resulted in budget estimates, which were not 
commensurate with actual requirements. 

44.  The Committee regret to observe that there had always been 
substantial under-utilisation of budge tary provisions under the head 
‘Professional Services’ meant for “Modernisation of Statistical System in India”. 
The reasons adduced in support of under-utilisation has been due to non-
operationalisation of the scheme as the sche me was taking time to take off. They 
are given to understand that during 2002- 03, certain studies and projects under 
the Plan schemes “Institutional D evelopment and Capacity Building in 
Programme Project Planning Implemen tation Monitoring and Performance 
Management of Infrastructure in Public and Private Sector”,  “Development of 
Social Environment and Price Statistics”  and ‘Improvement of National Accounts 
Statistics’ as envisaged could not take place resulting in underutilization of 
funds.  
45.  The Committee are concerned to note that huge amount has been 
allocated under this Head since 2002-03 which remained unutilized for non-
operationalisation of the scheme ‘Modernisat ion of Statistical System in India’. 
They feel that instead of making full allocation, the Government could have made 
notional provisions under this Head when the scheme was at its nascent stage in 
2002-03. The Scheme has now been operati onalised during the current year 2004-
05. They want that Government should come forward with only realistic 
budgetary allocations in future. 

                                              Demand no. 90 
Detailed Demand No. 50 
Object Head wise 
 
Other Charges 
 
(in thousands of Rs.) 
BE RE Actual Year 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
2001-2002 22,29 0,17 20,67 1,50 4,65 0,08 
2002-2003 78,00 2,19 10,84 1,03 4,69 0,09 
2003-2004 2,08,65 1,03 2,02,53 0,92 3,98 0,06 
2004-2005 20,00 0,93     
 
46.  In reply to a query with regard to manifold increase in the BE during 2002-03 
and 2003-04 and in RE stage, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:- 
  
 “During the 10 th plan under the head “other charges” in the component 
“Awards and fellowships for outstanding and meritorious research work in 
Statistics” of the plan scheme “i nstitutional development and capacity 
building” five doctoral fellowships have been awarded.  A number of travel 
grant assistance has been provided to statisticians for presenting their 
accepted research papers abroad in in ternational conferences.  Three 
senior statisticians have been awarded national award in memory of Prof. 
P.V. Sukhatme and thr ee young statisticians have been given national 
awards in honours of Prof.  C.R. R ao.  The first International award 
established in memory of Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis has been awarded to Prof. 
C.R. Rao in the 54 th session of the International St atistical Institute, held in 
Berlin on 18th August 2003. 
 
 An allocation of R.2.08 crore was made under the head in the component 
“awards and fellowships for outstanding and meritorious research work in 
statistics” of the plan scheme “Ins titutional Development and Capacity 
Building” for creation of chair which was an objective of the scheme.  This 

resulted in manifold increase in t he BE during 2003-04 in comparison to 
the actuals in 2002-03.  The amount was, however, not spent as a 
decision was ultimately taken that instituting a Chair would not be 
advantageous. 
 
 The actuals under the head for 2003-04 are as follows: 
Rs.3.98 lakh  (Plan) 
Rs.0.06 lakh  (Non-Plan) 
Taking into account the actual expenditure , it is agreed that the allocation of 
fund should have been more realistic.  During the year all efforts will be made 
to ensure timely utilization of available funds. 

 
47.  The Committee regret to observe  that there had been substantial 
under-utilisation of budgetary provisions under the object head ‘Other Charges’. 
One of the reasons adduced in support of  under-utilisation has been mentioned 
that the allocation of Rs. 2.08 crore was made under the head in the component 
“awards and fellowships for outstanding and merito rious research work in 
statistics” of the plan scheme “Institutional Developme nt and Capacity Building” 
for creation of chair which was an objective of the scheme.  This resulted in 
manifold increase in the BE during 2003-04 in comparison to the actuals in 2002-
03.  The amount was, however, not spent as a decision was ulti mately taken that 
instituting a Chair would not be advantageous. 
48.  The Committee, therefore, t ake a strong exception to such a casual 
approach and desire that in future befo re planning the Plan Schemes it should be 
properly assessed as to whether the propo sed schemes will be advantageous or 
not and the budgetary exercise should be  undertaken with due seriousness so 
that budget estimates are utilized fully without altering at RE stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I ;          M A J. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                              Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Finance  

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THE FOURTH REPORT (2004-05) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para No. Ministry/Department 
concerned 
Conclusions/Recommendations 
1. 11, 12, 13 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee note that  there are violent 
fluctuations in the Budget al locations of the Ministry 
between Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates and 
Actuals leaving aside th e provision for MPLADS. 
During the year 2001-02, BE was Rs. 160 crore and the 
Actual expenditure was only Rs. 30 crore. In the year 
2002-03, BE was Rs. 128 cr ore and the actual 
expenditure was Rs. 34 crore. In the year 2003-04 BE 
was Rs. 69 crore whereas the expected expenditure is 
Rs. 29 crore. Government has again made provision of 
Rs. 135 crore for the year 2004-05. Although the 
Government has stated that the provisions have been 
made for various projects which could not take off in 
time but now have been kicked off, yet the Committee 
are not convinced with the reply . 
The Committee strongly recommend that utmost 
care must be taken to avoid large variations in BE, RE 
and Actuals. While making budgetary provisions, the 
provisions should be made only for those 
schemes/projects which have either been kicked off or 
are likely to be taken up dur ing that particular year. 
They are of the view that such unrealistic projections at 
BE stage deprive other Ministries/Departments of 
available funds. 
From the budgetary provisions of the Ministry, 
the Committee take note with concern that the Ministry 
has not been making any sepa rate provisions for the IT 
(information technology) and show its projections 
separately in its Demands. Th ey, therefore, feel that 
since the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation is IT driven, it should lay special 
emphasis on IT spendings. They also want that in 
future the Ministry should come out with a separate 
head for IT. 
 
2. 18, 19 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee are pertur bed with the reply of 
the Government wherein they have stated that National 
Statistical Commission (NSC) will be set up through an 
administrative order instead of  an Act of Parliament in 
pursuance of recommenda tions of Rangarajan 
Commission. The
y recall that durin g 13th Lok Sabha, a 

Bill for constituting th e National Statistical 
Commission was introduced in Lok Sabha on 31 st July, 
2003 and referred to them also for consideration but it 
lapsed on dissolution of Lok Sabha. It is not understood 
to the Committee as to why there is sudden change in 
the attitude of the Governme nt with regard to National 
Statistical Commission. They  expect that such an 
important measure will be  brought forward through a 
legislative proposal instead  of rushing through by an 
administrative order. In their opinion this move will not 
only provide  Parliament an  opportunity to deliberate 
on the Bill threadbare but also enhance the status of the 
National Statistical Commission itself. The Act of 
Parliament will provide National Statistical 
Commission statutory status.  
Hence, they want that Government should come 
out with a Bill for setting up of National Statistical 
Commission and refrain fr om rushing such an 
important measure of far reaching implications by 
issuing an administrative order. 
 
3. 26 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee are well aware that 
Modernisation of Statistical System in India is a World 
Bank project. It is stretched in two phases namely tier-I 
and tier-II. They are give n to understand that ground 
work in respect of tier-I  of the project has been 
completed and the actual work will be commenced 
soon and the studies are exp ected to be over by the end 
of 2005. They desire that G overnment should strictly 
adhere to the time schedule in right earnest so that tier-
ii of the project which is dependent on the outcome of 
the tier-I takes off in time. They want the Government 
to inform them periodically in this regard. 
 
4. 32 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee take serious note of the fact that 
though they have been im pressing upon the need to 
have timely and qualitative co llection of data in the 
past, no tangible improvement has so far been noticed. 
They are also concerned to find that different 
methodologies being adopted by various Ministries for 
collection of data do not conf orm to the standards laid 
down by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. The Central Statistical Organisation 
(CSO) working under the Minist ry has reportedly been 
unable to maintain statistical standards due to 
ineffective statistical co-ordination with other Central 

Ministries/Departments, some of which even do not 
have statistical cells and pr ofessional statisticians. The 
result has been that the su rveys are conducted one after 
another at their own level resulting into collection of 
sub-standard data which can hardly be relied upon. As 
regards data collection in th e States, the situation is 
even more pathetic. Most of the statistical data in the 
States is generated at the level of Block Development 
Officers and approved by th e Agriculture Production 
Commissioner in the State capital who is the final 
authority. The Committee are of  the view that the main 
problem with regard to State statistical system relates 
to lack of infrastructural facilities which includes lack 
of qualified enumerators as well. They are of the 
opinion that unless qual ity of data collection 
,methodology of carrying out the operation and quality 
of enumerators is improved, the desired goal of data 
collection can never be met. They are given to 
understand that under the sc heme ‘Modernisation of 
Statistical System in I ndia’ being funded by World 
Bank the infrastructural facilities at the State level are 
going to be upgraded and the State Statistical Bureaus 
will be strengthened. In view of the fact that this 
project has already been delayed, the Committee desire 
that all earnest efforts should be made to ensure that the 
different components specified under the Project are 
achieved in a time bound manner so that the 
improvement could be effected in the present statistical 
system and uniform method of  data collection can be 
achieved. They desire that Collection of Statistics Act 
which will bestow more powers on the Ministry with 
regard to collection of st atistics should also be 
amended forthwith. 
 
5. 39 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note t h
many ambitious projects have been held up due to time a
cost over-run, resulting in wastage of precious natio n
wealth. This is despite the fact that 29 Stand i
Committees have been set up in differ e
Ministries/Departments to  look into this phenomenon 
which the officers of the Ministry of Statistics a
Programme Implementaiton are also represented. Th e
Committees despite looking into the specific reasons f
time and cost over-runs al so fix responsibility. Though t
Standing Committee on Finance have repeatedly b e
emphasizing the need to minimize the dela ys 

introducing an effective mechanism of monitoring in t
past, not much improvement in the results has been noti c
so far. The same reasons are adduced time and again w h
explaining the delays and cost escalations. This positio n
not acceptable to the Committee. They desire that t
various factors which cause the delays should be identif i
and tackled in an effective manner on priority. 
 
6. 41, 42 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee note that there has been a 
manifold increase in the BE during 2003-04 in 
comparison to the Actuals during 2002-03. The main 
reason for higher allocation at BE stage during 2003-04 
is due to provision for the construction of Central 
Training Facility for creatin g necessary infrastructure 
for providing training to st atistical personn el.  In BE 
2003-04, an allocation of Rs. 7.15 crore was made 
under the budget head in the plan scheme “Institutional 
Development and Capacity Building” for Construction 
of Central Training  Facility for the statistical personnel 
of the country.  However,  since preparation and 
approval of the plan for construction of the building by 
Central Public Works Department (CPWD) was taking  
time, the budget under the head at RE stage was 
reduced to Rs.50 lakh, resulting in overall reduction 
under the Head at RE stage.  During BE 2002-03, 
although an initial alloca tion of Rs. 4.46 crore was 
made under the head, there was no provision for 
acquiring land   for construction of Central Training 
Facility.  Since there was a distinct possibility of 
acquiring land for the purpose from the Greater Noida 
Authority, Rs. 4.28 crore a dditional allocation was 
made for the purpose in RE 2002-03 which raised the 
overall budget   under the head.  The land was acquired 
in March, 2003 at a cost of Rs. 431.59 lakh.  During the 
current year 2004-05, an allocation of Rs. 8.86 crore 
has been made for construction of Central Training 
Facility through Central P ublic Works Department.  
This has resulted in sharp increase in BE allocation 
under the head during the current year. 
 
The Committee therefore recommend that since 
the land for construction of Central Training Facility 
has now been acquired and an allocation of Rs. 8.86 
crore has also been made the allocated budgetary 
provisions should be fully utilized for construction of 
the building and desired that  the expenditure may be 
watched carefully and revised accordin gly at RE sta ge 

so as to minimize the gap between RE and Actuals. 
 
7. 44,45 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee regret to observe that there had 
always been substantial unde r-utilisation of budgetary 
provisions under the head ‘Professional Services’ 
meant for “Modernisation of Statistical System in 
India”. The reasons adduced in support of under-
utilisation has been due to non-operationalisation of the 
scheme as the scheme was taking time to take off. They 
are given to understand that during 2002-03, certain 
studies and projects under the Plan schemes 
“Institutional Development and Capacity Building in 
Programme Project Planning Implementation 
Monitoring and Performance Management of 
Infrastructure in Public and Private Sector”,  
“Development of Social Environment and Price 
Statistics” and ‘Improveme nt of National Accounts 
Statistics’ as envisaged could not take place resulting in 
underutilization of funds.  
The Committee are concerned to note that huge 
amount has been allocated under this Head since 2002-
03 which remained unutilized for non-
operationalisation of the scheme ‘Modernisation of 
Statistical System in India’. They feel that instead of 
making full allocation, the Government could have 
made notional provisions under this Head when the 
scheme was at its nascent stage in 2002-03. The 
Scheme has now been operationalised during the 
current year 2004-05. They want that Government 
should come forward with only realistic budgetary 
allocations in future. 
 
8. 47, 48 Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee regret to observe that there had 
been substantial under-u tilisation of budgetary 
provisions under the object head ‘Other Charges’. One 
of the reasons adduced in support of under-utilisation 
has been mentioned that the allocation of Rs. 2.08 crore 
was made under the head in the component “awards 
and fellowships for outstanding and meritorious 
research work in statistics” of the plan scheme 
“Institutional Development a nd Capacity Building” for 
creation of chair which was an objective of the scheme.  
This resulted in manifold increase in the BE during 
2003-04 in comparison to the actuals in 2002-03.  The 
amount was, however, not spent as a decision was 
ultimatel
y taken that institutin g a Chair would not be 

advantageous. 
The Committee, therefore, take a strong 
exception to such a casual approach and desire that in 
future before planning the Plan Schemes it should be 
properly assessed as to whether the proposed schemes 
will be advantageous or not and the budgetary exercise 
should be undertaken with due seriousness so that 
budget estimates are utilized fully without altering at 
RE stage. 
 

Minutes of the Second sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11 August, 2004 from 1445 to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
8. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
12. Shri K. S. Rao 
13. Shri Ajit Singh 
14. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
15. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Murli Deora 
17. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
19. Shri Amar Singh 
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
21. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 
1. Dr. Mano Ranjan, Secretary (S&PI) 
2. Dr. S. Ray, DG & CEO, NSSO 
3. Shri Gautam Basu, AS & FA, (S&PI) 
4. Dr. R.C. Panda, AS (S&PI) 
5. Prof. K.B. Sinha, Director (ISI) 
6. Dr. Vaskar Saha, ADG 
7. Dr. G. Ravindran, ADG 
8. Shri A.K. Saxena, JS(S&PI) 
9. Shri Vishnu Kumar, DDG(CC) 
10. Dr. K.V. Rao, DDG (FOD) 
11. Dr. A.K. Yogi, DDG (Trg) 
12. Shri V.K. Ar ora, DDG (ISD) 
13. Shri N.R. Dash, Director 
14. Shri A.K. Ganeriwala, Director 
15. Shri Deepak Rastogi, Director 
16. Shri V.P. Goel, Director (MPLADS) 
17. Shri J.L. Narayan, Jt. Adviser 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation to the sitting of the Committee and invited 
their attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of t he Directions by the 
Speaker. 
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of representatives of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Impl ementation on Demands for Grants (2004-05) and other 
related matters. 
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation to furnish notes on certain points raised by 
the Members to which replies were not readily available with them during the 
discussion. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
             The witnesses then withdrew 
 
     (The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 12 August, 2004 at 1100  hours) 

Minutes of the Fourth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 August, 2004 from 1500 to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri K. S. Rao 
6. Shri Lakshman Seth 
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Murli Deora 
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. XX  XX  XX  XX 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX  
6. The Committee thereafter, took up for consideration the draft report on the 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005)  of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and adopted the same without any amendment.  
7. XX  XX  XX  XX  

8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to  finalise the Reports in the light 
of modifications as also to make verbal and other consequential changes arising out of 
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 