56
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT
SYSTEMS BILL, 2006
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 ( Saka)

FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT
SYSTEMS BILL, 2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.5.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.5.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

COF No. 56
Price : Rs. 132.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
NOTES OF D ISSENT .................................................................................... 63
MINUTES OF THE S ITTINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE HELD ON 29 S EPTEMBER,
2006, 26 O CTOBER, 2006, 7 N OVEMBER, 2006, 29 D ECEMBER, 2006,
11 J ANUARY, 2007, 1 F EBRUARY, 2007 AND 14 M AY, 2007 ................. 66
APPENDIX
The Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006 .......................... 83
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2006-2007)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty Sixth Report on the Payment and Settlement Systems
Bill, 2006.
2. The Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006 introduced in
Lok Sabha on 25 July, 2006 was referred to the Committee on
28 August, 2006 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting
held on 29 September, 2006.
4. Written replies, views/memoranda were received from Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), RBI, SBI, PNB, Bank of
India, Canara Bank, Bank of Baroda, Oriental Bank of Commerce, ICICI
Bank, IDBI Bank, HDFC Bank, HSBC Bank, Standard Chartered Bank,
Citi Bank, Abhyudaya Cooperative Bank Ltd., Janata Sahakari Bank
Ltd., Pune, the Saraswat Cooperative Bank Ltd., Indian Banks
Association, Bank Employees Federation of India, All India Bank
Officers Association, All India Bank Employee’s Association, National
Confederation of Bank Employees and United Forum of Reserve Bank
Officers and Employees, the Clearing Corporaiton of India Ltd., Foreign
Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), Fixed Income Money
Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA), National Stock
Exchange of India Ltd., Shri M.G. Bhide, Director, CRISIL, Bombay
Mercantile Cooperative Bank Ltd., Shri M.R. Ramesh (Former Managing
Director, the Clearing Corporaiton of India Ltd.), and Juris Corporation.
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 26 October, 2006 took
oral evidence of the represnetatives of: (i) All India Bank Officers’
Association (ii) All India Bank Officers Confdederation (iii) All India
Bank Employees’ Association (iv) Bank Employees Federation of
India and (v) National Confederation of Bank Employees. The
Committee at their sititng held on 7 November, 2006 took oral evidence
of the representatives of Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL),

Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and Fixed Income Money Markets
and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA). On 29 December 2006, the
Committee took oral evidence of United Forum of Reserve Bank
Officers and Employees, ICICI Bank, IDBI Bank, HDFC Bank, State
Bank of India (SBI), Punjab National Bank (PNB), Bank of India and
Canara Bank. At their sitting held on 11 January, 2007, they took oral
evidence of the representatives of Reserve Bank of India. Thereafter,
the Committee at their sitting held on 1 February, 2007 took oral
evidence of the rperesentatives of the Ministry of Finance.
6. The Committee in their sitting held on 14 May, 2007 considered
and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise
the same and present it to both Houses of Parliament.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), various
organizations/associations, banks, RBI and individual experts for the
cooperation extended in placing before them their considered views
and perceptions on the Bill and for furnishing written notes and
information that the Committee had desired in connection with the
examination of the Bill.
8. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
15 May, 2007 Chairman,
25 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
A payment system can broadly be understood to be a mechanism
that facilitates transfer of value between a payer and a beneficiary by
which the payer discharges the payment obligations to the beneficiary.
Payment system enables two-way flow of payments in exchange of
goods and services in the economy.
2. Payment and settlement systems in India have had a long and
chequered history, starting from usage based modes of funds settlement
– in the form of hundis and other instruments accepted by practice,
to the role of banks which has become pronounced during the last
fifty years or more.
3. World over, Payment systems have encountered many challenges
and are constantly adapting to the rapidly changing payments
landscape. More recently, the proliferation of electronic payment
mechanisms, the increase in the number of players in the financial
arena and the payment crises in quite a few countries and regions in
the 1990s have focused attention on public policy issues related to the
organisation and operation of payment systems.
4. As seen from the Background information furnished to the
Committee, three main areas of public policy have guided payments
system development and reform: protecting the rights of users of
payment systems, enhancing efficiency and competition, and ensuring
a safe, secure and sound payments system.
5. The Central Bank of any country is usually the driving force in
the development of the national payment system. The Reserve Bank
of India (RBI), as the, Central Bank of the country has been playing
this developmental role and initiating many reforms aimed at
improving the efficiency of payment and settlement systems of the
country. Although these initiatives have technology as an integral
component, the various other requirements are also being addressed
as part of the process of reforms. The current predominant mode of
funds settlement is through the clearing process – achieved by the
functioning of 1054 clearing houses in the country, where settlement
of net pay-ins and pay-outs is worked out for clearing of cheques
which are issued under the precincts of the Negotiable Instruments

2
Act, 1881. The legal basis for the functioning of the clearing houses is
the ‘Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers’ Clearing Houses’
(BCH), derived under the Indian Contracts Act, 1872. All member banks
of a clearing house enter into a contractual relationship with the
manager of the clearing house and the conduct of clearing and
settlement operations follow the provisions of this contract which is
based on the URR.
Payment Systems – Current Status
6. There are diverse payment systems functioning in the country,
ranging from the paper based systems where the instruments are
physically exchanged and settlements worked out manually to the most
sophisticated electronic fund transfer systems which are fully secured
and settle transactions on a gross, real time basis. They cater to both
low value retail payments and large value payments relating to the
settlement of inter-bank money market, Government securities and forex
transactions.
7. The retail payment systems, comprising both paper based as
well as electronic systems, typically handle transactions which are low
in value, but very large in number, relating to individuals, firms and
corporates. The clearing houses clear and settle transactions relating to
various types of paper based instruments like cheques, drafts, payment
orders, interest / dividend warrants, etc. The clearing houses are
voluntary bodies set up by the participating banks and post offices
and they function in an autonomous manner. The Uniform Regulations
and Rules for Bankers’ Clearing Houses (URRBCH) issued by the
Reserve Bank, and adopted by the Clearing Houses relate to the criteria
for membership / sub-membership, withdrawal / removal / suspension
from membership and the procedures for conducting of clearing as
well as settlement of claims between members.
8. The various types of electronic clearing systems functioning in
the retail payments area in the country include: Electronic Clearing
System (ECS), both for Credit and Debit operations which functions
from 64 places (15 managed by the Reserve Bank and the rest by the
State Bank of India and other public sector banks; Electronic Funds
Transfer (EFT) System operated by the Reserve Bank at 15 places; and
the National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) System – a variant of
EFT – which is also operated by the Reserve Bank.
9. The large value payment systems functioning in the country
are: the Inter-Bank Cheques Clearing Systems (the Inter-bank Clearing),

3
the High Value Cheques Clearing System (the High Value Clearing),
the Government Securities Clearing System (the G-Sec Clearing), the
Foreign Exchange Clearing System (the Forex Clearing) and the Real
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System. While the G-Sec Clearing and
the Forex Clearing of the large value payment systems are managed
by the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), the RTGS System
is operated by the Reserve Bank.
10. On the existing arrangements relating to operation of clearing
Houses a note furnished by, the Ministry of Finance, inter-alia reads as
under:—
“At 59 of clearing houses, cheque processing is conducted using
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) Technology. Sorting
and listing of cheques is done at the specially instituted cheque
processing centres. Due to volume consideration, Mumbai has three
cheque processing centres and New Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai
have two cheque processing centres each. At the remaining
55 centres, there is only one cheque processing centre at each centre.
Thus, there are 64 MICR cheque processing centres of which only
5 cheque processing centres are managed by RBI. At the non-
MICR centres, sorting of cheques is done manually by individual
banks and exchanged with each other at the Clearing House. The
clearing houses are managed mostly by the State Bank of India or
its Associates. The employees at the clearing house are the staff of
the bank managing the clearing house. “
Regulation and supervision of Payment Systems:
11. The power to make regulations for clearing houses of banks
and fund transfer through electronic means – which are adopted by
the members of the clearing houses by way of contractual agreement(s)
is vested in the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank of
India under Section 58 (2) (p) and Section 58 (2) (pp) respectively of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
12. The procedure of netting (arriving at the multilateral net
settlement) is not legally recognised but has been adopted as a working
procedure by the members of the clearing houses. The corporate entity,
the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), which, at present,
operates the inter-bank Government Securities and Foreign Exchange
Clearing Systems as well as the new National Payments Corporation
of India, which will take over the operations of retail payment systems
will be outside specific regulatory purview in the existing legal
framework for payment system.

4
13. Mainly on account of these factors, it has been considered
necessary to enact the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006 which
will, inter alia, empower the Reserve Bank of India to act as the
designated authority with the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to regulate and oversee the various payment and settlement
systems in the country including those operated by non-
banks like CCIL, card companies, other payment system
providers and the proposed umbrella organisation for retail
payments;
(b) lay down the procedure for authorisation of payment
systems as well as revocation of authorisation;
(c) to lay down operational and technical standards for various
payment systems;
(d) to call for information and furnish returns and documents
from the service providers;
(e) to issue directions and guidelines to system providers;
(f) to audit and inspect the systems and premises of the system
providers;
(g) to lay down the duties of the system providers;
(h) to levy fines and impose penalties for not providing
information or documents or wrongfully disclosing
information, etc.; and
(i) to make regulations for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
14. The Bill,  inter alia, seeks to provide for the following matters,
namely:—
(a) to designate the Reserve Bank of India as the designated
authority for the regulation and supervision of payment
systems in India for their smooth operations;
(b) to give legal recognition to the netting procedure and
settlement finality; and
(c) to empower the Securities Appellate Tribunals to settle
disputes between the Reserve Bank of India and the system
providers.
15. The Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006, was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 25 July, 2006 and referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to

5
the Standing Committee on Finance on 28 August, 2006 for examination
and report thereon.
16. Furnishing a detailed account of the factors that necessitated
the move to consider enacting a specific legislation for regulation and
supervision of payment system, the Ministry of Finance, in a written
note informed as under:—
“First, there has been a phenomenal growth in the volume and
value of payment transactions. Most of these payments—made
either by cheque or electronic funds transfer are settled through a
process called “multilateral netting”—where mutual claims and
obligations between so many banks or financial institutions are
made by a single payment or receipt. So far, there is no specific
legislation on multilateral netting. Netting is in practice by contract
or adoption of procedural guidelines by the participating
institutions. As the financial markets are acquiring sophistication,
need for such explicit laws are being felt. Even internationally,
such developments are relatively new. It is only during the last
10 years that the other countries with developed financial markets
have gone for specific netting legislation or recognized netting
under their Payment system laws.
Legal recognition of netting is the pre-condition for recognizing
settlement finality under the netting schemes. Settlement finality
provision is useful during insolvency proceedings. If a participant
in payment system, as envisaged under the Bill, turns insolvent,
the net position worked out by the payment system provider would
be deemed “final” and ‘irrevocable” even if the settlement were to
take place after declaration of the time of insolvency. The liquidator
would be bound to honour the obligation of the defaulting
participant and cannot resort to cherry picking i.e. “pick and
choose” of liability and assets.
Nearly Rs. 1 lakh crore of transactions move through netting
systems each day. There is an urgent need for keeping our financial
markets free from legal uncertainty.
The Reserve Bank of India Act empowers RBI to frame regulations
on cheque clearing and/or electronic clearing. But “netting” and
“settlement finality” are fundamental issues and cannot be made
a part of sub-ordinate legislation. The regulations under Reserve
Bank of India Act cannot limit the authority of the liquidator/
legal powers available with the liquidator under other laws.

6
Second, as per a self assessment made by the Reserve Bank on
compliance to international standards on payment and settlement
systems, India is compliant to 9 out of 10 Core Principles of
Systemically Important Payment System. International best practices
conform to the “Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment
Systems” (CPSIPS) formulated by the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS). The first principle of CPSIPS is that “the system
should have a well-founded legal basis under all relevant
jurisdictions”. India is partially compliant to this principle. Not
having a statutory provision on “netting” and “settlement finality”
is the only reason for India not being fully compliant. India’s
standing in the global banking community would be enhanced if
we can build this legal infrastructure.
Third, Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) has been set
up by banks and financial institutions in India as a central counter-
party and specialized clearing organization for inter-bank
Government securities and foreign exchange transactions. RBI has
been monitoring the working of CCIL because of the moral
authority it wields and most of the participants i.e. banks are the
regulated entities of Reserve Bank. The activities of CCIL have
been growing and even the corporates are now being admitted as
members for several money market instruments. Though RBI has
been making annual assessment of the working of CCIL, it is not
considered to be “inspection“ or “oversight visit”. Formal authority
to conduct inspection and audit and impose penalty for non-
compliance to direction is necessary to ensure that the liberal regime
does not lead to deviant behaviour on the part of CCIL. For
authorisation, revocation of authorization, inspection or audit,
specific legal provision would be necessary. It can not be done by
Regulations under Section 58 (2) (p) of the Reserve Bank of India
Act.
Fourth, several payment systems have started operations without
specific authorization from Reserve Bank. Several money transfer
companies which started operation on a small scale have now
grown in size. There is no legal clarity as to whether we can
regulate them. Similarly, the card companies (VISA and Mastercard)
– incorporated outside India – operate through a complex
mechanism so as to avoid regulatory control. Once Government
defines that card transactions form a “payment system”, it would
be easier to bring the card companies under regulatory framework
of RBI. The existing method of regulating them through the banks
that issue cards to customers or acquire transactions has
limitations.”

7
Views/Memoranda submitted in respect of the Payment and
Settlement Systems Bill, 2006
17. The avowed purpose of introducing the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006, as brought out in the preceding paragraphs, is to
enable the Reserve Bank to authorize inter-alia the setting up of
payment system, revoke authorization, lay down technical and
operational standards, give directions to systems providers, collect
information/data, audit/inspect payment systems, levy penalties for
violations, and provide backing to the process of netting and settlement
finality.
18. With a view to seek clarifications on various aspects of
operation, as well as regulation and supervision of payment systems,
and the proposals of the Bill, the Committee have, apart from taking
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the
Reserve Bank of India, sought memoranda and had personal hearings
of a cross-section of experts in the related fields, as well as
representatives of the managements of banks in the public, private
and co-operative sectors, foreign banks, and the bank officers and
employees unions.
19. Through the memoranda submitted and in the course of
personal hearings, the individual experts as well as the representatives
of the managements of various banks, have, in general, welcomed the
proposals of the Bill, which would empower the Reserve Bank to have
regulatory oversight over payment systems. However, the
representatives of Bank officers and employees unions, particularly the
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers and Employees have been
vehement in expressing opposition to proposal for enacting the Payment
and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006. The opposition expressed by the
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers and Employees Union to the
Bill has been mainly on account of the proposal to set up the National
Payments Corporation of India, which, though not a part of the
provisions, would, as indicated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill, take ‘over the operations of retail payment system’ and
function under the regulatory purview of the Reserve Bank of India.
20. The contentions as made in the memoranda submitted and in
the course of personal hearings of the United Forum of Reserve Bank
officers and employees association inter-alia centered on:
(i) The existing legal provisions, particularly Section 58 (p) and
58 (pp) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, being
adequate in empowering the Reserve Bank of India to
regulate and oversee payment system operations;

8
(ii) There being no discernible uniformity at the international
level on the role of the Central Banks vis-a-vis payment
system operations and over sight.
(iii) The intended purpose of seeking to enact the Bill is mainly
to legalise the formation of the National Payments
Corporation (NPCI), which would operate the retail payment
system in the Country.
(iv) Likely loss of income generation of Reserve Bank and Public
Sector Banks on account of transferring clearing house
operations to the umbrella orgnisation for retail payment
systems (NPCI).
(v) Likely adverse effect on secrecy and confidentiality, which
are of importance to payment system operations, on account
of setting up the National Payment System Corporation viz.,
NPCI.
21.  By citing the recommendations of the Advisory Group of
Payment and Settlement System set up by the Reserve Bank in 2000
which had inter-alia recommended amending Section 17 (b) (Business
of the Reserve Bank) and Section 58 (regulation making power of the
Central Board) of the RBI Act, 1934, the United Forum of Reserve
Bank Officers and Employees contended before the Committee that
the issue of suitably empowering RBI to regulate and supervise the
payment systems could be addressed by carrying out appropriate
amendments in the RBI Act and other associated Acts. Asked as to
why the alternative of carrying out amendments in the RBI Act, 1934
as suggested by the Advisory Group was not considered in lieu of the
separate enactment proposed for payment system regulation, the
Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, submitted as under:
“Section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 prescribes the
business which the Reserve Bank may transact and Section
58 empowers the Central Board of the Reserve Bank to make
regulations, with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or
convenient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the
RBI Act, 1934. Since Section 17 does not confer any regulatory/
supervisory powers on the Reserve Bank, any amendments in
Section 17 and the Regulations made under Section 58 would not
empower the Reserve Bank to regulate and supervise the payment
systems. Further, many countries have separate legislations for the
regulation and supervision of payment systems. Amendment to
Section 17 or Section 58 will not be appropriate for a comprehensive

9
law on payment and settlement system. It is in this context that
a separate enactment covering all aspects of the regulation and
supervision of the payments systems have been conceived. Even if
regulations are framed under Section 58 of the RBI Act, it might
not be appropriate for defining concepts such as “netting” and
“finality of settlements”
22. The Ministry of Finance further added as under in this regard
in a subsequent reply:—
“Further to our earlier reply it is stated that it would not be
appropriate to put comprehensive provisions for empowering RBI
as the regulator and supervisor of the payment and settlement
systems as well as providing legal recognition for “netting” and
“settlement finality” in the RBI Act 1934 by amending the
provisions of that Act.
The enactment of a separate law on payment and settlement
systems will show the importance that our country accords to the
safe, secure and efficient functioning of the payment and settlement
systems. The proper functioning of the payment and settlement
systems is very important for ensuring financial and monetary
stability. Moreover, in many countries there is a separate legislation
dealing with these functions e.g. Australia, Canada, South Africa,
Brazil etc. In Sweden there is a separate law dealing with
“settlement finality”.
23. As for the contention, which relates to the absence of a
discernible trend at the international level on the role expected of the
Central Banks vis-a-vis retail payment systems, a representative of the
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers and Employees’ Association
averred as under while tendering evidence:—
“At first, the Reserve Bank told us, the unions that internationally
the Central Bank of the country is not associated with clearing
operations. Later on, when we studied, we found that in many
countries, including in the USA, the Central Bank is actively
involved in extending service. Then, they have modified the
statement saying that out of the Payment and Settlement Systems
of 14 countries that they have surveyed out of 161 Central Banks,
they have found that in majority of the countries, the Central
Banks are not actually providing service.”
“We have also drawn your attention to the international guidelines
of Bank for International Settlement. They have given certain broad

10
guidelines to countries about the payment and settlement system.
They are saying clearly to keep the Central Bank at the centre of
the payment and settlement system. What they are saying is this;
‘The specific tasks directly carried out by the Central Bank in the
payment system area vary from country to country.’ So, there is
no universal framework or universal procedure.”
24. The Reserve Bank of India had, in the year, 2002, constituted
a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.H. Patil, Chairman,
Clearing Corporation of India to go into the entire gamut of the
Payment Systems, and to examine various aspects relating to the legal
basis for the systems as well as for regulation and oversight. The
terms of reference of the Committee set up by the Reserve Bank were
as follows:—
(i) To examine the adequacy of legal basis for payment systems
(ii) To suggest appropriate legislative changes for regulation of
payment systems
(iii) To suggest an administrative set-up within the Bank for
administering regulation and supervision of payment
systems.
(iv) Any other related matter.
25. The Committee on Payment Systems (2002) headed by Dr. R.H.
Patil had, inter-alia , considered and deliberated upon a model/
illustrative Payment and Settlement Systems Bill prepared by the Task
Force on Legal issues of the National Payment Council (NPC)
constituted by the Reserve Bank in 1999 to proffer advice on matters
relating to payment systems. The R.H. Patil Committee also carried
out a survey of the international position with regard to law on
regulation and supervision of payment systems, finality of settlement
of netting, in regard to which, it, inter-alia observed as follows:—
“Recognising the important role of payment and settlement systems
in any economy and among other aspects, the impact in the form
of systemic risks which these systems carry, most of the central
banks the world over have a regulatory oversight over such
systems. While some of the countries have explicit laws to provide
the overall composite legal basis for such functions, other economies
have laws for specific activities (such as clearing).”
26.  The representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve
Bank have, in their deposition as well as written submissions made to

11
the Committee emphasized on the fact that the proposals of the
Payment and Settlement System Bill, 2006, were in consonance with
the international practice for enabling the Central Banks to have
regulatory oversight over payment systems. Illustrative examples of
the position prevailing in the countries such as Canada, U.K., Australia,
countries of Euro Area, Italy, Malaysia, Singapore and South Africa,
were also cited by the Ministry in this regard.
National Payments Corporation of India
27. With reference to the umbrella organization proposed for retail
payment systems viz. the National Payments Corporation of India perse,
the concerns expressed by the Reserve Bank Officers and Employees’
Unions, as brought out in brief in the preceding paragraphs include:
(i) Pursuing the proposal to set up the corporation without proper
publicity and consultation; (ii) loss of income/revenue generation of
RBI/public sector banks on account of transferring retail payment/
clearing house operations to the new corporation; (iii) likely adverse
implications on secrecy and confidentiality; and (iv) the intention behind
introducing the Bill being legalizing the setting up of the Corporation.
(i) Framework of the new institutional structure for Retail Payment
System (NPCI)
28. The broad framework of the new national entity for retail
payment systems, as depicted in the Vision Document (2005-08) on
‘Payment Systems in India’ brought out by the Reserve Bank inter-alia
reveals as follows:—
• It would be a limited liability company , owned and operated
by banks. Indian Banks Association, in consultation with a
few leading banks, will evolve consensus on the ownership
pattern. Since a few banks have already been running MICR
Cheque Processing Centres (MICR CPCs) with substantial
investment, they may be consulted for the purpose.
• The details regarding staffing, ownership of existing
infrastructure etc., will be worked out.
• All retail clearing operations, both paper-based and electronic
will be managed and operated by this entity.
• The new organization would provide a robust and
technologically intensive centralized system offering ECS,
EFT and NEFT services covering the entire country. It may
also take initiatives on ATM-switching, multi-application
smart card, e-commerce and m-commerce based payment
systems.

12
29. As for the averment about lack of transparency and inadequate
consultative process in pursuing the proposal of setting up the ‘National
Payments Corporation’, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply
inter-alia stated:—
“For giving effect to this proposal, Indian Banks Association (IBA)
constituted a Committee of senior bankers with representatives from
public sector banks, banks in private sector, foreign banks and co-
operative banks and finalized the structure of the new organization.
It was decided by IBA that it would be a Section 25 company
owned and operated by banks. No bank or bank group can have
shareholding of more than 10 percent and shares would be held
by as many banks as possible. It was also decided that RBI would
have representation in the Board.
Thus it may be seen that due consultative process has been gone
through while taking the decision on setting up of National
Payments Corporation of India (NPCI). As regards consultation
with the Unions and Associations, it is understood that the
managements of individual banks have been discussing with them
to address their concerns.”
30. On the related contention that setting up the NPCI was
intended to privatize and outsource clearing activities, the Ministry, in
a written reply stated:—
“The views expressed by many bank unions/associations regarding
the NPCI are not well founded and not based on facts. The
proposed setting up of NPCI will neither lead to outsourcing or
privatization of clearing activities nor adversely affect the interests
of the bank employees.”
(ii) Financial implications of the proposed institutional structure for
retail payment systems
31. As per the Bank Employees’ Unions, setting up the new
institution for retail payment systems would significantly impact the
income generation of the Reserve Bank and the Public Sector Banks
presently operating and managing clearing houses. In this regard, a
representative of the employees unions stated as under while tendering
evidence:
“…coming to the question of financial loss, whatever investment
RBI has made for MICR cheque clearance functions, which require
sophisticated, imported machinery and which are very costly, they

13
have been able to get that money back from the system. In fact,
as we have calculated, Rs. 300 crore is the earning from this system,
and it is the Reserve Bank or the public sector banks which receive
this money. On this, the Government of India is also getting some
returns by way of income-tax or dividend. That way, through the
functioning of the payment and settlement system, the national
exchequer is being strengthened.
32. On the question of loosing/foregoing the income generation
from clearing systems, on account of transferring these functions to
the new corporation, the Deputy Governor, RBI stated as under while
deposing before the Committee:
“RBI has not been operating the clearing system to generate income.
Income generation is only incidental. RBI started the cheque
processing centres as a part of its initiative to build a sound cheque
clearing system. Now there is a felt need for consolidating all
clearing centres under an umbrella organization to bring efficiency
and standardization of procedure and practices. Therefore, RBI
would not hesitate to sacrifice some nominal income if the step
taken brings improvements in the system. Besides, the profit to be
generated by the new company would not be paid to the
shareholders as dividend, but would be used for further
development of payment system.
(iii) Implications on secrecy and confidentiality
33. Speaking inter-alia on the adverse implications on secrecy and
confidentiality on account of setting up the new institutional structure
for retail payments, a representative of the United Forum of RBI
Officers and employees stated as under while deposing before the
Committee:
“The Reserve Bank is having the figures of all the commercial
banks at their finger tips because it is having all the data. The
Reserve Bank knows the financial position of each and every
participant of the clearing house. The RBI can take preemptive
measure if any bank’s financial position is sharply deteriorating,
which this company cannot because whatever be the mutual
arrangement between this company and the RBI, and RBI cannot
divulge all the details of the commercial banks to this company. It
is because if such details go out, then it will be a very serious
thing.”

14
34. Touching upon issues relating to maintenance of confidentiality
of information vis-à-vis in the proposals of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006, the Deputy Governor, Reserve bank of India stated
as under:
In terms of clause 22 of the Bill the system provider (company)
will not disclose the contents of any document/information
provided by a system participant (participant bank). In terms of
clause 26(4) any unauthorized disclosure of information is
punishable by fine or imprisonment or both.
(iv) Shareholding pattern of NPCI
35. Issues relating to the shareholding pattern/structure of the new
organization (NPCI) proposed to operate the retail payment systems
as formulated in the report of the Working Group of the Indian Banks
Association (IBA), which comprised of the representatives of public
sector banks, Banks in private sector, foreign banks and co-operative
houses as furnished to the Committee by the Ministry of Finance in
a summarized form inter-alia reads as follows:
“NPCI will have dispersed ownership banks giving due share to
public sector banks, private banks, cooperative banks and foreign
banks. No share holder/group will have a share more than 10%
of the total paid-up capital. The shareholders will be expected to
maintain an arm’s length from the organization to promote the
cause of competitive neutrality. The company will be set up under
Section 25 of the Companies Act whereby no profit will be required
to be distributed as dividend to the shareholders; instead the profits
will be ploughed back into the company to improve the quality of
services being provided and to develop new innovative payment
products which will enhance customer convenience.”
36.  In response to a related question, the Ministry of Finance, in
a written reply inter-alia submitted as follows:
“No bank can hold more than 10% of the total shareholding of
NPCI – the clearing company for retail payment systems. Also out
of its total paid up capital of Rs. 100 crores already 5 public sector
banks have pledged Rs. 10 crores each, thereby aggregating
Rs. 50 crores. 2 private sector and 2 foreign banks have pledged
Rs. 10 crores each, thereby totalling Rs. 40 crores. The rest would
be dispersed among other banks. As it stands today, the
shareholding of public sector banks exceeds that of private sector
and foreign banks.

15
37.  It was also added as under in reply by the Ministry:
“The NPCI (when it is set up) would be subject to the regulation
and supervision of RBI under the proposed Act and the regulations
framed thereunder. RBI would also have a nominee in the Board
of Directors of the NPCI. Though majority shareholding of the
NPCI has not been explicitly stated in the Articles of Association
or Memorandum of Association, public sector banks would have
significant representation on the Board of NPCI (based on their
percentage share in the volume of payment transactions) and would
therefore have substantial powers in the decision-making process.
The systemically important large value payment system RTGS
will continue to be managed and operated by RBI and RBI would
continue to provide settlement service through its regional offices
for all clearings taking place at centres with RBI offices.”
38. Also asked whether it would not be appropriate to incorporate
suitable clauses in the Memorandum of Association and Article of
Association of the Company to the effect that public sector banks
would be contributing the major share capital of the company; and
that banks incorporated and owned by Indian concerns would have
controlling stake in entities operating systemically important payment
systems, the Ministry of Finance, in response, informed:
“…. This concern would be addressed appropriately by RBI without
explicitly stating it in the Memorandum of Association and Articles
of Association of NPCI……”
“…Control through regulation and supervision can be used as
effective instrument to ensure that NPCI operates in public interest.
It is primarily for this reason that NPCI is going to be registered
under Section 25 of Companies Act whereby the profit would not
be distributed to the shareholders but would be utilized for
ploughing back into the business of NPCI. This will financially
strengthen NPCI and enable it to introduce more efficient and
customer friendly payment modes and increase the reach of the
payment systems to smaller towns and rural areas. Besides, the
proposed NPCI would operate only retail payment systems which
are not systemically important.”
39. On the issue raised about the enactment of the Payment and
Settlement Systems Bill, 2006, being proposed for legalizing the
formation of the NPCI, the Ministry of Finance in reply, inter alia
stated:
 “The proposals of the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill are
neither essential/imperative nor of significance for setting up the

16
company to operate all the retail payment systems. The initiatives
on Payment and Settlement Systems Bill had been conceived way
back in 2000 and the initiatives for setting up of company to
operate the retail payment systems started in 2005. They are not
dependent on each other. However, it would be appropriate if the
Payment System Bill becomes an Act as early as possible so that
the new clearing company could be set up under RBI’s regulatory
and supervisory framework right from the beginning.”
40. In this regard, the Secretary, Financial Sector, Ministry of
Finance too stated as follows before the Committee:
“Now, whether this Bill becomes an Act or not, institutions like
CCIL or the National Payments Corporation will come into
existence and they will start transactions. The only difficulty will
be that the RBI will continue to be empowered in its capacity to
be able to have oversight authority over these.
41. The Committee recognize the importance and the need for
providing explicit legal basis for the payment and settlement systems
in its entirety particularly when the payment and fund transfer
processes are dominated by modern and technological modes. The
avowed purpose on the part of the Government for introducing the
Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006 is to provide a specified
and dedicated legal foundation for the regulation and supervision
of the Payment and Settlement Systems; accord legal recognition to
netting procedures, which would enable compliance with the ‘core
principles for systematically important payment systems’ formulated
by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS); confer formal
authority on the Reserve Bank to regulate corporate entities such as
the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), and the proposed
National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI); and bring newer
forms of payment systems and service providers including card
companies, money transfer businesses etc. under formal regulatory
purview.
42. However, as discussed in the preceding paragraphs, the
necessity of the proposed legislation has been questioned, particularly
by the Reserve Bank’s Officers and Employees’ Associations. The
reservations or objections expressed have been mainly on account of
the proposed setting up of a separate national level entity viz.,
National Payment Corporation of India, which is not a part of the
provisions of the Bill, but, as indicated in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons would be taking over the ‘operation of retail payment
systems’ in the Country.

17
43. From the information and clarifications furnished by the
Government, the Committee note that the National Payments
Corporation is proposed to be set up under Section 25 of the
Companies Act – whereby the profits earned would not be paid out,
but ploughed back into the company for further development of
payment systems. The contentions made in regard to the company
proposed to be set up for managing and operating retail payment
systems inter alia centre on, inadequate publicity and consultations
in pursuing the proposal, and the likely implications on issues
relating to confidentiality and security required of payment system
operations. Upon considering the reservations of various sectors on
this specific initiative – as highlighted in the narrative part of the
Report – the Committee feel it essential on the part of the
Government to hold wider and in-depth consultations on the entire
gamut of issues relating to the proposed company viz., the ‘business
model’ envisaged; terms and conditionalities of licensing the
proposed company; service conditions of employees currently engaged
in clearing house operations etc. so as to evolve a consensus on the
proposal.
44. In the course of their deliberations on the specific proposals
of the Bill, the Committee felt that a number of provisions relating
to the definitions of various terms, the authorization processes,
dispute resolution mechanism etc. should be recast to serve the
intended objectives better. Such of the provisions, and the
recommendations and observations of the Committee are dealt with
in the subsequent paragraphs of the report.
Clause 2–Definitions
45. Clause 2, which seeks to define certain expressions and terms
used in the Bill, which include, ‘Bank’, ‘derivative’, electronic fund
transfer, netting, etc.
Clause 2 (1) (a)–Definition of ‘bank’
46. Clause 2 (1) (a) which defines the term, ‘Bank’, reads as follows:
(a) “bank” means,—
(i)a  bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
 ( ii)a  post office savings bank;
(iii)a  banking company as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);

18
(iv)a  co-operative bank as defined in clause ( cci) of section 5,
as inserted by section 56, of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949 (10 of 1949); and
(v) such other bank as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify for the purposes of this Act.
47. The definition of ‘bank’ as proposed under Clause 2 (1) (a) of
the Bill specifically mentions co-operative banks but does not expressly
cover Public Sector Banks, State Bank and its Associates and Regional
Rural Banks. Further, in terms of Clause 2 (1) (a) (v), the power to
notify a ‘bank’ for the purposes of the proposed Act vest with the
Central Government.
48. A need was expressed by Juris Corp, a law firm and FIMMDA
for specifically defining ‘Post Office Savings Bank’ for the purposes of
the Bill. In response to a query raised in this regard, the Ministry of
Finance, in a written reply stated as under:
“Though the post office is not a banking company as defined
under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, for the purpose of certain
Acts like the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891, the post office
savings bank is considered as a bank and is covered under the
definition of bank. As per Section 2 (2) (c) of the Bankers’ Books
Evidence Act, “bank” and “banker” means any post-office savings
bank or a money order office. Further, Section 3 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 defines the term “Banker” as “banker”
include any person acting as a Banker and any post office saving
bank. In the circumstances, it is felt there is no need to define the
term “post office savings bank” in the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006.”
49. On being questioned about a suggestion made for
supplementing the definition of ‘bank’ by making a specific mention
of public sector banks, State Bank and its associates, etc., the Ministry
of Finance in a written reply submitted as under before the Committee:—
“The power to notify a bank in terms of Clause 2 (1) (a) (v) of the
Bill is with the Central Government. Already, an amendment to
Clause 2(1) (a) (v) has been suggested by RBI whereby it will be
empowered to notify a “bank” and not the Central Government.”
50. The Committee note that in terms of Clause 2 (1) (a) (v) of
the Bill, the power to notify a bank for the purposes of the Payment
and Settlement Systems is to be vested with the Central Government.

19
In regard to the need expressed for supplementing the definition of
‘Bank’ as proposed under Clause 2 (1) (a) by making a specific
mention of Public sector banks and the State Bank and its associates,
the Government have, inter alia proposed to vest the power to notify
a bank for the purposes of the Bill with the Reserve Bank instead
of the Central Government. The Committee are also of the view that
the power to notify a bank for the purposes of the Payment and
Settlement Systems should be vested with the Reserve Bank since it
is the regulatory authority for the banking sector as well as payment
system operations. The Committee, therefore, desire that as agreed
to, Clause 2 (1) (a) (v) of the Bill be suitably modified to vest the
power to notify a bank with the Reserve Bank instead of the Central
Government.
Clause 2 (1) (b) - Definition of “derivative”
51. Clause 2 (1) (b) reads as under:
“derivative” means an instrument, to be settled at a future date,
whose value is derived from change in interest rate, foreign
exchange rate, credit rating or credit index, price of securities (also
called “underlying”), or a combination of more than one of them
and includes interest rate swaps, forward rate agreements, foreign
currency swaps, foreign currency rupee swaps, foreign currency
options, foreign currency rupee options or such other instruments
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time;
52. The definition of the term ‘derivative’ proposed in the Bill is
similar to the definition of the term as contained in Section 45 U(a) of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (“RBI Act”). A view point expressed
by Juris Corp and FIMMDA in this regard was that it may be essential
to define the term by drawing reference to the RBI Act so as to
inter alia avoid any discord between the two definitions in future. Certain
Banks, which include, the ICICI Bank and Union Bank of India felt it to
be desirable to make the definition of the term ‘derivative’ into an
inclusive one as appearing in Securities Contracts Regulations Act,
1956 so that the value of the instrument may be defined from
“underlying” in addition to those specified in the definition as proposed
in the Bill e.g. Weather, price of commodities etc.
53. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply stated:
“…incorporating the definition of the term “derivative” as provided
in the proposed Section 45U (a) of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934, may not be required as the scope of both the laws are entirely

20
different. Further, any subsequent amendments to Section 45 U (a)
of the RBI Act, 1934 would reflect on the proposed Payment and
Settlement Systems Act, which may lead to unintended
consequences. Therefore, Government is not in favour of defining
the term “derivative” in reference to the RBI Act, 1934. However,
Government is in agreement with the suggestion to make the
definition of the term “derivative into an inclusive one, such that
the value of the instrument may be defined from “underlying” in
addition to those specified in the definition. The definition in the
RBI Act, 1934 may not be useful for this purpose as well for the
reasons already stated.”
54. Clarifying as to how it was proposed to make the definition
of the term ‘derivative’ into an ‘inclusive one’ the Ministry of Finance,
subsequently informed that the words, ‘or any other underlying’ (in
addition to interest rate, foreign exchange rate etc.) were proposed to
be added in the definition, so as to enable the RBI to specify the same
for the purposes of the Bill. The modified definition proposed, reads
as under:—
“ ‘derivative’ means an instrument to be settled at a future date,
whose value is derived from change in interest rate, foreign
exchange rate, credit rating or credit index, price of securities (also
called “underlying”) or any other underlying or a combination of
more than one of them, and includes interest rate swaps, forward
rate agreements, foreign currency swaps, foreign currency rupee
swaps, foreign currency options, foreign currency rupee options or
such other instruments, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank
from time to time.”
55. The definition of the term ‘Derivative’ as proposed under
Clause 2 (1) (b) is identical to the definition of the term as contained
in Section 45 U of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, which relates
to the regulatory role of the Reserve Bank vis-a-vis institutions such
as banks for dealing in derivative instruments. For the purposes of
the Payment and Settlement Systems, however, the Committee note
that the number and type of derivative instruments or structures
could be wide and varied. In response to the suggestions as made
before the Committee by representatives of the Banking Sector, the
Government have proposed to make the definition of the term
‘Derivative’ into an inclusive one by suitably incorporating the words,
‘or any other underlying’ so as to enable the Reserve Bank to specify
newer instruments whose value may be derived from ‘underlyings’
in addition to those specified in the definition as proposed viz.,

21
interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit rating or credit index and
price of securities. The Committee express agreement with the
proposal of the Government to rephrase the definition of the term
‘Derivative’ into an ‘inclusive one’, which would enable in covering
newer instruments that may emerge in the financial market.
Clause 2 (1) (c) - Definition of “Electronic Fund Transfer”:-
56. Clause 2 (1) (c) defines ‘Electronic Fund Transfer’ as under:
“(c) electronic funds transfer” means any transfer of funds which
is initiated through electronic means so as to instruct, authorise or
order a bank to debit or credit an account with that bank, and
includes point of sale transfers, automated teller machine
transactions, direct deposits or withdrawals of funds, transfers
initiated by telephone and card payment;
57. It has been pointed out in the memoranda furnished to the
Committee by some of the banks as well as individual experts that
the definition of ‘Electronic Fund Transfer’ as proposed under Clause
2 (1) (c) restricts itself to transfer of funds initiated through electronic
means and does not explicitly cover electronic clearing system (ECS),
Auto-debit instructions etc. wherein the “initiation” need not be through
electronic means in all situations. Questioned whether it would not be
desirable to modify the definition to include such transactions that are
not initiated through electronic means but are processed/effected
though electronic means, the Government have in a written response,
stated as under:—
“In order to provide more clarity to the definition and to include
even instances where the “initiation” is not through electronic
means, the definition may be modified as under:
‘electronic funds transfer’ means any transfer of funds which is
initiated by a person so as to instruct, authorize or order a bank to
debit or credit an account with that bank through electronic means
and includes point of sale transfers, automated teller machine
transactions, direct deposits or withdrawals of funds, transfers
initiated by telephone , by internet and card payments.”
58. Yet another suggestion received in this regard has been that
electronic modes through which customers instruct their banks to issue
payments (Such as internet banking, ATM transactions, card payments
etc.) as well as fund transfers between two accounts maintained with
the same bank should be placed outside the gamut of the Bill as they
do not construe payment systems by themselves.

22
59. Clarifying the intended purpose in this regard, the Ministry of
Finance, in response, stated as follows:
“the new definition suggested covers such transactions also. Certain
intra-bank payment systems having systemic repercussions would
have to be regulated. Other intra-bank payment systems may be
exempted by the Reserve Bank in exercise of its powers under
Clause 4 (1) (d) of the proposed Act.”
60. The Committee note that the definition of the term ‘Electronic
Funds Transfer’ as proposed under Clause 2 (1) (c), which inter alia
reads, ‘any transfer of funds which is initiated through electronic
means so as to instruct, authorize or order a bank’ does not explicitly
cover transaction instances such as auto debit instructions etc. of
customers of banks, which may not be initiated through electronic
means but are processed or effected electronically. In response to
the queries posed in this regard, the Government have proposed to
suitably modify the definition of the term to inter-alia read: ‘…any
transfer of funds which is initiated by a person so as to instruct,
authorize or order a bank to debit or credit an account with that
bank through electronic means’. The Government have also proposed
to specifically cover funds transfer initiated by internet under the
ambit of the definition. The Committee desire that the definition of
the term, Electronic Funds Transfer as proposed under Clause 2 (1)
(c) be modified accordingly so as to leave no scope for ambiguity.
Clause 2 (1) (d)—Definition of “netting”
61. Clause 2 (1)(d) reads as under:
(d) “netting” means the determination by the system provider of
the amount of money or securities, due or payable or deliverable, as
a result of setting off or adjusting, the claims and obligations among
the system participants, including the claims and obligations arising
out of the termination by the system provider, on the insolvency or
liquidation of any system participant or such other circumstances as
the system provider may specify in its rules or regulations, of the
transactions admitted for settlement at a future date so that only a net
claim be demanded or a net obligation be owed;
62. The Union Bank of India in their Memorandum submitted to
the Committee opined that the definition of the term “netting” as
proposed for the purpose of payment and settlement operations
appeared to take within its scope inter se claims and obligations which
are not pure fund transfer or security settlement obligations arising

23
out of permitted transactions for the settlement purposes as agreed
between the participants or as per rules of system operator. It was,
therefore, felt that the definition of ‘netting’ should be reworded to
make it clear that the netting was limited only to mutual claims and
obligations with respect to permitted transactions in the settlement
process. For this purpose, it was felt that the expression “mutual”
should be prefixed to the expression “claims and obligations” in the
first part of the definition.
63. In response to a related question, the Ministry of Finance, in
their written reply, while contending that the definition of the term, as
proposed, was intended to cover “multilateral netting” also, sought to
bring in clarity that netting would be with respect to only those
payment obligations arising out of the transactions in the particular
payment system by proposing to incorporate the words ‘or bye-laws
(by whatever name called) after the words, ‘in its rules or regulations’
in the proposed definition. Incorporation of these words in the
definition has been proposed by the Ministry of Finance, as the
Settlement/payment systems such as CCIL may, apart from rules and
regulations, also have bye-laws, and may choose some other
nomenclature for the same. The modified version of the definition,
proposed reads as under:
“netting” means the determination by the system provider of the
amount of money or securities, due or payable or deliverable, as
a result of setting off or adjusting the payment obligations or
delivery obligations among the system participants, including the
claims and obligations arising out of the termination by the system
provider, on the insolvency or liquidation of any system participant
or such other circumstances as the system provider may specify in
its rules or regulations or bye-laws (by whatever name called), of
the transactions admitted for settlement at a future date so that
only a net claim be demanded or a net obligation be owed.”
64. Apart from rules or regulations, payment systems, as in the
case of Clearing Corporation of India (CCIL) may also have ‘bye
laws’ and may also choose some other nomenclature for the same in
future. With a view to clarify that the process of mutual offsetting
of positions or obligations under the ‘netting process’ would only
be in respect of transactions undertaken in a given payment system,
the Government have proposed to add the words ‘or bye laws (by
whatever name called)’ after the words ‘in its rules or regulations’
in the definition of the term ‘Netting’ as proposed under Clause 2
(1) (d). As the addition of the words, ‘or bye laws (by whatever

24
name called)’ after the words ‘in its rules or regulations’, as proposed
by the Government is intended to clarify that ‘netting’ would be
confined to offsetting the positions or obligations of transactions
undertaken in a given payment system, the Committee endorse the
same for incorporation.
Clause 2 (1) (h) – Definition of ‘Payment System’
65. Clause 2 (1) (h) defines ‘Payment system’ as under:
“payment system” means a system that enables payment to be
effected between a payer and a beneficiary, and includes clearing,
payment or settlement service or all of them, but does not include a
stock exchange;
66. The term ‘payment system’ has been defined in the Bill to
mean a system that enables payment to be effected between a payer
and a beneficiary, and includes clearing, payment and settlement service
or all of them, but does not include a stock exchange.
67. The Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), in their memorandum
opined that the definition of ‘Payment System’ as proposed in Clause
2 (1) (h) was worded in very general terms, which may include a
simple system of payment of cheques issued by any customer of the
bank. Mainly on account of the fact that Clause 4 (1) of the Bill
provides that no person shall commence or operate a payment system
except under the authorization of RBI and Clause 26 (1) provides for
penalties for failing to comply with the terms and conditions of
authorization the IBA has felt it to be necessary that the law should
very clearly define a payment and settlement system. The following
definition of payment system, has, therefore, been suggested by the
IBA:
“Payment system means a formal arrangement between three or
more participants with common rules and standardized
arrangements specified by the RBI for the execution of orders
initiated through electronic means or otherwise for transfer of funds
between participants, a payer and a beneficiary, including payment,
electronic funds transfer, clearing, settlement, netting and or any
other system but does not include a stock exchange.”
Explanation: For removal of doubts it is hereby clarified that any
payment or settlement system for the users of credit cards, debit
cards, smart cards or any other similar device shall be deemed to
be a payment system for the purposes of this Act.”

25
68. Asked about the Government’s perception on the need
expressed for defining the term ‘Payment System’ in clearer terms, as
suggested by the IBA, the Ministry of Finance, in reply stated:
“…the intention of the Bill is to bring all payment systems in the
country (other than stock exchanges) within the ambit of a
regulatory and supervisory system. When the proposed Payment
and Settlement Systems Bill comes into force no person will be
entitled to operate a payment system without the authorization
issued by RBI. As per the suggested definition, only those “formal
arrangements” having “common rules and standardized
arrangements specified by RBI” fall within the definition of
“payment system” thereby exempting other systems run without
any such specifications, which would not be in conformity with
the object of the proposed Act. Further, under Clause 4 of the Bill,
RBI has been empowered to exempt any person from provisions
requiring acquisitions of authorizations. Therefore, the suggested
amendment may not be required .”
69. However, expressing agreement with the need for providing
clarity in the definition of “payment system”, the Ministry of Finance
have proposed to rephrase the words, ‘a beneficiary, and includes
clearing, payment or settlement service’ to read as, ‘a beneficiary and
involving clearing payment or settlement service’. The modified
definition of payment system proposed is as under:
“payment system” means a system that enables payment to be
effected between a payer and a beneficiary, and involving clearing,
payment or settlement service or all of them, but does not include
a stock exchange.”
70. While the definition of Payment system as proposed in the
Bill does not include a stock exchange, the definition of ‘Settlement’ as
proposed under Clause 2 (1) (m) includes Settlement of securities.
Asked, in this regard, to clarify the mechanism to be followed by
stock exchanges that trade Government Securities and Derivatives, the
Ministry, in response stated as under:
“All Government securities and their derivatives which are traded
on the stock exchanges would be subject to the SEBI Act and
related statutes. However, the payment instructions relating to such
transactions would be under the purview of the proposed Act.
Clause 34 of the proposed Act states that “nothing contained in
this Act shall apply to any of the securities traded on stock
exchanges or other exchanges except in so far as they relate to
settlement of payment instructions”.

26
71. On being questioned further whether the non-applicability of
the proposed Act to stock exchanges – except in so far as they relate
to settlement of payment instructions – would not lead to jurisdictional
disputes between RBI as regulator of payment systems and SEBI, as
regulator of stock exchanges, the Ministry of Finance, in reply stated:
“Any difference of opinion between RBI and SEBI if it arises, would
be settled according to the established consultative mechanism.
There is a High Level Consultative Committee (HLCC) of the
financial system regulators which is composed of heads of RBI,
SEBI, IRDA and PFRDA, which is headed by the Governor of RBI
and which meets periodically to discuss issues of common interest.
There is a Technical Advisory Committee at operating level for
interaction between the various financial system regulators which
meet frequently for this purpose.”
72. Further, a view point expressed in the memorandum furnished
by HSBC Bank was that account to account transfers within the same
bank as well as structured cash management solutions involving
initiation of payments or cheque collection services and other akin
services offered by various banks today, which do not involve
settlement of payments by themselves should be clearly excluded from
the definition of ‘payment system’. In response to a related query, the
Ministry of Finance stated as follows:
“Intra bank account-to-account transactions would generally be
exempted. However, instead of exempting in the Act itself, it would
be appropriate toexempt by way of notification so that certain
categories of intra-bank transactions such as large value transactions
(beyond a certain threshold limit) may be kept within the
framework ofregulation.”
73. Though a need has been expressed by the Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) in particular for defining the term, ‘Payment
System’ in a comprehensive manner, as per the Government’s
perception, the definition of the term as proposed under Clause 2
(1) (h) was adequate to bring all payment systems in the country,
excluding the stock exchanges, within the regulatory and supervisory
ambit of the proposed Act. However, with a view to providing clarity
in the definition, as contained in the Bill, the Government have
proposed to rephrase the words ‘effected between a payer and a
beneficiary, and includes clearing, payment or settlement service’ to
read as ‘effected between a payer and a beneficiary, and involving
clearing, payment or settlement service’. As the rephrasing of the

27
definition by substituting the word ‘includes’ with ‘involving’ would
bring to light the processes of clearing, payment and settlement
involved in Payment Systems in clear terms, the Committee express
agreement to the same.
74. The Committee also observe that while ‘stock exchanges’ are
proposed to be excluded from the ambit of the definition of ‘payment
system’, ‘settlement of securities’ is covered under the definition of
‘settlement’ proposed under Clause 2 (1) (m) of the Bill. From the
clarificatory information furnished by the Government, the
Committee note that, while trading of securities and derivative
instruments at the stock exchanges would be covered under the SEBI
Act and related statutes, the payment leg of such transactions would
be covered under the proposed payment and settlement systems Act.
Specifically with reference to the issue of settlement of securities
transactions at the stock exchanges, the Committee emphasise the
need for ensuring that adequate care is taken for preventing the
possibility of jurisdictional overlap between the Reserve Bank, as
the regulator of the payment systems, and SEBI, as the regulator of
stock exchanges.
75. From the information and clarifications furnished by the
Government, the Committee further note that intra bank account
transactions are not proposed to be excluded in entirety from the
purview of the definition of Payment System or the regulatory
mechanism proposed in the Bill. The Committee expect the Reserve
Bank to notify in clear terms, the type or categories of intra bank
transactions, which would fall within the framework of the proposed
regulatory mechanism, so as to make this aspect unambiguous.
Clause 2 (1) (l) – Definition of “security”
76. Clause 2 (1) (l), which defines the term ‘security’ reads as
follows:
“security” means Government securities as defined in the Public
Debt Act, 1944 or such other securities as may be notified by the
Central Government from time to time under that Act;
77. A need was expressed for rephrasing the term ‘security’ as
‘securities’ in the definition proposed and also defining the term by
drawing reference to the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act or in a
broad based manner, so as to enable inclusion of other ‘paper’ such
as corporate bonds etc., in future.

28
78. Responding to the suggestion, the Ministry of Finance, in a
written reply stated as under:—
“The definition of “security” has been included to distinguish
government securities from other types of securities. The suggestion
to modify “security” to “securities” may be accepted, since the
term “securities” has been used throughout in the Bill.”
79. In terms of Clause 2 (1) (l), the term, ‘security’ is to mean
‘Government securities as defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944 or
such other securities as may be notified by the Central Government’.
As the term ‘securities’ has been used throughout the Payment and
Settlement Systems Bill, and there are varied forms of Government
Securities, the Committee expect that, as agreed to by the
Government, the term ‘security’ as appearing in Clause 2 (1) (l) will
be modified so as to read as ‘securities’.
Clause 2 (1) (n) – Definition of “systemic risk’
80. Clause 2 (1) (n) defines ‘systemic risk’ as follows:
(n) “systemic risk” means the risk arising from—
(i) the inability of a system participant to meet his payment
obligations under the payment system as and when they
become due; or
(ii) any disruption in the system, which may cause other
participants to fail to meet their obligations when due,
ultimately likely to have an impact on the stability of the
system;
81. The definition of ‘systemic risk’ as proposed, inter alia means
the risk arising from (i) the inability of system participant to meet
payment obligations and (ii) any disruption in the system.
82. The Union Bank of India expressed the opinion that the
definition of ‘systemic risk’ as proposed was worded in ‘general terms’,
which would become contentious if subjected to interpretation. Asked
whether it may not be appropriate for the regulator, the RBI to decide
on whether ‘systemic risk’ was involved or not by adding the words,
‘in the opinion of Reserve Bank of India’ at the end of the definition,
the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply expressed agreement that
the decision whether “systemic risk” was involved should be left to
the RBI.

29
83. The Committee observe that the definition of ‘systemic risk’,
as proposed under Clause 2 (1) (n) whereby such a risk is to mean
to arise from the inability of system participants in meeting payment
obligations, or any disruption in the system, ‘which may have an
impact on the stability of the system’ has the possibility of becoming
contentious if subjected to interpretation. To a suggestion made, the
Government have agreed that the decision on whether a systemic
risk was involved or not in a Payment System should be left to the
Reserve Bank. The Committee recommend that this aspect be made
clear in the definition of the term and clause 2 (1) (n) amended
accordingly.

30
CHAPTER II
CLAUSE 3 – DESIGNATED AUTHORITY AND ITS COMMITTEE
84. Clause 3 of the Bill reads as under:
(1) The Reserve Bank shall be the designated authority for the
regulation and supervision of payment systems under this Act.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purposes of exercising the
powers and performing the functions and discharging the duties
conferred on it by or under this Act, by regulation, constitute a
committee of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank.
(3) The Committee constituted under sub-section (2) shall consist
of the following members, namely:—
(a) Governor, Reserve Bank of India, who shall be the Chairman
of the Board;
(b) Deputy Governors, Reserve Bank of India, out of whom the
Deputy Governor who is the in-charge of the Payment and
Settlement Systems, shall be the Vice-Chairman of the Board;
(c) Not exceeding three Directors from the Central Board of
the Reserve Bank of India to be nominated by the Governor.
(4) The powers and functions of the Committee constituted under
sub-section ( 2), the time and venue of its meetings, the procedure to
be followed in such meetings (including the quorum at such meetings)
and other matters incidental thereto shall be such as may be prescribed.
85. Clause 3 (1) of the Bill seeks to designate the Reserve bank as
the authority for regulation and supervision of payment systems.
Further, Clause 3(3) is intended to enable for constitution of a
Committee for regulation and supervision of the payment systems.
86. The Reserve Bank of India had, on March 7, 2005 constituted
a Board for regulation and supervision of Payment and Settlement
Systems (BPSS) through a Regulation framed under Section 58 (2) (i)
of the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934, whose composition, powers
and functions are as follows:.
Composition : The Board consists of the Governor of RBI as
Chairman, Deputy Governors out of whom the Deputy Governor

31
in charge of Payment Systems will be Vice-Chairman and two
directors from the Central Board of RBI as members. The Executive
Directors in-charge of Payment Systems and Financial Markets
Committee are permanent invitees to the meetings of the Board.
Persons with experience in the fields of payment and settlement
systems can be invited as permanent invitees/ad hoc invitees.
Functions and Powers : The Board shall perform the following
functions and exercise the following powers
(a) Lay down the policies relating to regulation and supervision
of the payment and settlement systems.
(b) Lay down the standards for both existing and future
payment and settlement systems.
(c) The authorization of payment and settlement systems.
(d) The determination of the criteria for membership of payment
and settlement systems including continuation, termination
and rejection of membership.
(e) Overseeing the administration of rules and guidelines framed
under any statutes for the purpose and directions issued
from time to time.
(f) Taking steps deemed necessary for effective regulation and
supervision of payment and settlement systems.
(g) Creating necessary administrative structures within the
existing rules and regulations for ensuring effective
regulation and supervision of the payment and settlement
systems.
87. Earlier, in 1999, the Reserve Bank had, as a part of its efforts
to usher in safe and sound payment system in the country, constituted
a National Payments Council (NPC) to proffer advice to the Bank on
matters relating to payment systems.
88. While Clause 3 (2) of the Bill deals with the constitution of
the Committee for regulation and supervision of payment systems, the
term ‘Board’ has been used in Clause 3 (3) (a) and (b) of the Bill,
which relate to the Governor of Reserve Bank being the Chairman of
the Board/Committee; and the composition of the Committee/Board.
Questioned whether it was correct to use the term ‘Board’ in Clause
3 (3) (a) and 3 (3) (b), the Ministry of Finance, at first, informed that
it was proposed to replace the word ‘Board’ with the word, ‘Committee’
in Clause 3 (3) (a) and 3 (3) (b).

32
89. Questioned about the role expected of the existing Board for
Payment and Settlement System constituted in 2005, following the
enactment of the proposed Bill, the Ministry of Finance in response,
informed as follows:
”The Government is of the view that the Board for regulation and
supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) already
constituted by the BPSS Regulations under the Reserve Bank of
India Act may be carried forward as a provision in the Payment
and Settlement Systems Bill. The new Act should also recognise
this “Board” and should continue till the Board is reconstituted in
accordance with the new Act. Accordingly, it is suggested that the
revised clause 3 of the Bill to be as under:
“Designated Authority and its Committee
(1) The Reserve Bank shall be the designated authority for the
regulation and supervision of payment systems under this Act.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of exercising the powers
and performing the functions and discharging the duties conferred
on it by or under this Act, by regulation, constitute a committee
of itsCentral Board to be known as theBoar d for Regulation and
Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems.
(3) The Board constituted under sub-section (2) shall consist of
the following members, namely:—
a. Governor, Reserve Bank of India, who shall be the Chairman
of the Board
b. Deputy Governors, Reserve Bank of India, out of whom
Deputy Governor who is the in-charge of the Payment and
Settlement Systems, shall be the Vice-Chairman of the Board
c. Not exceeding three Directors from the Central Board of
the Reserve Bank of India to be nominated by the Governor.
(4) The powers and functions of the Boardconstituted under sub-
section (2), the time and venue of its meetings, the procedure to
be followed in such meetings (including the quorum at such
meetings) and other matters incidental thereto shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and
Settlement Systems constituted under Section 58(2)(i) of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 shall, on the commencement of this Act,

33
be deemed to be the Board constituted under subsection(2) and
continue accordingly until the Board is reconstituted in accordance
with this Act, and shall further be governed by the said regulations
in so far as these are not inconsistent with this Act or any
regulations framed under this Act.
90. The Union Bank of India, in particular, emphasized on the
aspect that besides its regulatory and supervisory role, the Reserve
Bank, as monitory authority would also be required to continue to
play its developmental role. Hence, it was suggested that the expression
‘development’ should be added before the words, ‘regulation and
supervision’ in Clause 3(1) so that the role of RBI as the designated
authority was made amply clear. In response, however, the Ministry
of Finance opined that ‘all central banks play a developmental role in
their respective payment systems’ and ‘RBI does not need any legal
backing to play this developmental role’.
91. A case was also made out that the Committee/Board for
regulation of payment systems constituted in terms of the proposed
Section 3 (3) should comprise of independent members / representatives
of Banks viz., Public sector banks, private sector banks and co-operative
banks in addition to the representatives of RBI so that the views of
the stakeholders were given due consideration. In this regard, the
Ministry of Finance, in a written reply stated that ‘since the Committee
is to be constituted from the Central Board of the Reserve Bank, only
the directors of the Central Board could be nominated as members’. It
was also added in reply that the representatives of large banks and
the Indian Banks Association (IBA) were represented on the National
Payments Council, which acts as an advisory body to the Board.
92. The intended purpose of designating the Reserve Bank as
the authority for regulation and supervision of Payment Systems
and providing for the constitution of a Committee of the Central
Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank to be known as the Board
for regulation and supervision of payment systems, has not been
brought out in clear and unambiguous terms in Clause 3 of the Bill.
The ambiguity in the proposed provisions, the Committee note, has
been mainly on account of the usage of different terms viz.,
‘Committee’ and ‘Board’ in sub sections (2) and (3) of Clause 3 which
relate to the constitution and composition of the proposed Board for
Regulation and Supervision of Payment Systems. The Government
had, at first sought to overcome the inconsistencies by proposing to
carry out appropriate changes in the provisions of Clause 3. However,
when questioned about the role expected of the existing Board for

34
Regulation and Supervision of Payment Systems constituted in
March, 2005, consequent to the enactment of the proposed legislation,
it has inter alia been proposed by the Government to incorporate an
additional sub clause [sub clause (5)] for according recognition to
the existing regulatory board for payment systems under the proposed
Act. In terms of the new sub clause proposed to be added to Clause
3, the existing Board for regulation and supervision of Payment and
Settlement Systems ‘would be deemed to be the Board constituted
under sub section 2 and continue accordingly until the Board is
reconstituted’ in accordance with the proposed Act.
93. The Committee observe in this regard that, as a part of the
efforts to usher in safe and sound payment systems in the Country,
the Reserve Bank had, in 1999, constituted a National Payment
Council to proffer advice on matters relating to payment systems,
and the Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment Systems
in March, 2005. The setting up of the existing Board for payment
system regulation being inter alia a measure aimed at creating a
necessary administrative structure within the existing rules for
ensuring effective regulation and supervision of the payment and
settlement systems, the Committee are inclined to concur with the
proposal for according recognition to it under the proposed Act and
enabling for its continuance until its reconstitution following the
commencement of the Act.
94. An issue brought before the Committee has been the need
for the stakeholders in payment system operations viz., Banks in
the public, private and co-operative sectors as well as foreign banks
to have their representatives co-opted as independent members on
the Regulatory Board, so that they are able to ventilate their views
on regulatory aspects of a payment systems. While it may not be
feasible or appropriate to co-opt independent members on the Central
Bank’s Regulatory Board, as suggested by the representatives of some
banks, the Committee are of the view that the Reserve Bank could
consider broadbasing the composition of National Payment Council
for this purpose inter alia by ensuring adequate and proper
representation therein for the Banks etc. operating in different sectors.

35
CHAPTER III
CLAUSE 4 – AUTHORIZATION OF PAYMENT SYSTEMS
Clause 4 of the Bill reads as under:
95. Clause 4 (1) of the Bill reads as follows:-
(1) No person shall commence or operate a payment system except
under and in accordance with an authorisation issued by the Reserve
Bank under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to—
(a) the continued operation of an existing payment system on
the commencement of this Act for a period not exceeding
six months from such commencement, unless within such
period, the operator of such payment system obtains an
authorisation under this Act;
(b) any person acting as the duly appointed agent of another
person to whom the payment is due;
(c)a  company accepting payments either from its holding
company or any of its subsidiary companies or from any
other company which is also a subsidiary of the same
holding company;
(d) any other person whom the Reserve Bank may , after
considering the interests of monetary policy or efficient
operation of payment systems, the size of any payment
system or for any other reason, by notification, exempt from
the provisions of this section.
96. On the Payment System operators, who would be required to
obtain authorization from the Reserve bank in terms of Clause 4 (1)
for continued operation, a note furnished by the Ministry of Finance
states as under:-
“Some of the payment system operators who would apply for
authorization after enactment of the Bill as law will be Clearing
Corporation of India (which operates the inter-bank Government
securities and forex clearing system) and National Payments
Corporation of India (when it is set up). Card payment companies
could also apply to RBI for authorization as well as other persons
or entities which wish to operate payment systems.”

36
97. As the Reserve Bank, by itself, would be operating payment
systems, it was suggested that Clause 4 (1) of the Bill needed to be
amended for exempting the Reserve Bank from obtaining authorization/
permission for continued operation of payment systems. In this regard,
the Ministry of Finance expressed agreement for modifying Clause 4
(1) so as to read as follows:
“(1) No person, other than the Reserve Bank, shall commence or
operate a payment system except under and in accordance with
an authorisation issued by the Reserve Bank under the provisions
of this Act”.
98. With a view to avoid a situation where a payment system may
have to be closed down if the authorization was not given within six
months as stipulated under Clause 4 (1)(a), the IBA, in particular,
suggested that the following words may be added at the end of Clause
4 (1) (a):
“or rejection of the request for authorization is conveyed to the
payment system whichever is later”.
99. Expressing agreement to the suggestion, the Ministry of Finance,
in reply proposed to modify Clause 4 (1) (a) of the Bill as under:
“the continued operation of an existing payment system on the
commencement of this Act for a period not exceeding six months
from such commencement, unless within such period, the operator
of such payment system obtains an authorization under this Act
or the application for authorization is refused by RBI.”
100. It was also added as follows by the Ministry in reply:—
“Further, sub-clause (1) may be renumbered as Clause 4 by omitting
the number “(1)” as the Clause contains only one sub-clause.”
101. With specific reference to the provisions of Clause 4 (1) (b),
the Ministry of Finance were asked to clarify the nature/type of entities
who would be exempted from obtaining authorization for commencing
or continue to operate payment systems. In response thereto, the
Ministry of Finance inter alia informed:
“…The company to which the payment is due may appoint an
agent to collect the cheques, electronic instructions, etc. and submit
it for processing. Some of the service providers are facilitating this
for collection of utility bill payments like electricity, telephone, etc.

37
on behalf of the service provider (electricity, telephone) – these
collection agents are what are proposed to be covered under this
Clause.”
102. Asked further whether money transfer businesses, card
payment and settlement business, which may follow one to one agency
contracts with respect to collection/remittance/fund transfer etc. would
be exempted from ‘regulation’/obtaining authorisation in terms of
Clause 4(b), the Ministry, in reply stated that it was not proposed to
exempt such entities from the provisions of the proposed Act’.
103. In response to a suggestion for extending the scope of the
exemption provisions for obtaining authorization under Clause 4 to
specifically include intra-bank account to account transactions as well
as cash handling of banks outsourced by companies, the Ministry of
Finance informed:—
“While bringing the Act into effect, Reserve Bank would issue the
Notification with the list of exemptions which would include intra-
bank transactions as well with certain exceptions but it would be
appropriate to include them when their volume/value increases
substantially.”
104. It was also added as follows in reply:—
“Intra-bank account-to-account transaction would generally be
exempted. However, instead of exempting in the Act itself, it would
be appropriate toexempt by way of notification so that certain
categories of intra-bank transactions such as large value transactions
(beyond a certain threshold limit) may be kept within the
framework ofregulation.”
105. The Committee note that with a view to clarify that the
Reserve Bank, which would be discharging the combined function
of a regulator as well as service provider of payment and settlement
systems would be exempt from the authorization process prescribed
in the Bill, the Government have proposed to incorporate the words
‘other than the Reserve Bank’ after the words ‘No person…’ at the
beginning of Clause 4 of the Bill. The modification proposed being
of a clarificatory nature, the Committee express agreement to the
same. The Committee also expect that, as agreed to, the incorrectly
shown number (1) in Clause 4, which has only one sub-clause is
omitted.

38
106. As regards acquisition of authorization, the Committee opine
that proviso (a) of Clause 4 in terms of which, the existing payment
systems/service providers are to obtain authorization from the Reserve
Bank within six months of the commencement of the Act for their
continued operation is not adequate in addressing situations where
the applications for such authorization are refused or are not given
by the Reserve Bank within the stipulated period. With the intention
of taking care of such situations, the Government have proposed to
incorporate the words, ‘or the application for authorization is refused
by the Reserve Bank’ at the end of the proviso. Incorporation of the
above words would make it clear that the authorization for continued
operation of a payment system would be given or refused by the
Reserve Bank within six months of the commencement of the
proposed Act. The Committee, accordingly, desire that the
modification, as agreed to, be carried out in proviso (a) of Clause 4
so as to take care of instances of refusal of authorization for operation
of payment systems.
107. The Committee further note from the information and
clarifications furnished by the Government that while service
providers such as the ones facilitating in collection of utility Bill
payments etc. and ‘Cash Management Services’ within group
companies would be exempted from the authorization process in
terms of provisos (b) and (c) of Clause 4, money transfer businesses,
card payment and settlement services as well as cash management
services across companies would not be outside the regulatory
mechanism under the proposed Act. Taking into account the need
expressed for clarity on the nature of payment related services that
would be exempt from the authorization process or regulatory
oversight in terms of the proposed Act, the Committee feel it to be
essential on the part of the Reserve Bank to notify, in clear terms,
the categories/types of payment transactions/services that would be
exempt from the ‘authorization process prescribed’ or the ‘regulatory
framework proposed’ following the commencement of the Act.
Clause 5: Application for authorization.
108. Clause 5 of the Bill which provides for submission of an
application to Reserve Bank by any person desirous of commencing or
carrying on a payment system operations reads as under:—
(1) Any person desirous of commencing or carrying on a
payment system may apply to the Reserve Bank for an
authorisation under this Act.

39
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such
form and in such manner and shall be accompanied by
such fees as may be prescribed.
109. A view point expressed in regard to the provisions of
clause 5, was that any service provider, before he being authorized by
Reserve Bank of India, should be required to deposit adequate amount
of security or financial guarantee to ensure flawless service. In response
thereto, the Ministry of Finance stated as under:-
“The Reserve Bank while authorizing any payment system would
be examining these issues. In case any service provider which
would guarantee settlement e.g. CCIL, adequate risk mitigation
measures would have to be put in place by the service provider.”
110. Further, for enabling transparency in process and ease of
compliance, the HDFC Bank has inter alia suggested that both the
eligibility norms for system providers as well as their scope of work,
terms, duties, obligations etc. should be clearly spelt out. In this
connection, as informed by the Ministry of Finance, the related norms
would be detailed in the regulations / guidelines to be framed by RBI
after the enactment of the Bill as law.
111. With reference to the provisions of Clause 5, which
inter alia provide for submission of an application to the Reserve
Bank by persons/entities desirous of commencing payment system
operations, the Committee feel it is necessary to take cognizance of
the views expressed in the memoranda submitted to them, which
emphasize on ensuring deposit of adequate amount of security and
providing financial guarantee by the prospective service providers;
and spelling out the scope of work, terms and duties of the system
providers in clear terms. The Committee expect the Reserve Bank to
clearly address issues relating to eligibility norms, terms and
conditions of work and duties etc. of prospective payment system
service providers in line with international benchmarks and accepted
practices in the related regulations to be framed following the
commencement of the proposed Act.
Clause 7: Issue or refusal of authorisation.
112. Clause 7 which seeks to provide for issue or refusal of
authorization for operating a payment system reads as under:-
“(1) The Reserve Bank may, if satisfied, after any inquiry under
section 6 or otherwise, that the application is complete in all

40
respects and that it conforms to the provisions of this Act and the
regulations issue an authorisation for operating the payment system
under this Act having regard to the following considerations,
namely:—
(i) the need for the proposed payment system or the services
proposed to be undertaken by it;
(ii) the technical standards or the design of the proposed
payment system;
(iii) the terms and conditions of operation of the proposed
payment system including any security procedure;
(iv) the manner in which transfer of funds may be effected
within the payment system;
(v) the procedure for netting of payment instructions effecting
the payment obligations under the payment system;
(vi) the financial status, experience of management and integrity
of the applicant;
(vii) interests of consumers, including the terms and conditions
governing their relationship with payment system providers;
(viii) monetary and credit policies; and
(ix) such other factors as may be considered relevant by the
Reserve Bank.
(2) An authorisation issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be in such
form as may be prescribed and shall—
(a) state the date on which it takes effect;
(b) state the conditions subject to which the authorisation shall
be in force;
(c) indicate the payment of fees, if any , to be paid for the
authorisation to be in force;
(d) if it considers necessary, require the applicant to furnish
such security for the proper conduct of the payment system
under the provisions of this Act;
(e) continue to be in force till the authorisation is revoked.
(3) Where the Reserve Bank considers that the application for
authorisation should be refused, it shall give the applicant a written
notice to that effect stating the reasons for the refusal:

41
Provided that no such application shall be refused unless the
applicant is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.”
113. It has been expressed in the memoranda submitted to the
Committee that for streamlining the approval process and for the
benefit of the applicants, it would be preferable to prescribe timelines
within which approval/refusal may be accorded to an application.
Agreeing to the suggestion for prescribing a timeline for the approval/
refusal of application for authorization, the Government has proposed
to add, to this effect, a new sub-clause (4) after sub-clause (3) in
Clause 7, which reads as under:
“Every application for authorization shall be processed by the
Reserve Bank as expeditiously as possible and an endeavor shall
be made to dispose of the application within six months from the
date of filing of the application.”
114. The stipulations of Clause 7 do not prescribe any time limit
for the Reserve Bank to issue or refuse authorization for operating
a payment system. In response to the need expressed for prescribing
a time-line within which the Reserve Bank may convey the grant of
authorization or refusal of authorization for commencement of a
payment system, the Government have proposed to incorporate a
new sub-clause (4) to Clause 7 whereby a time-line of six months is
prescribed as a general rule for the Reserve Bank to decide on the
applications. As stipulating a time frame would be of benefit to the
applicants and have the positive effect of streamlining the approval
processes, the Committee desire that the proviso to this effect, as
proposed be incorporated in the Bill.
Clause 8—Revocation of Authorisation
115. Clause 8 of the Bill which seeks to provide for revocation of
authorisation given to a system provider under Section 7 reads as
follows:
“(1) If a system provider,—
(i) contravenes any provisions of this Act, or
(ii) does not comply with the regulations, or
(iii) fails to comply with the orders or directions issued by the
designated authority, or
(iv) operates the payment system contrary to the conditions
subject to which the authorisation was issued, the Reserve

42
Bank may, by order, revoke the authorisation given to such
system provider under this Act:
Provided that no order of revocation under sub-section ( 1) shall be
made—
(i) except after giving the system provider a reasonable
opportunity of being heard; and
(ii) without prejudice to the direction of the Reserve Bank to
the system provider that the operation of the payment
system shall not be carried out till the order of revocation
is issued.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to a case where
the Reserve Bank considers it necessary to revoke the authorisation
given to a payment system in the interest of the monetary policy
of the country or for any other reasons to be specified by it in the
order.
(3) The order of revocation issued under sub-section ( 1) shall
include necessary provisions to protect and safeguard the interests
of persons affected by such order of revocation.
(4) Where a system provider becomes insolvent and is wound up,
he shall inform the fact of his being insolvent or being wound up
to the Reserve Bank and thereupon the Reserve Bank shall take
such steps as deemed necessary, revoke his authorisation to operate
the payment system.”
116. Asked to explain the rationale of the provisions of Clause 8
(1) (ii) whereby the Reserve Bank would be empowered to revoke the
authorisation on account of ‘non-compliance with regulations’, the
Ministry of Finance, in reply stated:
“Given the sensitive nature of the service being provided, it is
essential to safeguard the interests of all participants. The system
has to be robust, efficient, dependable at all times and must deliver
in all normal circumstances. Any lapse on the part of the system
provider could create a situation where systemically important
payment systems might be effected. Such effects have the potential
to trigger a collapse of the systems and throw the entire cycle of
movement of funds and economic activity out of gear. These would
be listed in the Regulations to which the system provider has to
comply. Adequate powers of revocation are required which would
act as deterrents on service providers who might indulge in un-
authorised activities .”

43
117. With specific reference to the provisions of Clause 8 (4) as per
which, a system provider is to inform the fact of being insolvent or
being would up to the Reserve bank, it has been pointed out that the
word ‘he’ appearing in the first line should be replaced by the word
‘it’ and the word ‘his’ appearing in the second line replaced by the
word ‘its’, so as to enable clarity in the provisions.
118. Expressing agreement to the suggestion for making the
provision clear, the Ministry of Finance have proposed to modify Clause
8 (4) to read as under:
“Where a system provider becomes insolvent or is wound up,
such system provider shall inform the fact of his or it, as the case
may be, being insolvent or wound up to the Reserve Bank and
thereupon the Reserve Bank shall take such steps as deemed
necessary to revoke the authorization issued to such payment
system provider to operate the payment system.”
119. Yet another suggestion made in regard to the provisions of
Clause 8 (4) has been that the Reserve Bank should be entitled to take
suo-moto action on the likelihood of a system provider being insolvent
or likely to be wound up instead of waiting to be informed of the
same as proposed under Clause 8 (4). In this regard, the Ministry of
Finance, have however, informed as under:
“The provisions of sub-clause (2) of Clause 8 are wide enough to
cover situations were Reserve Bank can, suo-moto, revoke the
authorisation even in case of insolvency/winding up of the system
provider.”
120. The Committee observe that the proposal to bestow the
power of revoking the authorization given to system providers would
serve as a deterrent on the system providers from indulging in
unauthorized activities. However, with specific reference to the
provisions of sub-clause (4) of Clause 8, whereby a system provider
is to inter alia  inform the Reserve Bank of the fact of being wound
up or being insolvent, the Committee note that the usage of the
words ‘he’ and ‘his’ in the provision to refer to the system providers
has the possibility of becoming ambiguous as evidenced from the
view points expressed before them. For addressing the issue, the
Government have proposed to suitably modify the proviso to Clause
8 by substituting the word ‘he’ with ‘such system provider’, to which
the Committee express agreement, and desire that the same be
incorporated in the Bill.

44
Clause 9—Appeal to the Central Government.
121. Clause 9 which provides for an appeal to the Central
Government against an order of refusal/revocation of authorization by
the Reserve Bank reads as under:
“(1) Any applicant for an authorisation whose application for the
operation of the payment system is refused under sub-section ( 3)
of section 7 or a system provider who is aggrieved by an order of
revocation under section 8 may, within thirty days from the date
on which the order is communicated to him, appeal to the Central
Government.
(2) The decision of the Central Government on the appeal under
sub-section (1) shall be final.”
122. W ith a view to prescribe a timeframe for the Central
Government to decide on the appeal against an order of refusal or a
revocation order issued by RBI under Section 8, the State Bank of
India, in their Memorandum submitted to the Committee inter alia
suggested incorporation of the words, ‘which will be disposed by the
Central Government within a period of three months from the date of
receipt of such appeal’ at the end of Clause 9 (1).
123. Expressing agreement to the suggestion for fixing a time-
frame, the Ministry of Finance have submitted as under:
“It is suggested that a period of three months can be laid down
for the Central Government to hear and dispose of the appeal
against the decision of RBI to refuse authorization or revoke
authorization as the case may be.”
124. The Government have expressed agreement to the need felt
for fixing a time limit of three months for the Central Government
to decide on an appeal that may be made by a system provider
aggrieved by a revocation order issued by the Reserve Bank in terms
of the provisions of Clause 8, or whose application for authorization
is refused by the Bank in terms of the provisions of Clause 7 of the
Bill. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that a provision to
this effect, for fixing a timeframe of three months for the Central
Government to decide on the appeals against the revocation or
rejection order issued by the Reserve Bank be incorporated in Clause
9 of the Bill.

45
Clause 10—Power to determine standards
125. Clause 10 of the Bill which seeks to empower the Reserve
Bank with the power to determine and prescribe standards in respect
of inter alia format of payment instructions, timing to be maintained
by payment systems, manner of transfer of funds within payment
systems etc. reads as under:
(1) The Reserve Bank may, from time to time, prescribe—
(a) the format of payment instructions and the size and shape
of such instructions;
(b) the timings to be maintained by payment systems;
(c) the manner of transfer of funds within the payment system,
either through paper, electronic means or in any other
manner, between banks or between banks and other
institutions;
(d) such other standards to be complied with the payment
systems generally;
(e) the criteria for membership of payment systems including
continuation, termination and rejection of membership;
(f) the conditions subject to which the system participants shall
participate in such fund transfers and the rights and
obligations of the system participants in such funds.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Reserve Bank may, from time to time, issue such guidelines, as it may
consider necessary for the proper and efficient management of the
payment systems generally or with reference to any particular payment
system.
126. Sub-clause (c) of Clause 10 (1) deals with the manner of
transfer of funds within the payment systems, amongst the banks or
other institutions. Since the expression “other institutions” has not been
defined in the Bill, the Ministry of Finance were questioned whether
it would not be appropriate to replace the term ‘other institutions,
with ‘system participants’ in the provision. In response thereto, the
Ministry of Finance proposed to rephrase sub-clause (c) of Clause 10
(1) to read as follows:
“the manner of transfer of funds within the payment system, either
through paper, electronic means or in any other manner, between
banks or between banks and other System Participants .”

46
127. The CII, in their memorandum have suggested that the matters
listed under Clause 10 (1) in respect of which the Reserve Bank would
be empowered to prescribe/determine standards should also cover basic
security standards for participants in a payment system. Questioned
in this regard, the Ministry of Finance stated as follows:
“Clause 7(1) (iii) mentions that the RBI will issue authorization to
an applicant taking into consideration (among other things) the
terms and conditions of operation of the proposed payment system
including any security procedure. This provision should take care
of basic security standards. Hence there is no need to carry out
any modification as suggested.”
128. Yet another suggestion made by the CII, relates to prescribing
penalties for system participants for not meeting the performance
standards prescribed viz. standards relating to timings to be maintained
in aspect of RTGS/EFT credits etc. In this regard, the Ministry of
Finance in a written submission, stated as under:
“If the performance standards are prescribed by RBI in accordance
with its powers under the Bill (for example Clause 10), every such
non-compliance would be a contravention attracting the provisions
of Clause 26 (5) of the Bill.”
129. The proposals of Clause 10 of the Bill seek to empower the
Reserve Bank to determine and prescribe standards for payment
systems, which inter alia relate to the format of payment instructions,
timings to be maintained etc. With specific reference to Clause 10
(1) (c) on the ‘manner of transfer of funds within the payment system’
in respect of which the Reserve Bank would be prescribing standards,
the Committee observe that in response to the questioning on the
appropriateness of the usage of the term, ‘other institutions’ in the
proviso, which has not been defined in the Bill, the Government
have proposed to substitute the phrase ‘between banks and other
institutions’ to read as ‘between banks and other system participants’.
As the substitution of the word ‘other institutions’ with ‘system
participants’ in the proviso would provide clarity by removing the
likely ambiguity, the Committee endorse the same for being carried
out.
130. The Committee also feel it to be essential here to emphasize
on the importance, which the performance standards, inclusive of
the security procedures to be maintained by the payment systems,
acquire in the current day context, where new types of payment
services and arrangements, involving extensive application of

47
technology are being witnessed. The Committee trust that the
performance standards to be evolved and formulated by the Reserve
Bank for adherence by the payment systems participants would be
based on international benchmarks and adaptable to local
requirements.
Clause 11—Notice of change in the payment system
131. Clause 11 of the Bill which inter alia provides that the system
providers shall not cause any change effecting the structure or operation
of the payment system without the approval of the Reserve Bank
reads as under:
“(1) No system provider shall cause any change in the system
which would affect the structure or the operation of the payment
system without—
(a) giving notice of not less then thirty days to the system
participants; and
(b) the approval of the Reserve Bank.
(2) Where the Reserve Bank has any objection, to the proposed
change for any reason, it shall communicate such objection to the
systems provider within two weeks of receipt of the intimation of
the proposed changes from the system provider.
(3) The system provider shall, within a period of two weeks of the
receipt of the objections from the Reserve Bank forward his
comments to the Reserve Bank and the proposed changes may be
effected only after the receipt of approval from the Reserve Bank.”
132. In terms of the provisions of Clause 11, no system provider
shall ‘cause any change in the system’ without giving notice of not
less than 30 days to the system participants. As the changes proposed
by a system provider could, inter alia, require further upgrades/changes
at the participant end, it has been suggested in the memoranda
submitted to the Committee that the stipulated period be mandated as
60 days so as to give sufficient notice to the participants to manage
the respective internal upgrades/developments to support the changes
etc. The Ministry of Finance have, in this regard, in a written reply,
submitted as under:
“Normally a 30 day period is sufficient for system participants to
carry out the changes at their end. However in terms of Clause
11(1) (b) it is suggested that the RBI while approving the request

48
of the system provider for making changes in the system, if it is
convinced that more time is needed, may stipulate a time period
exceeding 30 days for system participants to carry out changes at
their end.”
133. For this purpose, the Ministry have proposed to add the
following as a proviso to sub-clause (1) of Clause 11 of the Bill:
“Provided that in the interest of monetary policy of the country or
in public interest, Reserve Bank may permit the system provider
to make any changes in system without complying with
requirement specified in item (a) of sub-clause (1) of Clause 11.”
134. Asked further whether it would not be essential to make it
clear in the provision that the thirty days notice period to be given to
the participants by the system provider for carrying out changes would
commence following the Reserve Bank’s approval in terms of Clause
11 (1) (b) the Government agreed to the suggestion.  Accordingly, it
has been proposed to rephrase Clause 11 (1) (b) to read as ‘after the
approval of Reserve Bank’.
135. The Citibank, in their memorandum, opined that such of the
major changes having significant impact to the payment system process,
which would attract the provisions of Clause 11 (1), should be defined
to the extent possible. In response to related queries, the Ministry of
Finance informed that these issues will be elaborated upon in the
guidelines framed for the purpose and the directions to be issued by
the Reserve Bank to system providers from time to time.
136. The Committee observe that the proposals of Clause 11 are
inter alia intended to provide that the system providers can effect
changes involving the structure or operation of the payment system
only with the approval of the Reserve Bank and by giving notice of
not less than 30 days to the system participants. The proposed
provisions are, however, not adequate to address situations where a
time period of more than 30 days may be required by the system
providers inter alia for carrying out the changes and enabling the
participants viz., banks etc. to carry out concomitant upgrades etc.,
as may be required. Secondly, the Committee also observe that the
provisions, as proposed do not clearly stipulate that the 30 days
notice period would commence following the Reserve Bank’s approval
for the changes proposed. The Government have, for addressing the
inconsistencies in the provisions, as pointed out by the Committee,
proposed to add a proviso to Clause 11, whereby the Reserve Bank

49
could be empowered to waive the stipulated notice period of
30 days in the interest of ‘monetary policy of the country or in
public interest’. The Government have also proposed to modify sub-
clause (b) of Clause 11 to clearly specify that the notice period for
carrying out the changes would commence following the Reserve
Bank’s approval of the related proposal. The Committee desire that
the modifications in the provisions, as agreed to, which would inter
alia take care of situations where a period in excess of 30 days may
be required for the system providers/participants for carrying out
changes in the structure/operation of payment systems be
incorporated.
137. The Committee also expect that as submitted before them,
the Reserve Bank would elaborate/specify the nature and type of
major changes in Payment Systems that would attract the stipulation
of obtaining prior approval in terms of the provisions of Clause 11.
Clause 17: Power to issue directions
138. Clause 17 which seeks to provide for issuance of written
directions by the Reserve Bank reads as under:
 “Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that—
(a)a  payment system or a system participant is engaging in,
or is about to engage in, any act, omission or course of
conduct that results, or is likely to result, in systemic risk
being inadequately controlled; or
(b) any action under clause (a) is likely to affect the payment
system, monetary or the credit policy of the country, the
Reserve Bank may issue directions in writing to such
payment system requiring it, within such time as the Reserve
Bank may specify—
(i) to cease and desist from engaging in the act, omission
or course of conduct or to ensure the system
participants to cease and desist from the act, omission
or course of conduct; or
(ii) to perform such acts as may be necessary, in the
opinion of the Reserve Bank, to remedy the situation.”
139. With reference to the proposals of Clause 17 (b), which seek
to empower the RBI to issue ‘cease and desist direction’ to a system
provider or participant for engaging in acts of omission which may

50
affect the payment system, the ICICI bank, in their memorandum, felt
it to be desirable to change the expression, ‘payment system, monetary
or the credit policy’ to ‘payment system and the monetary and credit
policy’.
140. The ICICI bank also emphasized on ensuring that a reasoned
cease and desist order is given by the RBI to the system provider/
participant and a redressal mechanism put in place to assist a system
participant/provider aggrieved by a cease and desist order. In this
regard, the Ministry of Finance informed as under in a written reply:
“The cease and desist order may have to be issued if the action
is likely to affect the payment system or monetary policy or credit
policy. The intention is to cover actions which are likely to affect
monetary policy or credit policy. In a given case, a particular action
may affect the monetary policy without affecting the credit policy
or vice versa . Therefore, in order to make the intention more clear,
the provision may be modified as under:
(b) ‘any action under clause (a) is likely to affect the payment
system or the monetary policy or the credit policy of the country’.”
141. The Committee observe that the phrasing of sub-clause (b)
of the Clause 17 which inter alia  reads ‘affect the payment system,
monetary or the credit policy’ does not bring out in clear terms the
intended purpose of enabling the Reserve Bank to issue ‘cease and
desist’ directions or initiating such action as may be necessary for
restraining a payment system or system participants from indulging
in acts detrimental to the payment system or the monetary policy or
the credit policy. Consequently, the Government have proposed to
rephrase the said sub-clause to read as ‘… is likely to affect the
payment system or the monetary policy or the credit policy of the
country’. The Committee, express agreement with the proposed
rephrasing of the proviso, which would make the intended purpose
of the provisions clear. However, they also desire that the procedure
to be followed by the Reserve Bank in issuing ‘cease and desist’
directions is well laid out and issues concerning the follow up action
to be taken thereon, inclusive of the redressal mechanism that may
be available to the entities affected by such ‘directions’, are
adequately addressed in the regulations to be framed following the
commencement of the Act.
Clause 23: Settlement and netting
142. Clause 23 of the bill, which provides for gross and netting
procedure; procedure for distribution of losses; and finality and

51
irrevocable nature of settlement reads as under:
(1) The payment obligations and settlement instructions among
the system participants shall be determined in accordance
with the gross or netting procedure, as the case may be,
approved by the Reserve Bank while issuing authorisation
to a payment system.
(2) Where the rules providing for the operation of a payment
system indicates a procedure for the distribution of losses
between the system participants and the payment system,
such procedure shall have effect notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(3)A  settlement effected under such procedure shall be final
and irrevocable.
(4) Where a system participant is declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction as insolvent or is dissolved or wound
up, then notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or any other law for the time being
in force, the order of dissolution or adjudication or winding
up, as the case may be, shall not affect any settlement that
has become final and irrevocable.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the settlement, whether gross or net, referred to in this section is final
and irrevocable as soon as the money, securities, foreign exchange or
derivatives or other transactions payable as a result of such settlement
is determined, whether or not such money, securities or foreign
exchange or derivatives or other transactions is actually paid.
143. In terms of Clause 23 (1), payment obligations and settlement
instructions among the system participants are to be determined in
accordance with the ‘gross or netting procedure’. The CII, in their
Memorandum pointed out to the Committee that the concept, ‘gross
settlement’ has not been defined under the Chapter on definitions or
in the proviso to the section. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance,
in a written reply, stated as follows:
“The definition of “gross settlement” can be given if so desired.
But this is a well understood term in the banking industry.”
144. The provisions of Clause 23 (4) inter alia stipulate that the
order of dissolution or winding up etc., ‘shall not affect any settlement
that has become final and irrevocable’.

52
145. Dr. R.H. Patil, Chairman, Clearing Corporation of India in his
memorandum, and also in the course of personal hearing pointed out
to the Committee that unless specific protection was given to the
collaterals collected from the members from insolvency and liquidation
laws, it would be difficult to enforce collaterals in the event of
insolvency or liquidation of a market participant towards fulfillment
of settlement obligations. Therefore, incorporation of a proviso to
Clause 23(4) has been suggested on the following lines:
“Provided further that such order of dissolution or adjudication or
winding up as the case may be, shall also not affect the right of
system provider to appropriate the collaterals contributed by the
system participant towards its settlement or other obligations in
accordance with the Rules or Regulations of such System Provider.”
146. Agreeing to the suggestion that collaterals should be excluded
from being the subject of any stay or attachment the government has
proposed to modify clause 23 (4) by adding the following after the
words ‘final and irrevocable’ in clause 23 (4):
“and the right of the system provider to appropriate any collaterals
contributed by the system participant towards its settlement or
other obligations in accordance with the rules and regulations of
such system provider.”
147. The modified/revised proviso [clause 23 (4)] proposed reads
as follows:
“Where a system participant is declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction as insolvent oris dissolved or wound up, then
notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956
or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any other law for the time
being in force, the order of dissolution or adjudication or winding
up, as the case may be, shall not affect any settlement that has
become final and irrevocable and the right of the system provider
to appropriate any collaterals contributed by the system participant
towards its settlement or other obligations in accordance with the
rules and regulations of such system provider.”
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the settlement, whether gross or net, referred to in this section is final
irrevocable as soon as the money, securities, foreign exchange or
derivatives or other transactions payable as a result of such settlements
is determined, whether or not such money, securities or foreign
exchange or derivatives or other transactions is actually paid.

53
148. The Committee observe that though sub-clauses (3) and (4)
of Clause 23 provide for ‘finality and irrevocability of settlement’
on account of legal or operational reasons etc., the provisions, as
pointed out by the Chairman, Clearing Corporation of India do not
provide specific protection to the collaterals collected from the
participant members by the settlement agencies/system providers from
insolvency and liquidation laws. The Committee understand that
collateralization, particularly in the case of gross settlement systems
acquires importance for providing guaranteed settlements. By way
of responding to the suggestion for giving specific protection for
collaterals, the Government have proposed to substitute proviso (4)
of Clause 23 to inter alia  specify in clear terms that any stay,
attachment etc. would not come in the way of the system providers
to ‘appropriate any collaterals contributed by the system participant
towards its settlement or other obligations’. The Committee
recommend that the modification proposed to the provision for
excluding collaterals from being subject to any stay or litigation etc.
be necessarily incorporated.
149. With specific reference to the provisions of sub clause (1) of
Clause 23 as per which determination of payment obligations and
settlement instructions among the system participants ‘would be in
accordance with the gross or netting procedure’, the Committee note
that the Government have opined that it may not be essential to
specifically define the term ‘gross settlement’. Considering the need
for clarity on certain provisions of the Bill, the Committee are of
the opinion that it may be necessary on part of the Reserve Bank to
re-assess, whether or not, the term ‘gross settlement’ needs to be
separately defined so as to leave no scope for any ambiguity.
Clause 24: Settlement of disputes
150. Clause 24 of the bill which prescribes the dispute settlement
mechanism in a payment system reads as under:
“(1) The system provider shall make provision in its rules or
regulations for creation of panel consisting of not less than three
system participants other than the system participants who are
parties to the dispute to decide the disputes between system
participants in respect of any matter connected with the operation
of the payment system.
(2) Where any dispute in respect of any matter connected with the
operation of the payment system arises between two or more

54
system participants, the system provider shall refer the dispute to
the panel referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Where any dispute arises between any system participant and
the system provider or between system providers or where any of
the system participants is not satisfied with the decision of the
panel referred to in sub-section ( 1), the dispute shall be referred to
the Reserve Bank.
(4) The dispute referred to the Reserve Bank for adjudication under
sub-section ( 3) shall be disposed of by an officer of the Reserve
Bank generally or specially authorised in this behalf and the
decision of the Reserve Bank shall be final and binding.
(5) Where a dispute arises between the Reserve Bank, while acting
in its capacity as system provider or as system participant, and
another system participant, the matter shall be referred to a
Securities Appellate Tribunal established under section 15K of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) for
settlement of the dispute and the decision of the said Tribunal
shall be final and binding.”
151. Issues brought to light in regard to the provisions relating to
settlement of disputes in a payment system viz., Clause 24 (1) to (5)
(Settlement of Disputes) inter-alia include:
(i) The panel to be set up in each case [in terms of Clause 24 (1)]
should consist of participants from various sectors to ensure
fair and unbiased dispute resolution. For example, if a
dispute relates to a private bank and a co-operative bank,
the panel may consist of a PSU bank, a private bank and
a co-operative bank.
(ii) Alternatively, a mechanism as contained in the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 may be considered wherein each
of the parties select one arbitrator and thereafter the
arbitrators so selected choose a third/neutral arbitrator.
(iii) It would be advisable to stipulate timelines for decisions
taken by RBI/Panel appointed.
152. In response to the related queries posed, the Government
have, in a written reply submitted that the ‘details of the composition
of the dispute resolution panel as well as the question of timelines for
decisions by RBI/panel would be brought out in the regulations/
guidelines to be framed under the proposed Act’.

55
153. Asked whether it would not be appropriate that disputes
between system participants and system providers involving points of
law should go to the appropriate legal authorities, the Ministry of
Finance have in reply, stated as under:
“In the interests of smooth functioning of the payment systems it
is important that there should be speedy resolution of disputes by
persons who are conversant with the subject which is technical in
nature. Such disputes are proposed to be referred to RBI who will
be empowered to regulate and supervise the payment and
settlement systems.”
154. The Committee observe that the dispute resolution
mechanism as proposed under the provisions of Clause 24 inter alia
provides for constitution of a panel of ‘not less than three system
participants’ to decide on disputes among system participants, with
the Reserve Bank functioning as the Appellate Authority. The
framework for settlement of disputes among system participants,
between system participants and system providers etc., as proposed
under Clause 24 is expected to enable in speedy resolution of the
points of dispute, which are generally expected to be of technical
nature. The Committee, however, desire that as assured in the
submissions made before them by the Government, issues relating
to fairness and objectivity in the constitution of the ‘dispute
resolution panel’ and stipulating time-lines for the decisions to be
taken by the panel/RBI are comprehensively addressed in the
regulations/guidelines to be framed under the proposed Act.
Clause 25 : Dishonour of electronic funds Transfer for insufficiency,
etc., of funds in the account.
155. Clause 25 of the Bill, which inter alia provides for penalty for
non-execution of electronic funds transfer reads as follows:
“(1) Where an electronic funds transfer initiated by a person cannot
be executed because of the account of money standing to the credit
of that account is insufficient to honour the transfer instruction or
that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account
by an agreement made with a bank, such person shall be deemed
to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any
other provision of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may be extended to two years, or with fine which
may extend to twice the amount of the electronic funds transfer,
or with both:

56
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless—
(a) the electronic funds transfer was initiated for payment of
any amount of money to another person for the discharge,
in whole or in part, of any debt on other liability;
(b) the electronic funds transfer was initiated in accordance with
the relevant procedural guidelines issued by the system
provider;
(c) the payee makes a demand for the payment of the said
amount of money by giving a notice in writing to the person
initiating the electronic funds transfer within thirty days of
the receipt of information by him from the bank concerned
regarding the dishonour of the electronic funds transfer; and
(d) the person initiating the electronic funds transfer fails to
make the payment of the said money to the payee within
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “debt or liability”
means a legally enforceable debt or other liability, as the case may
be.
(2) The provisions of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) shall apply to the dishonour of electronic
funds transfer to the extent the circumstances admit.”
156. In this regard, a number of Banks have in their memoranda
submitted to the Committee sought to highlight the aspect of ‘electronic
funds transfer’ having certain unresolved technology and security
issues. For instance, the HSBC Bank pointed out that it was not very
clear as to how the intended beneficiary would be made aware that
the electronic funds transfer has failed at the paying bank due to
insufficiency of funds. Questioned whether the existing framework of
electronic funds transfer enables the beneficiary or the beneficiary bank,
to be aware of a failed electronic fund transfer on account of insufficient
funds in the payer’s account for enabling the beneficiary (payee) to
give a notice to the person initiating the transfer, the Ministry of
Finance, in a written reply, stated as under:
“The rules and regulations of the system provider should provide
for the information flow within the payment system between
system participants and between system provider and system
participants. It is felt that the same may not be incorporated in
the Bill.”

57
157. Questioned further whether it would not be necessary to
rephrase the words ‘debt or liability’ in the explanation to section 25
(1), to read as ‘debt or other liability’ so as to correspond to Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, the Ministry of Finance
expressed agreement. In this regard, the Ministry have also stated:
“Further, in item (a) of sub-clause (1) of Clause 25 the words ‘any
debt or liability’ may be modified as ‘any other debt or other liability’,
so as to bring in clarity in the provision”.
158. Asked to clarify/elaborate on the provisions of Clause 25 (2),
whereby the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 would apply to dishonour of electronic funds transfer to the
extent the circumstances admit, the Ministry have in response stated
as follows:
“The provisions of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments
Act 1881 has been made applicable to the extent circumstances
admit. For example, in terms of the provisions of Section 142 (a)
of the NI Act, “no court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under Section 138 except upon a complaint, in writing,
made by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in due
course of the cheque.” In case of the offence under Clause 25 of
the Bill, the concept of “payee” and “holder in due course” does
not exist and the person committing the offence would be the
person who initiates the electronic fund transfer. Similarly, the
provisions of Section 146 providing for presumption of the act of
dishonour of the bank’s slip or memo having thereon the official
mark denoting that the cheque has been dishonoured, may not be
applicable as it is, to the offence under Clause 25 of the Bill.”
159. Clause 28(1) of the Bill inter-alia provides that no court should
take cognizance of an offence punishable under the proposed Act,
‘except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve
Bank’. Questioned whether the provisions of clause 28 (1) would be in
consonance with the proposals of Clause 25, which seek to treat
dishonour of electronic fund instructions at par with dishonour of
cheques, the Ministry of Finance informed as under in reply:—
“It is felt that in all offences, barring the offence under Clause 25,
congnizance should only be taken on a complaint from an
authorized officer of RBI, as is the case in RBI Act, 1934 and
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
160. While the Committee consider it to be a desirable proposition
to treat dishonour of electronic funds transfer instructions at par

58
with dishonour of cheques on account of insufficiency of funds,
they can not also, help taking note of the contentions made and the
concerns expressed by some banks, which mainly relate to the
prevailing practice of ‘information flow’ and ‘technology related
aspects’ of electronic funds transfer. The contentions made on the
provisions of Clause 25, inter alia , centre on the adequacy of the
existing information flow system between the “payee’s” and the
“beneficiary’s” banks to know of a failed electronic funds transfer
etc. The Committee, therefore, feel it to be essential on the part of
the Reserve Bank to comprehensively address issues relating to the
adequacy of the existing practice and procedure of flow of
information and other technology related aspects of electronic funds
transfer, so as to leave no scope for any question marks, before
giving effect to the proposal for treating dishonour of electronic
fund transfer instructions at par with dishonour of cheques.
161. The Committee also note that the words and expressions
relating to ‘debt’ and ‘liability’ in proviso (a) of sub clause (1) of
Clause 25 and the Explanation under Section 25 (1) are not in
consonance with the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, which, as per sub clause (2) of Clause 25
would ‘apply to dishonour of electronic funds transfer to the extent
the circumstances admit’. The Committee desire that, as agreed to,
necessary modifications to this effect are carried out in the Bill.
162. The Committee further note from the submissions of the
Government that Clause 28 (1) of the Bill stipulates that no court
shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under the proposed
Act, ‘except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the
Reserve Bank’. The Committee note that this stipulation is not
proposed to be made applicable to the provisions of Clause 25
relating to dishonour of electronic funds transfer. The Committee,
accordingly, recommend that the aspect of non-applicability of the
stipulations of Clause 28 (1) to instances of dishonour of electronic
funds transfer be made adequately clear in the provisions.
Clause 30: Power of Reserve Bank to impose fines
163. Clause 30 of the Bill reads as under:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 26, if a
contravention or default of the nature referred to in sub-
section ( 2) or sub-section ( 6) of section 26, as the case may
be, the Reserve Bank may impose on the person
contravening or committing default a penalty not exceeding

59
five lakh rupees or twice the amount involved in such
contravention or default where such amount is quantifiable,
whichever is more, and where such contravention of default
is a continuing one, a further penalty which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees for every day after the first
during which the contravention or default continues.
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub-section ( 1),
the Reserve Bank shall serve a notice on the defaulter
requiring him to show cause why the amount specified in
the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and a
reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given
to such defaulter.
(3) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve Bank under this section
shall be payable within a period of thirty days from the
date on which notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding
payment of the sum is served on the defaulter and, in the
event of failure of the person to pay the sum within such
period, may be recovered on a direction made by the
principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where
the registered office of the defaulter company or the official
business of the person is situated.
(4) The Reserve Bank may recover the amount of penalty by
debiting the current account, if any, of the defaulter or by
liquidating the securities held to the credit of the defaulter
or in accordance with the provisions of this Act:
Provided that no such direction shall be made, except on
an application made by an officer of the Reserve Bank
authorised by it in this behalf.
(5) The court which makes a direction under sub-section ( 3)
shall issue a certificate specifying the sum payable by the
defaulter and every such certificate shall be enforceable in
the same manner as it were a decree made by the court in
a civil suit.
(6) Where any complaint has been filed against any person in
any court in respect of the contravention or default of the
nature referred to in sub-section (2), or, as the case may be,
sub-section ( 4) of section 26, then no proceeding for the
imposition of any penalty on the person shall be taken under
this section.

60
164. Sub-clause (3) of Clause 30 provides for payment of penalty
imposed by the Reserve Bank within thirty days from date of notice
demanding payment and on the failure of which the same shall be
recovered on a direction made by the principal Civil Court having
jurisdiction; and Sub-clause (4) of Clause 30 provides for recovery of
the amount of penalty by the Reserve Bank by debiting the current
account of the defaulter or by liquidating the securities held to its
credit.
165. Further, the proviso after Clause 30 (4) provides as under:
“Provided that no such direction shall be made, except on an
application made by an officer of the Reserve Bank authorized by
it in this behalf.”
166. Asked whether it was not necessary to incorporate the afore-
mentioned proviso, which inter alia  provides that ‘no such direction
shall be made, except on an application’, after sub-clause (3) of Clause
30 instead of sub-clause (4) of Clause 30 as provided for in the Bill,
the Ministry of Finance expressed agreement.
167. The Committee observe that while sub-clause (3) of Clause
30 inter alia provides for direction to be made by the Principal Civil
Court in the event of failure of the defaulter to pay the penalty
amount, sub-clause (4) of Clause 30 provides for recovery of the
amount of penalty by debiting the current account of the defaulter
or by liquidating the securities held by the defaulter.
168. The Committee pointed out that the proviso as shown below
Clause 30 (4) relates to the condition for issue of direction by the
Principal Civil court and as such should have been shown below
Clause 30 (3) to which the Ministry agreed.
169. The Committee, therefore, expect that the proviso relating
to the Direction that could be made by the Principal Civil Court
which is incorrectly shown under Clause 30 (4) is appropriately
shown under Clause 30 (3).
Clause 38: Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations.
170. Clause 38 of the Bill reads as under:—
(1) The Reserve Bank may, with the previous sanction of the
Central Government, by notification, make regulations for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

61
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, such regulations may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers and functions of the Committee constituted
under sub-section ( 2), the time and venue of its
meetings and the procedure to be followed by it at its
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings, under
sub-section ( 4) of section 3;
(b) the form and manner in which an application for
authorisation for commencing or carrying on a payment
system shall be made and the fees which shall accompany
such application under sub-section ( 2) of section 5;
(c) the form in which an authorisation to operate a payment
system under this Act shall be issued under sub-section (2)
of section 7;
(d) the format of payment instructions and other matters relating
to determination of standards to be complied with by the
payment systems under sub-section ( 1) of section 10;
(e) the intervals, at which and the form and manner in which
the information or returns required by the Reserve Bank
shall be furnished under section 12;
(f) such other matters as are required to be, or may be,
prescribed.
(2) Any regulation made under this section shall have effect from
such earlier or later date (not earlier than the date of commencement
of this Act) as may be specified in the regulation.
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by
the Reserve Bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that
Central Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses
agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall,
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that regulation.

62
171. A view-point expressed by some experts has been that as in
the case of SEBI, RBI should be authorized to make regulations for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill, without the prior sanction of
the Central Government. Informing that this matter was under active
consideration, the Ministry of Finance also stated that the revised
Clause 38 (1) may be as under:
“The Reserve Bank may,by notification in the Official Gazette make
regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all or any
of the matters for which provision is necessary or convenientto
carry out the purposes of this Act”.
172. The Committee note that by way of acting on the need
expressed for enabling the Reserve Bank to exercise the regulation
making power without the prior sanction of the Central Government
for the purposes of the proposed Act, as is the case with SEBI under
the SEBI Act, the Government have proposed to revise the provisions
of Clause 38 (1) to this effect. The Committee recommend that the
revision of the provisions of Clause 38 (1), as proposed, for
empowering the Reserve Bank with the power to make regulations
without the prior sanction of the Central Government be incorporated
in the Bill.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
15 May, 2007 Chairman,
25 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

63
NOTE OF DISSENT
Shri Rupchand Pal, MP
The Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006 was referred to
Standing Committee on Finance for its scrutiny and recommendations.
In the course of deliberations a lot of objections regarding the
objectives of the Bill were raised by different witnesses.
The Committee has admitted that the necessity of the proposed
legislation has been questioned particularly by the Reserve Bank’s
Officers and Employees’ Association. Many of the questions raised did
not have satisfactory replies and clarifications either.
In the Draft Report in the background paragraph 5, it has been
correctly observed that “the Central Bank of any country is usually
the driving force in the development of national payment system. The
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as the Central Bank of the country has
been playing this developmental role and initiating many reforms aimed
at improving the efficiency in payment and settlement systems of the
country”.
It has been mentioned that to provide legal framework to the
existing system, it required to set up a new entity called the National
Payments Corporation of India which would be taking over the
operations of retail payment system. This job so long was done by the
Reserve Bank of India itself. While the large value payment systems,
the Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGSS) will continue to be
operated by RBI while the inter Bank Govt. Securities & Foreign
Exchange Clearing System is operated by Clearing Corporation of India
Ltd. (CCIL),. But the apprehension is that in not so distant future the
whole payment and settlement system would be done by private
entities (companies) only.
It is said that RBI by this piece of legislation will have a legal
framework even after the newer systems involving high technology
payment systems come into operation. The RBI will have exclusive
jurisdiction as a regulator which it has been doing and doing
successfully so long and the Payment & Settlement Systems Bill 2006
states that the proposed measure will remove the “conflict of interest”
as it exists to-day between RBI as Regulator, supervisor and also service

64
provider on the other hand. The Bill intends to do away with that i.e.
the conflict of interest in RBI as regulator and supervisor and also at
the same time service provider. And lastly, the argument that this
measure will largely help complying with the international standard
and BIS is not at all a strong one.
I do not subscribe to the views expressed in the recommendations
in the Draft Report.
My Note of Dissent is based on the following:—
First, the RBI has been doing the function relating to payment
settlement very efficiently and successfully. Secondly , most of the
countries including USA, Germany, Chine, Brazil etc. the Central Banks
have been functioning both as regulator and supervisor as also service
provider. There is no case for conflict of interest. Moreover, several
documents of BIS do not indicate any universal practice in the matter.
Rather they emphasize that the system should be country-specific and
the involvement of the Central Bank of the country as service provider
along with its role as regulator and supervisor is to be judged on the
basis of need of the concerned country.
I believe that India needs continuation of the RBI in the current
role it has been successfully playing both as regulator, supervisor and
also service provider.
As regards changes required to provide legal framework, I believe
an appropriate amendment of section 58 (P) of RBI Act, 1935 could
serve the purpose in order to strengthen the RBI’s regulatory authority
and there is no need for separate enactment as is being proposed in
the Bill.
The RBI has been functioning very efficiently with a state of the
art technology. With RTGS, ECS, EFT, MICR and growing geographical
coverage of cheque clearance system of our country, RBI has achieved
best international standard as rightly claimed by the Governor of RBI
also.
On the other hand, the proposed new private entity have neither
the expertise nor experience such as RBI does possess as the key service
provider and also manager of clearing houses.
So, it is absolutely not in the interest of national economy to disrupt
the existing process and the ongoing processes of improvement of the
payment system by the RBI.
I think the Board of Payment & Settlement System under the
chairmanship of Governor of RBI is a proven competent authority in

65
the matter and can act as umbrella organization which the new private
entity cannot do. The ongoing innovation process of payment and
settlement system have been carried forward efficiently under this
Board of Payment & Settlement. I think the BPS should be allowed to
continue the process of further improvement of cheque clearance system
and the creation of a private new entity meanwhile will only weaken
the whole process of improvement.
Hence my dissent. I reiterate my view that instead of going for a
new Act and setting up of new private entity for payment and
settlement system, the best course would be to amend section 58(P) of
RBI Act, 1934 and/or any other section of RBI Act, 1934 appropriately
to strengthen the regulatory authority of RBI and remove the legal
weaknesses in the matter.
My Note of Dissent may kindly be incorporated in the Report
itself.
Sd/-
(Shri Rupchand Pal, MP)

66
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 29th September, 2006 from
1100 to 1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Kanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijoy Krishna
3. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
4. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri A.R. Shaheen
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Banking
Division)
1. Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Spl. Secretary (FS)
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA) Banking Division

67
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Banking
Division) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006. The Chairman then asked the representatives to
furnish written notes on certain points raised by Members in respect
of which replies were not readily available with them.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

68
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 26th October, 2006 from 1030 to
1135 hrs. and 1150 to 1250 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri A.R. Shaheen
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
11. Shri Mahendra Mohan
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(1030 to 1135 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** ** **

69
4. The evidence was concluded.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
(1150 to 1250 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1. All India Bank Officers’ Association
(i) Shri Alok Khare, President
(ii) Shri N.S. Virk, Vice President
(iii) Shri S. Nagarajan, Deputy General Secretary
2. All India Bank Officers’ Confederation
(i) Shri Amar Pal, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Chandraprasad, Deputy General Secretary
3. All India Bank Employee’s Association
(i) Shri C.H. Venkatachalam, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Ramanand, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri C.M. Puri, General Council Member
4. Bank Employees Federation of India
(i) Shri S. Bardhan, General Secretary
(ii) Shri M.L. Malkotia, Joint Secretary
5. National Confederation of Bank Employees
(i) Shri V .K. Gupta, Vice President
(ii) Shri Profullo Kumar Patnaik, General Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the (i) All India Bank Officers’ Association, (ii) All India Bank Officers’
Confederation, (iii) All India Bank Employees’ Association, (iv) Bank
Employees Federation of India, and (v) National Confederation of Bank
Employees to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.

70
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006. The Members raised queries which were replied to
by the representatives.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

71
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7th November, 2006 from
1030 to 1130 hrs. and 1215 to 1315 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
7. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Mahendra Mohan
9. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
10. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
11. Shri Rashid Alvi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(1030 to 1130 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** ** **
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

72
Part II
(1215 to 1315 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL)
Dr. R.H. Patil, Chairman
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Advisor—Legal
Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA)
Shri C.E.S. Azariah, Chief Executive Officer
6. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of—
(i) Clearing Corporation of India Limited; (ii) Indian Banks’ Association
and (iii) Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association to
the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
7. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006. The Members raised question which were replied
to by the representatives.
8. The evidence was concluded.
9. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

73
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Friday, 29th December, 2006 from 1030 to
1140, 1200 to 1310 hrs. and 1400 to 1540 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Vijoy Krishan
5. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri K.S. Rao
11. Shri A.R. Shaheen
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Raashid Alvi
15. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
16. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

74
2. ** ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** ** **
Part-I
(at 1040 hours)
WITNESSES
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers & Employees
1. Shri Samir Ghosh, Convener.
2. Shri S.V . Mahadik, General Secretary, AIRBWF.
3. Shri S.C. Sharma, Secretary , RBIOA.
4. Shri C.M. Paulsil, Secretary , AIRBOA.
5. Shri K.K. Sharma, Secretary, AIR&EA
5. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers & Employees and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker.
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
United Forum of Reserve Bank Officers & Employees on the Payment
and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006. Thereafter, the Members asked
clarificatory questions which were replied to by the representatives.
The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available
with them might be furnished to the Committee within a week’s time.
Part-II
(1200-1310 hours)
W
ITNESSES
ICICI Bank
1. Shri K.V . Kamath, Managing Director & CEO
2. Smt. Kalpana Morparia, Joint Managing Director
3. Smt. Madhbi Puri Butch, Chief Corporate Brand Officer
IDBI Bank
1. Shri V .P . Shetty, CMD

75
HDFC Bank
1. Mr. Bhavesh Zaveri, Group Head—Wholesale Operations
2. Mr. Rajender Sehgal, Executive Vice-President & Head,
Corporate Banking
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
ICICI Bank, IDBI Bank and HDFC Bank on the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006. Thereafter, the Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee within a week’s time
8. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-III
(1400-1540 hours)
State Bank of India
1. Shri O.P . Bhatt, Chairman
2. Shri A.D. Chaudhuri, CGM (Banking Operations)
Punjab National Bank
1. Shri S.C. Gupta, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri U.S. Bhargava, General Manager
3. Shri A. Balasubramanian, General Manager
Bank of India
1. Shri M. Balachandran, CMD
2. Shri H.S. Bhatia, GM
Canara Bank
1. Shri M.B.N. Rao, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri B.S. Hegde, General Manager,
3. Shri T.Y. Prabhu, General Manager

76
9. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank, Bank of India and Canara
Bank on the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006. Thereafter,
the Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by
the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives
that the information with regard to queries of the Members which
was not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee within a week’s time.
10. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

77
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 11th January, 2007 from 1100 to
1240 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Vijoy Krishna
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Mahendra Mohan
14. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
16. Shri Vijay J. Darda
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

78
WITNESSES
Reserve Bank of India
1. Shri V . Leeladhar, Deputy Governor
2. Shri A.P . Hota, CGM
3. Shri K.D. Zacharias, Legal Adviser
4. Shri Arun Pasricha, DGM
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions which
were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed
the representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

79
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1st February 2007 from
1100 to 1240 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab— Acting Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Yashwant Sinha
14. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
1. Shri Vinod Rai, Spl. Secretary (FS)
2. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA) Banking Division

80
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab to chair the sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the
Rules of Procedure.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in connection
with the examination of the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill,
2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied
to by the representatives. The acting Chairman, then, directed the
representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

81
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 14 May, 2007 from 1600 to
1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
1. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
2. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee and requested them to give their suggestions
on the recommendations contained in the Draft Report on Payment
and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006.

82
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report
on the Payment and Settlement Systems Bill, 2006. The Committee,
after deliberation, adopted the same without any modification.
4. As some Members did not agree to the recommendations
contained in the report, they desired to submit their notes of dissent.
The Chairman permitted them to submit their notes of dissent by
15 May, 2007.
5. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Report and also to make consequential verbal changes arising out
of factual verification and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

83
APPENDIX
25 July 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 50 of 2006
THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2006
_________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
DESIGNATED A UTHORITY AND ITS C OMMITTEE
3. Designated authority and its Committee.
CHAPTER III
AUTHORISATION OF P AYMENT SYSTEMS
4. Payment system not to operate without authorisation.
5. Application for authorisation.
6. Inquiry by the Reserve Bank.
7. Issue or refusal of authorisation.
8. Revocation of authorisation.
9. Appeal to the Central Government.

84
CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
REGULATION AND SUPERVISION BY THE R ESERVE B ANK
10. Power to determine standards.
11. Notice of change in the payment system.
12. Power to call for returns, documents or other information.
13. Access to information.
14. Power to enter and inspect.
15. Information, etc., to be confidential.
16. Power to carry out audit and inspection.
17. Power to issue directions.
18. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions generally.
19. Directions of Reserve Bank to be complied with.
CHAPTER V
R
IGHTS AND DUTIES OF A SYSTEM PROVIDER
20. System provider to act in accordance with the Act, regulations,
etc.
21. Duties of system provider.
22. Duty to keep documents in the payment system confidential.
23. Settlement and netting.
CHAPTER VI
S
ETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
24. Settlement of disputes.
25. Dishonour of Electronic funds Transfer for insufficiency, etc.,
of funds in the account.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
26. Penalties.
27. Offences by companies.
28. Cognizance of offences.
29. Application of fine.
30. Power of Reserve Bank to impose fines.
31. Power to compound offences.

85
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
32. Act to have overriding effect.
33. Mode of recovery of penalty.
34. Non-applicability to Stock and other Exchanges.
35. Certain persons deemed to be public servants.
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.
37. Power to remove difficulties.
38. Power to Reserve Bank to make regulations.

86
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 50. of 2006
THE PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation and supervision of payment systems in India
and to designate the Reserve Bank of India as the authority for that
purpose and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment
and Settlement Systems Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act, and any reference to the
commencement in any such provision of this
Act shall be construed as a reference to the
commencement of that provision.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(a) “bank” means,—
(i) a bank included in the Second
Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934;
(ii) a post office savings bank;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment
Definitions
2 of 1934

87
(iii) a banking company as defined in
clause (c) of section 5, of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949;
(iv) a co-operative bank as defined in
clause (cci) of section 5, as inserted by
section 56, of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949; and
(v) such other bank as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify
for the purposes of this Act.
(b) “derivative” means as instrument, to be
settled as a future date, whose value is derived
from change in interest rate, foreign exchange
rate, credit rating or credit index, price of
securities (also called “underlying”), or a
combination of more than one of them and
includes interest rate swaps, forward rate
agreements, foreign currency swaps, foreign
currency rupee swaps, foreign currency options,
foreign currency rupee options or such other
instruments as may be specified by the Reserve
bank from time to time;
(c) “electronic funds transfer” means any
transfer of funds which is initiated through
electronic means so as to instruct, authorise or
order a bank to debit or credit an account with
that bank, and includes point of sale transfer,
automated teller machine transactions, direct
deposits or withdrawals of funds, transfers
initiated by telephone and card payment;
(d) “netting” means the determination by
the system provider of the amount of money
or securities, due or payable or deliverable, as
a result of setting off or adjusting, the claims
and obligations among the system participants,
including the claims and obligations arising out
of the termination by the system provider, on
the insolvency or liquidation of any system
participant or such other circumstances as the
system provider may specify in its rules or
10 of 1949
10 of 1949

88
regulations, of the transactions admitted for
settlement at a future date so that only a net
claim be demanded or a net obligation be
owed;
(e) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(f) “payment instruction” means any
instrument, authorisation or order in any form,
including electronic means, to effect a
payment,—
(i) by a person to a system participant;
or
(ii) by a system participant to another
system participant;
(g) “payment obligation” means an
indebtedness that is owned by one system
participant to another system participant as a
result of clearing or settlement of one or more
payment instructions relating to funds,
securities or foreign exchange or derivatives or
other transactions;
(h) “payment system” means a system that
enables payment to be effected between a payer
and a beneficiary, and includes clearing,
payment or settlement service or all of them,
but does not include a stock exchange;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by
regulations made under this Act;
(j) “regulation” means a regulation made
under this act;
(k) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank
of India, constituted under the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934;
(l) “security” means Government securities
as defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944 or such
other securities as may be notified by the
Central Government from time to time under
that Act;
2 of 1934.
18 of 1944.

89
(m) “settlement” means settlement of
payment instructions and includes the
settlement of securities, foreign exchange or
derivatives or other transactions which
involve payment obligations;
(n) “systemic risk” means the risk
arising from—
(i) the inability of a system participant
to meet his payment obligations under the
payment system as and when they become
due; or
(ii) any disruption in the system,
which may cause other participants to
fail to meet their obligations when due,
ultimately likely to have an impact on the
stability of the system;
(o) “system participant” means a bank
or any other person participating in a
payment system and includes the system
provider;
(p) “system provider” means a person
who operates an authorised payment
system.
(2) Words and expressions used, but not
defined in this Act and defined in the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 or the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
D
ESIGNATED AUTHORITY AND ITS C OMMITTEE
3. (1) The Reserve Bank shall be the
designated authority for the regulation and
supervision of payment systems under this Act.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purposes
of exercising the powers and performing  the
functions and discharging the duties conferred
Designated
authority
and its
Committee.
2 of 1934.
10 of 1949.

90
on it by or under this Act, by regulation,
constitute a committee of the Central Board of
the Reserve Bank.
(3) The Committee constituted under sub-
section (2) shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) Governor, Reserve Bank of India,
who shall be the Chairman of the Board;
(b) Deputy Governors, Reserve Bank of
India, out of whom the Deputy Governor
who is the in charge of the Payment and
Settlement Systems, shall be the Vice-
Chairman of the Board.
(c) Not exceeding three Directors from
the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of
India to be nominated by the Governor.
(4) The powers and functions of the
Committee constituted under sub-section (2),
the time and venue of its meetings, the
procedure to be followed in such meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) and
other matters incidental thereto shall be such
as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORISATION OF PAYMENT SYSTEMS
4. (1) No person shall commence or operate
a payment system except under and in
accordance with an authorisation issued by the
Reserve Bank under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to—
(a) the continued operation of an
existing payment system on the
commencement of this Act for a period not
exceeding six months from such
commencement, unless within such period,
the operator of such payment system
obtains an authorisation under this Act;
Payment
system not
to operate
without
authorisation.

91
(b) any person acting as the duly
appointed agent of another person to whom
the payment is due;
(c) a company accepting payments
either from its holding company or any of
its subsidiary companies or from any other
company which is also a subsidiary of the
same holding company;
(d) any other person whom the Reserve
Bank may, after considering the interests of
monetary policy or efficient operation of
payment systems, the size of any payment
system or for any other reason, by
notification, exempt from the provisions of
this section.
5. (1) Any person desirous of commencing
or carrying on a payment system may apply
to the Reserve Bank for an authorisation under
this Act.
(2) An application under sub-section (1)
shall be made in such form and in such manner
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may
be prescribed.
6. After the receipt of an application under
section 5, and before an authorisation is issued
under this Act, the Reserve Bank may make
such inquiries as it may consider necessary for
the purpose of satisfying itself about the
genuineness of the particulars furnished by the
applicant, his capacity to operate the payment
system, the credentials of the participants or
for any other reason and when such an inquiry
is conducted by any person authorised by it in
this behalf, it may require a report from such
person in respect of the inquiry.
7. (1) The Reserve Bank may, if satisfied,
after any inquiry under section 6 or otherwise,
that the application is complete in all respects
and that it conforms to the provisions of this
Act and the regulations issue an authorisation
Application
for
authori-
sation.
Inquiry by
the
Reserve
Bank.
Issue or
refusal of
authori-
sation.

92
for operating the payment system under this
Act having regard to the following
considerations, namely:—
(i) the need for the proposed payment
system or the services proposed to be
undertaken by it;
(ii) the technical standards or the design
of the proposed payment system;
(iii) the terms and conditions of
operation of the proposed payment system
including any security procedure;
(iv) the manner in which transfer of
funds may be effected within the payment
system;
(v) the procedure for netting of
payment instructions effecting the payment
obligations under the payment system;
(vi) the financial status, experience of
management and integrity of the applicant;
(vii) interests of consumers, including
the terms and conditions governing their
relationship with payment system
providers;
(viii) monetary and credit policies; and
(ix) such other factors as may be
considered relevant by the Reserve Bank.
(2) An authorisation issued under
sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may
be prescribed and shall—
(a) state the date on which it takes
effect;
(b) state the conditions subject to which
the authorisation shall be in force;
(c) indicate the payment of fees, if any,
to be paid for the authorisation to be in
force;

93
(d) if it considers necessary, require the
applicant to furnish such security for the
proper conduct of the payment system
under the provisions of this Act;
(e) continue to be in force till the
authorisation is revoked.
(3) Where the Reserve Bank considers that
the application for authorisation should be
refused, it shall give the applicant a written
notice to that effect stating the reasons for the
refusal;
Provided that no such application shall be
refused unless the applicant is given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
8. (1) If a system provider,—
(i) contravenes any provisions of this
Act, or
(ii) does not comply with the
regulations, or
(iii) fails to comply with the orders or
directions issued by the designated
authority, or
(iv) operates the payment system
contrary to the conditions subject to which
the authorisation was issued,
the Reserve Bank may, by order, revoke the
authorisation given to such system provider
under this Act:
Provided that no order of revocation under
sub-section (1) shall be made—
(i) except after giving the system
provider a reasonable opportunity of being
heard; and
(ii) without prejudice to the direction
of the Reserve Bank to the system provider
that the operation of the payment system
shall not be carried out till the order of
revocation is issued.
Revocation
of authori-
sation.

94
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1)
shall apply to a case where the Reserve Bank
considers it necessary to revoke the
authorisation given to a payment system in the
interest of the monetary policy of the country
or for any other reasons to be specified by it
in the order.
(3) The order of revocation issued under
sub-section (1) shall include necessary
provisions to protect and safeguard the interests
of persons affected by such order of revocation.
(4) Where a system provider becomes
insolvent and I wound up, he shall inform the
fact of his being insolvent or being wound up
to the Reserve Bank and thereupon the Reserve
Bank shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
revoke his authorisation to operate the payment
system.
9. (1) Any application for an authorisation
whose application for the operation of the
payment system is refused under sub-section
(3) of section 7 or a system provider who is
aggrieved by an order of revocation under
section 8 may, within thirty days fro the date
on which the order is communicated to him,
appeal to the Central Government.
(2) The decision of the Central Government
on the appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
final
CHAPTER IV
R
EGULATION AND SUPERVISION BY THE
RESERVE B ANK
10. (1) The Reserve Bank may, from time
to time, prescribe—
(a) the format of payment instructions
and the size and shape of such instructions;
(b) the timings to be maintained by
payment systems;
Appeal to
the Central
Government.
Power to
determine
standards.

95
(c) the manner of transfer of funds
within the payment system, either through
paper, electronic means or in any other
manner, between banks or between banks
and other institutions;
(d) such other standards to be complied
with the payment systems generally;
(e) the criteria for membership of
payment systems including continuation,
termination and rejection of membership;
(f) the conditions subject to which the
system participants shall participate in such
fund transfers and the rights and
obligations of the system participants in
such funds.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may, from,
time to time, issue such guidelines, as it may
consider necessary for the proper and efficient
management of the payment systems generally
or with reference to any particular payment
system.
11. (1) No system provider shall cause any
change in the system which would affect the
structure or the operation of the payment
system without—
(a) giving notice of note less thirty days
to the system participants; and
(b) the approval of the Reserve Bank.
(2) Where  the Reserve Bank has any
objection, to the proposed change for any
reason, it shall communicate such objection to
the systems provider within two weeks of
receipt of the intimation of the proposed
changes from the system provider.
(3) The system provider shall, within a
period of two weeks of the receipt of the
objections from the Reserve Bank forward his
Notice of
change in
the
payment
system.

96
comments to the Reserve Bank and the
proposed changes may be effected only after
the receipt of approval from the Reserve Bank.
12. The Reserve Bank may call for from
any system provider such returns of documents
as it may require or other information in regard
to the operation of his payment system at such
intervals, in such form and in such manner, as
the Reserve Bank may require from time to
time or as may be prescribed and such order
shall be complied with.
13. The Reserve Bank shall have right to
access any information relating to the operation
of any payment system and system provider
and all the system participants shall provide
access to such information to the Reserve Bank.
14. Any officer of the Reserve Bank duly
authorised by it in writing in this behalf, may
for ensuing compliance with the provisions of
this Act or any regulations, enter any premises
where a payment system is being operated and
may inspect any equipment, including any
computer system or other documents situated
at such premises and call upon any employee
of such system provider or participant thereof
or any other person working in such premises
to furnish such information or documents as
may be required by such officer.
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), any document or information
obtained by the Reserve Bank under sections
12 to 14 (both inclusive) shall be kept
confidential.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may disclose
any document or information obtained by it
under sections 12 to 14 (both inclusive) to any
person to whom the disclosure of such
document or information is considered
necessary for protecting the integrity,
Power to
call for
returns,
documents
or other
information.
Access to
information.
Power to
enter and
inspect.
Information,
etc., to be
confidential.

97
effectiveness or security of the payment system,
or in the interest of banking of monetary policy
or the operation of the payment systems
generally or in the public interest.
16. The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose
of carrying out its functions under this Act,
conduct or get conducted audits and
inspections of a payment system or participants
thereof and it shall be the duty of the system
provider and the system participants to assist
the Reserve Bank to carry out such audit or
inspection, as the case may be.
17. Where the Reserve Bank is of the
opinion that,—
(a) a payment system or a system
participant is engaging in, or is about to
engage in, any act, omission or course of
conduct that results, or is likely to result,
in systemic risk being inadequately
controlled; or
(b) any action under clause (a) is likely
to affect the payment system, monetary or
the credit policy of the country,
the Reserve Bank may issue directions in
writing to such payment system requiring it,
within such time as the Reserve Bank may
specify—
(i) to cease and desist from engaging
in the act, omission or course of conduct
or to ensure the system participants to cease
and desist from the act, omission or course
of conduct; or
(ii) to perform such acts as may be
necessary, in the opinion of the Reserve
Bank, to remedy the situation.
18. Without prejudice to the provisions of
the foregoing, the Reserve Bank may , if it is
satisfied that for the purpose of enabling it to
regulate the payment systems or in the interest
of management or operation of any of the
Power to
carry out
and it and
inspection.
Power to
issue
directions.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
give
directions
generally.

98
payment systems or in public interest, it is
necessary so to do, lay down policies relating
to the regulation of payment systems including
electronic, non-electronic, domestic and
international payment systems affecting
domestic transactions and give such directions
in writing as it may consider necessary to
system providers or the system participants or
any other person either generally or to any such
agency and in particular, pertaining to the
conduct of business relating to payment
systems.
19. Every person to whom a direction has
been issued by the Reserve Bank under this
Act shall comply with such direction without
any delay and a report of compliance shall be
furnished to the Reserve Bank within the time
allowed by it.
CHAPTER V
R
IGHTS AND DUTIES OF A SYSTEM PROVIDER
20. Every system provider shall operate the
payment system in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, the regulations, the
contract governing the relationship among the
system participants, the rules and regulations
which deal with the operation of the payment
system and the conditions subject to which the
authorisation is issued, and the directions given
by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
21. (1) Every system provider shall disclose
to the existing or potential system participants,
the terms and conditions including the charges
and the limitations of liability under the
payment system, supply them with copies of
the rules and regulations governing the
operation of the payment system, netting
arrangements and other relevant documents.
Directions
of Reserve
Bank to be
complied
with.
System
provider to
act in
accordance
with the
Act,
regulations,
etc.
Duties of a
system
provider.

99
(2) It shall be the duty of every system
provider to maintain the standards determined
under this Act.
22. (1) A system provider shall not disclose
to any other person the existence or contents
of any document or part thereof or other
information given to him by a system
participant, except where such disclosure is
required under the provisions of this Act or
the disclosure is made with the express or
implied consent of the system participant
concerned or where such disclosure is in
obedience to the orders passed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a statutory authority
in exercise of the powers conferred by a statue.
(2) The provisions of the Banks’ Book
Evidence Act 1891 shall apply in relation to
the information or documents or other books
in whatever form maintained by the system
provider.
23. (1) The payment obligations and
settlement instructions among the system
participants shall be determined in accordance
with the gross or netting procedure, as the case
may be, approved by the Reserve Bank while
issuing authorisation to a payment system.
(2) Where the rules providing for the
operation of a payment system indicates a
procedure for the distribution of losses between
the system participants and the payment
system, such procedure shall have effect
notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being
in force.
(3) A settlement effected under such
procedure shall be final and irrevocable.
(4) Where a system participant is declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction as insolvent
or is dissolved or wound up, then
notwithstanding anything contained in the
Duty to
keep
documents
in the
payment
system
confidential.
Settlement
and
netting.
18 of 1991

100
Companies Act, 1956 or the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 or any other law for the time being
in force, the order of dissolution or adjudication
or winding up, as the case may be, shall not
affect any settlement that has become final and
irrevocable.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that the settlement, whether
gross or net, referred to in this section is final
and irrevocable as soon as the money, securities,
foreign exchange or derivatives or other
transactions payable as a result of such
settlement is determined, where or not such
money, securities or foreign exchange or
derivatives or other transactions is actually
paid.
CHAPTER VI
S
ETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
24. (1) The system provider shall make
provision in its rules or regulations for creation
of panel consisting of not less than three system
participants other than the system participants
who are parties to the dispute to decide the
disputes between system participants in respect
of any matter connected with the operation of
the payment system.
(2) Where any dispute in respect of any
matter connected with the operation of the
payment system arises between two or more
system participants, the system provider shall
refer the dispute to the panel referred to in
sub-section (1).
(3) Where any dispute arises between any
system participant and the system provider or
between system providers or where any of the
system participants is not satisfied with the
decision of the panel referred to in sub-section
(1), the dispute shall be referred to the Reserve
Bank.
Settlement
of
disputes.
1 of 1956
10 of 1949

101
(4) The dispute referred to the Reserve Bank
for adjudication under sub-section (3) shall be
disposed of by an officer of the Reserve Bank
generally or specially authorised in this behalf
and the decision of the Reserve Bank shall be
final and binding.
(5) Where a dispute arises between the
Reserve Bank, while acting in its capacity as
system provider or as system participant, and
another system participant, the matter shall be
referred to a Securities Appellate tribunal
established under section 15K of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 for
settlement of the dispute and the decision of
the said Tribunal shall be final and binding.
25. (1) Where an electronic funds transfer
initiated by a  person cannot be executed
because of the account of money standing to
the credit of that account is insufficient to
honour the transfer instruction or that it exceeds
the amount arranged to be paid from that
account by an agreement made with a bank,
such person shall be deemed to have committed
an offence and shall, without prejudice to any
other provision of this act, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may be
extended to two years, or with fine which may
extend to twice the amount of the electronic
funds transfer, or with both;
Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply unless—
(a) the electronic funds transfer was
initiated for payment of any amount of
money to another person for the discharge,
in whole or in part, of any debt on other
liability;
(b) the electronic funds transfer was
initiated in accordance with the relevant
procedural guidelines issued by the system
provider;
Dishonour
of
electronic
funds
Transfer
for
insufficiency,
etc., of
funds in
the
account.
15 of 1992

102
(c) the payee makes a demand for the
payment of the said amount of money by
giving a notice in writing to the person
initiating the electronic funds transfer
within thirty days of the receipt of
information by him from the bank
concerned regarding the dishonour of the
electronic funds transfer; and
(d) the person initiating the electronic
funds transfer fails to make the payment
of the said money to the payee within
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
section, “debt or liability” means a legally
enforceable debt or other liability, as the case
may be.
(2) The provisions of the Chapter XVII of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 shall
apply to the dishonour of electronic funds
transfer to the extent the circumstances admit
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
26. (1) Where a person contravenes the
provisions of section 4 or fails to comply with
the terms and conditions subject to which the
authorisation has been issued under section 7,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than one month
but which may extend to ten years or with
fine which may extend to one crore rupees or
with both and with a further fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees for every day, after
the first during which the contravention or
failure to comply continues.
(2) Whoever in any application for
authorisation or in any return or other
document or any information required to be
furnished by or under, or for the purpose of,
any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a
Penalties.
26 of 1881.

103
statement which is false in any material
particular, knowing it to be false or wilfully
omits to make a material statement, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than ten
lakh rupees and which may extend to fifty lakh
rupees.
(3) If any person fails to produce any
statement, information, returns or other
documents, or to furnish any statement,
information, returns or other documents, which
under section 12 or under section 13, it is his
duty to furnish or to answer any question
relating to the operation of a payment system
which is required by an officer making
inspection under section 14, he shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees in respect of each offence and if
he persists in such refusal, to a further fine
which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees for every day for which the offence
continues.
(4) If any person discloses any information,
the disclosure of which is prohibited under
section 22, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees or an amount equal to twice
the amount of the damages incurred by the act
of such disclosure, whichever is higher or with
both.
(5) Where a direction issued under this Act
is not complied with within the period
stipulated by the Reserve Bank or where no
such period is stipulated, within a reasonable
time or where the penalty imposed by the
Reserve Bank under section 30 is not paid
within a period of thirty days from the date of
the order, the system provider or the system
participant which has failed to comply with the
direction or to pay the penalty shall be

104
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than one month but which
may extend to ten years, or with fine which
may extend to one crore rupees or with both
and where the failure to comply with the
direction continues, with further fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees for every day,
after the first during which the contravention
continues.
(6) If any provision of this Act is
contravened, or if any default is made in
complying with any other requirement of this
Act, or of any regulation, order or direction
made or given or condition imposed thereunder
and in respect of which no penalty has been
specified, then, the person guilty of such
contravention or default, as the case may be,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to ten lakh rupees and where a contravention
or default is a continuing one, with a further
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees for every day, after the first during
which the contravention or default continues.
27. (1) Where a person committing a
contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or any regulation, direction or order made
thereunder is a company, every person who, at
the time of the contravention, was in charge
of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render any such person liable to
punishment if he proves that the contravention
took place without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent such
contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where a contravention of any
Offences
by
companies.

105
of the provisions of this Act or of any
regulation, direction or order made thereunder
has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the contravention has taken place
with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary
or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of the contravention and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “company” means any body
corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm,
means a partner in the firm.
28. (1) No court shall take cognizance of
an offence punishable under this Act except
upon a complaint in writing made by an officer
of the Reserve Bank generally or specially
authorised by it is writing in this behalf, and
no court, lower than that of a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class shall try any such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a
Magistrate may dispense with the personal
attendance of the officer of the Reserve Bank
filing the compliant, but the Magistrate may,
in his discretion, at any stage of the
proceedings, direct the personal attendance of
the complaint.
29. A court imposing any fine under this
Act may of direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment
of, the costs of the proceedings.
Cognizance
of offences.
Application
of fine.
2 of 1974

106
30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 26, if a contravention of default of
the nature referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-
section (6) of section 26, as the case may be,
the Reserve Bank may impose on the person
contravening or committing default a penalty
not exceeding five lakh rupees or twice the
amount involved in such contravention or
default where such amount is quantifiable,
whichever is more, and where such
contravention of default is a continuing one, a
further penalty which may extend to twenty-
five thousand rupees for every day after the
first during which the contravention or default
continues.
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty
under sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank shall
serve a notice on the defaulter requiring him
to show cause why the amount specified in
the notice should not be imposed as a penalty
and a reasonable opportunity of being heard
shall also be given to such defaulter.
(3) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve
Bank under this section shall be payable within
a period of thirty days from the date on which
notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding
payment of the sum is served on the defaulter
and, in the event of failure of the person to
pay the sum within such period, may be
recovered on a direction made by the principal
civil court having jurisdiction in the area where
the registered office of the defaulter company
or the official business of the person is situated.
(4) The Reserve Bank may recover the
amount of penalty by debiting the current
account, if any, of the defaulter or by
liquidating the securities held to the credit of
the defaulter or in accordance with the
provisions of this Act:
Provided that no such direction shall be
made, except on an application made by an
Power of
Reserve
Bank of
impose
fines.

107
officer of the Reserve Bank authorised by it in
this behalf.
(5) The court which makes a direction
under sub-section (3) shall issue a certificate
specifying the sum payable by the defaulter
and every such certificate shall be enforceable
in the same manner as it were a decree made
by the court in a civil suit.
(6) Where any complaint has been filed
against any person in any court in respect of
the contravention or default of the nature
referred to in sub-section (2), or, as the case
may be, sub-section (4) of section 26, then no
proceeding for the imposition or any penalty
on the person shall be taken under this section.
31. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any
offence punishable under this Act for any
contravention, not being an offence punishable
with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment
and also with fine, may on receipt of an
application from the person committing such
contravention either before or after the
institution of any proceeding, be compounded
by an officer of the Reserve Bank duly
authorised by it in this behalf.
(2) Where a contravention has been
compounded under sub-section (1), no
proceeding or further proceeding, as the case
may be, shall be initiated or continued, as the
case may be, against the person committing
such contravention under that section, in
respect of the contravention so compounded.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
32. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
Power to
compound
offences.
Act to
have
overriding
effect.
2 of 1974

108
33. (1) The penalty imposed on the
defaulter by the Reserve Bank under section
30 may be recovered by issuing a notice to
any person from whom any amount is due to
the defaulter, by requiring such person to
deduct from the amount payable by him to
the defaulter, the amount payable to the
Reserve Bank by way of penalty and pay to
the Reserve Bank.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this
section, every person to whom a notice is
issued under this sub-section shall be bound
to comply with such notice, and, in particular,
where such notice is issued to a post office,
bank or an insure, it shall not be necessary for
any passbook, deposit receipt, policy or any
other document to be produced for the purpose
of any entry, endorsement or the like being
made before payment is made notwithstanding
that any rule, practice or requirement to the
contrary.
(3) Any claim respecting any property in
relation to which a notice under this sub-section
has been issued arising after the date of the
notice shall be void as against any demand
contained in the notice.
(4) Where a person to whom the notice
under this sub-section is sent objects to it by a
statement on oath that the sum demanded or
any part thereof is not due to the defaulter or
that he does not hold any money for or on
account of the defaulter, then, nothing contained
in this sub-section shall be deemed to require
such person to pay any such sum or part
thereof, as the case may be, but if it is
discovered that such statement was false in any
material particular, such person shall be
personally liable to the Reserve Bank to the
extent of his own liability to the defaulter on
the date of the notice, or to the extent of the
penalty imposed on the defaulter by the
Reserve Bank, whichever is less.
Mode of
recovery of
penalty.

109
(5) The Reserve Bank may at any time or
from time to time, amend or revoke any notice
issued under this section or extend the time
for making the payment in pursuance of such
notice.
(6) The Reserve Bank shall grant a receipt
for any amount paid to it in compliance with
a notice issued under this section and the
person so paying shall be fully discharged from
his liability to the defaulter to the extent of the
amount so paid.
(7) Any person discharging any liability to
the defaulter after the receipt of a notice under
this section shall be personally liable to the
Reserve Bank to the extent of his own liability
to the defaulter so discharged or to the extent
of the penalty imposed on the defaulter by the
Reserve Bank, whichever is less.
(8) If the person to whom the notice under
this section is sent fails to make payment in
pursuance thereof to the Reserve Bank, he shall
be deemed to be the defaulter in respect of the
amount specified in the notice and further
proceedings may be taken against him for the
realisation of the amount as if it were an arrear
due from him in the manner provided in this
section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, “defaulter” means any person or system
provider or system participant on whom the
Reserve Bank has imposed a penalty under
section 30.
34. Nothing contained in this Act shall
apply to any of the securities traded on Stock
Exchanges or other Exchanges except in so far
as they relate to settlement of payment
instructions.
35. (1) Ever officer of the Reserve Bank who
has been entrusted with any power under this
Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant
Non-
applicability
to Stock
and other
Exchanges.
Certain
persons
deemed to
be public
servants.

110
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
36. No suit or other legal proceedings shall
lie against the Central Government, the Reserve
Bank, or any officer thereof for any damage
caused or likely to be caused by anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of this Act, any regulations,
order or direction made or given thereunder.
37. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provision is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
38. (1) The Reserve Bank may, with the
previous sanction of the Central Government,
by notification, make regulations for carrying
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing provision, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers and functions of the
Committee constituted under sub-section
(2), the time and venue of its meetings and
the procedure to be followed by it at its
meetings (including the quorum at
such meetings), under sub-section (4) of
section 3;
(b) the form and manner in which an
application for authorisation for
commencing or carrying on a payment
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
make
regulations.

111
system shall be made and the fees which
shall accompany such application under
sub-section (2) of section 5;
(c) the form in which an authorisation
to operate a payment system under this Act
shall be issued under sub-section (2) of
section 7;
(d) the format of payment instructions
and other matters relating to determination
of standards to be complied with by the
payment systems under sub-section (1) of
section 10;
(e) the intervals, at which and the form
and manner in which the information or
returns required by the Reserve Bank shall
be furnished under section 12;
(f) such other matters as are required
to be, or may be, prescribed.
(2) Any regulation made under this section
shall have effect from such earlier or later date
(nor earlier than the date of commencement of
this Act) as may be specified in the regulation.
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may
be after it is made by the Reserve Bank, be
forwarded to the Central Government and that
Central Government shall cause a copy of the
same to be laid before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the regulation,
or both Houses agree that the regulation should
not be made, the regulation shall, thereafter,
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that regulation.

112
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The payment and settlement systems serve as a backbone of
financial system of a country. In India, a host of payment systems are
in operation ranging from manual paper-based clearing to the Real
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System for facilitating non-cash mode
of payments. The various retail payment systems in operation include
the manual paper based clearing, MICR Clearing, Electronic Funds
Transfer Systems (including the Electronic Clearing Services), Card
Based Payment Systems, Government Securities Clearing, Forex
Clearing, etc. The paper-based cheque processing is operated and
managed by the Reserve Bank of India at the four metro centres,
whereas at twelve other centres it is operated by public sector banks
and managed by Reserve Bank of India, while at the remaining centres
it is operated as well as managed by certain public sector banks.
Clearing houses are not legal entities but voluntary bodies of banks
who have come together for the expressed purpose of clearing payment
instruments and instructions. The rules and regulations for the
functioning of clearing houses are contractual in nature. Among the
large-value payment systems, the Real Time Gross Settlement System
is operated by the Reserve Bank of India while the inter-bank
Government Securities and Foreign Exchange Clearing Systems are at
present operated by Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL). A new
National Payments Corporation of India would be taking over the
operations of retail payment systems. Both these corporate entities will
be outside the specific regulatory purview. The operations of Card
Based systems is not under the regulatory purview of the Reserve
Bank of India, however, the Bank is indirectly regulating it through
the card issuing banks.
2. The Central Board of directors of the Reserve Bank of India
under section 58(2)(p) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 is
empowered to make regulations of clearing houses for banks and under
58(2)(pp) of the said Act, to make regulations of fund transfer through
electronic means. These regulations are adopted by the members of
the clearing houses by way of contractual agreement.
3. The procedure of netting (arriving at the multilateral net
settlement) is not legally recognised but has been adopted as a working
procedure adopted by the members of the clearing houses.
4. In view of the above, it is considered necessary to enact a specific
legislation which will, inter alia , empower the Reserve Bank of India

113
to act as the designated authority with the following powers and
functions, namely:—
(a) to regulate and oversee the various payment and settlement
systems in the country including those operated by non-banks like
CCIL, card companies, other payment system providers and the
proposed umbrella organisation for retail payments;
(b) lay down the procedure for authorisation of payment
systems as well as revocation of authorisation;
(c) to lay down operational and technical standards for various
payment systems;
(d) to call for information and furnish returns and documents
from the service providers;
(e) to issue directions and guidelines to system providers;
(f) to audit and inspect the systems and premises of the system
providers;
(g) to lay down the duties of the system providers;
(h) to levy fines and impose penalties for not providing
information or documents or wrongfully disclosing information,
etc.; and
(i) to make regulations for carrying out the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
5. The Bill, inter alia,  seeks to provide for the following matters,
namely:—
(a) to designate the Reserve Bank of India as the designated
authority for the regulation and supervision of payment systems
in India for their smooth operations;
(b) to give legal recognition to the netting procedure and
settlement finality; and
(c) to empower the Securities Appellate Tribunals to settle
disputes between the Reserve Bank of India and the system
providers.
6. The bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
P. CHIDAMBARAM.
  N
EW D ELHI;
The 22nd May, 2006.

114
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1. —This clause provides for the name of the Act, its
application and the commencement thereof.
Clause 2.. —This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in
the Bill. The definitions of the terms “derivative”, “electronic fund
transfer”, “netting”, “payment instruction”, “payment obligation”,
“payment system” and “settlement” are some of them. A “payment
system” means a system which enables payment to be effected between
a payer and a beneficiary, and includes a clearing, payment or
settlement service or all of them, but does not include a stock exchange.
Clause 3. —This clause seeks to designate the Reserve Bank as the
authority for the regulation and supervision of payment systems and
also provides the constitution of a Committee of the Central Board of
Directors of the Reserve Bank of India for such regulation and
supervision.
Clause 4.. —This clause seeks to provide that any person before
commencing or operating a payment system shall obtain authorisation
from the Reserve bank in accordance with the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 5..—This clause seeks to require submission of an application
to Reserve Bank by persons desirous or commencing or carrying on a
payment system. The form of application, the manner of making such
application and the fee which shall accompany such application shall
be laid down by the Reserve Bank by regulations.
Clause 6.. —This clause seeks to provide for an inquiry by the
Reserve Bank before issue of authorisation, inter alia , regarding the
genuineness of the particulars furnished by the applicant, his capacity
to operate the payment system and the credentials of the participants.
Clause 7.. —This clause seeks to provide for issue or refusal of
authorisation by the Reserve Bank for operating a payment system.
Sub-clause (1)  provides that the Reserve Bank may issue an
authorisation after an inquiry and after satisfying itself about (i) the
need for the proposed payment system, (ii) its technical standards or
design, (iii) its financial status, (iv) its experience of management and

115
integrity of the applicant, (v) interests of consumers, (vi) monetary
and credit policies and (vii) such other factors as may be considered
by the Reserve Bank to be relevant for the purpose.
Sub-clause (2)  provides laying down, by regulations, the form of
authorisation and also required that the authorisation should state the
date on which it will take effect, the conditions subject to which the
authorisation will be in force, the fees to be paid, security to be
furnished, etc.
Sub-clause (3)  seeks to provide that in case of refusal for
authorisation, the Reserve Bank should give the applicant a written
notice stating the reasons for such refusal and also provide the applicant
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 8. —This clause seeks to provide for revocation of
authorisations given by the Reserve Bank to any system provider under
the proposed section 7.
Sub-clauses (1)  and (2) enumerates the circumstances under which
an authorisation may be revoked by the Reserve Bank, after providing
the concerned system provider a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
These circumstances, include, contravention of any provision of the
proposed legislation, non-compliance with the regulations, failure to
comply with the orders or directions of the Reserve Bank of operation
of a payment system contrary to the conditions imposed while giving
such authorisation. Further, the Reserve Bank has been provided with
the power to revoke authorisation to a payment system in interest of
monetary policy.
Sub-clause (3)  provides that the order of revocation shall include
provisions for protection and safeguard of the interest of persons
affected by such order.
Sub-clause (4) seeks to provide for revocation of authorisation by
the Reserve Bank in case of insolvency of the system provider.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide for an appeal to the Central
Government against an order of refusal or revocation of a authorisation
by the Reserve Bank and for finality of the order passed by the Central
Government.
Clause 10. —This clause seeks to empower the Reserve Bank with
the power to determine and prescribe standards, inter alia , in respect
of format of payment instructions, timings to be maintained by payment

116
systems, manner of transfer of funds, the criteria of membership of
payment systems and their rights and obligations. It also empowers
the Reserve Bank to issue guidelines for effective management of
payment systems.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide that the system providers
shall not cause any change effecting the structure and operation of the
payment system without giving notice to the system participants and
without the approval of the Reserve Bank.
Clause 12. —This clause seeks to empower the Reserve Bank with
the power to call for returns, documents or other information from
any system provider regarding the operations of the payment systems.
Clause 13. —This clause seeks to empower the Reserve Bank to
access any information relating to any payment system with the system
provider and the system participants.
Clause 14. —This clause seeks to provide the officers of the Reserve
Bank duly authorised by the Bank the power to enter and inspect any
premises where a payment system is operated and any equipment
including any computer system or other documents and also require
any employee of the system provider working at such premises to
furnish information.
Clause 15. —This clause seeks to impose a duty on the Reserve
Bank to keep any document or information obtained by it by way of
returns or inspection confidential, excepting in cases where the
disclosure of such document or information is considered necessary
for protecting the integrity, effectiveness or security of the payment
system, in the interest of banking or monetary policy or operation of
payment systems, or in public interest.
Clause 16. —This clause seeks to provide the Reserve Bank with
the power to conduct or get conducted audits and inspections of a
payment system or system participants.
Clause 17. —This clause seeks to provide for issuance of written
directions by the Reserve Bank to a system provider or system
participant to cease and desist from any act, omission or course of
conduct that would results in systemic risks or affects the payment
system, monetary or credit policy of the country or to perform such
acts, as may be necessary, for remedying the situation.
Clause 18. —This clause seeks to empower the Reserve Bank to
issue general directions laying down policies for regulation of payment

117
systems, or in the interest of management or operation of any of the
payment systems or in the public interest.
Clause 19. —This clause imposes a duty on every person to whom
a direction is issued in writing by the Reserve Bank to comply with
such directions without delay and furnish such compliance report to
the Reserve Bank.
Clause 20. —This clause seeks to impose a duty on every system
provider to act in accordance with the provisions of the proposed
legislation, regulations, contract governing the relationship among the
system participants, rules and regulations which deal with the operation
of the payment system and conditions subject to which the
authorisation is issued, and the directions given by the Reserve Bank.
Clause 21. —This clause deals with the duties of system providers.
Sub-clause (1)  seeks to impose a duty on every system provider to
disclose to the system participants, the terms and conditions including
the charges and limitation of liabilities under the payment systems
and the rules and regulations governing it and to maintain the
determined standards.
Sub-clause (2)  imposes a duty on the system provider to maintain
the standards as determined under the provisions of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 22.—This clause deals with the duty of the system providers
to keep documents and information provided by the system participants
confidential and the applicability of the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act,
1891 to such information, documents and other books maintained by
the system providers.
Sub-clause (1)  imposes a duty on every system provider to keep
the documents/and information given to him by the system participant
confidential, except where it is required to be disclosed under law.
Sub-clause (2)  provides that the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891
shall apply to the information or documents or other books maintained
by the system providers.
Clause 23. —This clause provides for gross and netting procedure
and for settlement in a payment system, the procedure for distribution
of losses among system participants and the finality and irrevocable
nature of settlement.

118
Sub-clause (1) seeks to provide for determination of settlement of
payment obligations (both gross and netting) in a payment.
Sub-clause (2)  seeks to provide that the procedure for the
distribution of losses between the system participants and the payment
system, as provided by the rules for operation of a payment system,
shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any other law.
Sub-clauses (3)  and (4) provides for the finality and irrevocability
of the settlement, notwithstanding of the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any other law for
the time being in force.
Clause 24. —This clause seeks to provide for settlement of disputes
in a payment system.
Sub-clauses (1)  and (2) seek to provide for settlement of disputes
between system participants, by way of a reference by the system
provider, through a panel consisting of not less than three system
participants who are not parties to the dispute.
Sub-clauses (3)  and (4) seeks to provide for settlement of disputes
between system providers and system participants or between system
providers or where the system participants are not satisfied with the
decision of the panel constituted under sub-clause (1) , by authorised
officers of Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (4)  provides that where Reserve Bank is a party to the
dispute as a system provider or participant, such disputes shall be
referred to a Securities Appellate Tribunal established under section
15K of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 for
settlement of disputes.
Clause 25. —This clause provides for the penalty on a person for
non-execution of electronic funds transfer, initiated by that person,
due to insufficiency of funds etc. and the conditions under which the
provisions of the clause shall be attracted and also the applicability of
Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 for dishonour of
electronic funds transfer to the extent the circumstances admit.
Clause 26. —This clause contains provisions relating to offences and
penalties.
Sub-clause (1)  provides that a person contravening the provisions
of clause 4 or the conditions subject to which an authorisation has

119
been issued under clause 7, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than one month but which may
extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees
or with both and with further fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees for every day, after the first during which the contravention or
failure to comply continues.
Sub-clause (2) provides that in case of offences of wilful submission
of false statement or wilful omission to submit material statement, in
any application for authorisation or return or other document, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and fine of not less than ten lakh rupees, which may
extend to fifty lakh rupees.
Sub-clause (3)  provides that whoever fails to produce or furnish
any statement, information, return or document under Clauses 12, 13
or 14, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten lakh
rupees in respect of each offence and if the offence persists for a
further fine which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees for
every day for which the offence continues.
Sub-clause (4) provides that whoever discloses information which
is prohibited under clause 22, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees or an amount equal to twice the amount
of damages incurred by the act, whichever is higher or with both.
Sub-clause (5)  provides that when the directions issued by the
Reserve Bank is not complied with within the stipulated time or a
reasonable time, as the case may be, or penalty imposed under clause
30 is not paid with thirty days from the date of the order, the same
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than one month but which may extend to ten years, or with fine
which may extend to one crore rupees or with both and where the
failure to comply with the direction continues, with further fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees for every day , after the first during
which the contravention continues.
Sub-clause (6)  provides a punishment of fine which may extend to
ten lakh rupees and where a contravention or default is a continuing
one, with further fine which may extend to twenty five thousand
rupees for every day, after the first during which the contravention or
default continues, for contravention of the provisions of the proposed
legislation, or default in complying with any requirement under the
proposed legislation or contravention of any regulation, direction or

120
order made or given or condition imposed under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 27.—This clause deals with the provisions relating to offences
by companies.
Sub-clause (1)  provides that where a person committing a
contravention of any of the provisions of the proposed legislation or
any regulation, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every
person who, at the time of the contravention, was in charge of and
was responsible to the company for the conduct of business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Sub-clause (2)  provides that where any offence under the proposed
legislation is committed by a company and it is proved that the
contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Clause 28. —This clause contains provisions relating to cognizance
of offences. It provides that no Court shall take cognizance of an
offence punishable under the proposed legislation except upon a
complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank generally
or specially authorised by it in writing in this behalf and the jurisdiction
to try offences have been conferred on courts not lower than that of
a Metropolitan or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class. It also provides
with the power to the Court to dispense with the personal attendance
of the complainant in the proceedings.
Clause 29. —This clause deals with application of fine towards
payment of the costs of the proceedings.
Clause 30. —This clause confers the power on the Reserve Bank to
impose fines.
Sub-clause (1)  provides for imposition of penalty by the Reserve
Bank for contravention of sub-clause (2) or sub-clause (6) of clause 26.
The Reserve Bank may impose a penalty which may extend to five
lakh rupees or twice the amount is involved in the contravention if
the same is quantifiable.
Sub-clause (2) seeks to provide for serving of notice on the defaulter
specifying the amount of the proposed fine and providing a reasonable
opportunity of hearing to him.

121
Sub-clause (3) provides for payment of penalty imposed by the
Reserve Bank within thirty days from date of notice demanding
payment and on the failure of which the same shall be recovered on
a direction made by the principal Civil Court having jurisdiction.
Sub-clause (4)  provides for recovery of the amount of penalty by
the Reserve Bank by debiting the current account of the defaulter or
by liquidating the securities held to its credit.
Sub-clause (5)  provides for issue of certificate by a Court issuing
direction under sub-clause (3) specifying the sum payable by the
defaulter and the enforceability of such certificate as a decree of a
Court.
Sub-clause (6)  provides that no proceeding for imposition of fine
shall be taken on a person against whom a complaint has been filed
before a Court for contravention of sub-clause (2) of sub-clause (4) of
clause 26.
Clause 31. -This clause seeks to empower the Reserve Bank to
compound offences.
Sub-clause (1)  provides that the officer authorised by the Reserve
Bank may compound any offences under the proposed legislation,
except those which are punishable with imprisonment and also fine,
on an application from the offender.
Sub-clause (2)  provides that no proceeding can be initiated or
continued, in respect of a contravention compounded under sub-clause
(1).
Clause 32. -This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall have effect notwithstanding of anything inconsistent
therewith in any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 33.-This clause provides for the mode of recovery of penalty
imposed by the Reserve Bank under clause 30 from a person from
whom money is due to the defaulter after issue of notice. It also
imposes a duty on such person to whom notice is issued to comply
with such notice. Further, it provides for full discharge of such person
from his liability to the defaulter to the extent of the amount paid.
This clause also provides that the person discharging any liability to
the defaulter after receipt of notice shall be personally liable to the
Reserve Bank to the extent of his liability towards the defaulter or to
the extent of the fine imposed on the defaulter. If a person fails to

122
make payment on receipt of notice, then he shall be deemed to be the
defaulter in respect of the amount specified in the notice and the
same shall be recovered from him in the manner provided under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 34. -This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation will not be applicable in case of securities traded on stock
exchanges or other exchanges, except in so far as they relate to
settlement of payment instructions.
Clause 35. -This clause provides that officers of the Reserve Bank
entrusted with any power under the proposed legislation shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 36. -This clause seeks to protect the action taken in good
faith by the Central Government, the Reserve Bank or any officer
thereof, under the proposed legislation. It provides that no suit or
legal proceeding for damage caused or likely to be caused, shall lie
against the specified persons, for anything done in good faith under
the proposed legislation.
Clause 37. -This clause empowers the Central Government issue
order published in the Official Gazette making such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation for
removing difficulties in giving effect to it provisions. Such orders could
be issued within two years from the date of commencement of the
proposed legislation. It also provides for laying of such orders before
each House of Parliament.
Clause 38. -This clause confers power on the Reserve Bank to make
regulations, with the previous sanction of Central Government for the
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation.
The regulation may, inter alia , provide for (i) constitution of committee
under sub-clause (2) of clause 3, (ii) determination of standards to be
complied with by payment systems, (iii) regulation of funds transfers
and (iv) form and manner in which application for authorisation to
operate a payment system under the proposed legislation shall be
made. The regulations which may be made by the Reserve Bank shall
be published in the Official Gazette and be laid before each House of
Parliament.

123
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 38 of the Bill empowers the Reserve Bank
of India to make, with the previous sanction of the Central Government
and by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations for carrying out
the provisions of the proposed legislation.
2. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in
respect of which such regulations may be made. The matters in respect
of which such regulations may be made, inter alia, relate to the powers
and functions of the Committee constituted under sub-section (2) of
clause 3, the time and venue of its meetings and the procedure to be
followed by it as its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings)
under Sub-clause (4) of clause 3; the form and manner in which an
application for authorisation to operate a payment system under the
proposed legislation shall be made under clause 5 and the fees that
shall accompany such application; the form and manner in which an
application for commencing or carrying on an authorization shall be
made and the fee which such application shall accompany under
Sub-clause (2) of clause 5; the form in which an authorisation to operate
a payment system under the proposed legislation shall be issued under
sub-clause (2) of clause 7; the determination of standards to be complied
with by the payment systems under of section 10; the intervals, form
and manner in which the information or returns required by the
Reserve Bank shall be furnished under clause 12.
3. The regulations made under the aforesaid clause 38 shall have
effect from an earlier date or a latter date but not earlier than the date
on commencement of the proposed legislation. The regulations are
also required to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which the regulations may be made
are matters of procedure or details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

124
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the regulation and supervision of payment systems in
India and to designate the Reserve Bank of India as the authority for
that purpose and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
——————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)