CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-fourth Report on Demand for Grants
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2007 and laid in Rajya
Sabha on 3.5.2007.
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the
Government in respect of all the 15 recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations, that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 11, 12 & 15
 (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 13 & 14
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. No. 5
 (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4, 6, 8 and 10
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapters I & V may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

2
A. Infrastructure and Projects Monitoring
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 59)
5. In the context of analyzing the reasons for time and cost overrun
in the implementation of infrastructure projects the Committee, inter
alia recommended that they be apprised of action taken against those
responsible for lapses that contributed to the cost escalation of projects
within one month.
6. The Government in their action taken reply stated inter alia  as
follows:
“As directed by the Hon’ble Committee, the Infrastructure and
Project Monitoring Division requested the 10 concerned
administrative Ministries to furnish action taken or proposed to be
taken within one month, vide D.O. No. 11025/3/2007-IPMD dated
May 17, 2007. Feedback has been received from 6 Ministries/
Departments and reminders issued to remaining 4 Ministries/
Departments for providing necessary information for the
preparation of the report for submission to the Standing Committee
on Finance. On the basis of the feedback received from six
Ministries/Departments an interim report will be submitted shortly
for the information of the Hon’ble Committee. The final report
will be submitted once reports are received from the 4 other
Ministries also.”
7. The Committee take a serious note of the fact that despite
their specific recommendation to the Government to submit the action
taken against those responsible for time and cost overruns within
one month, the Government should not submit an interim report
even after a lapse of more than six months since presentation of the
report. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier
recommendation desire that immediate steps be taken to ensure that
final report is submitted to the Committee taking into account the
feedback received from all the Ministries concerned.
B. India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para 73)
8. In view of its (India-Statistical Strengthening Project) being a
flagship programme bringing in immense value addition to the country
by way of improving the quality of statistics while reiterating the
need for implementing the project in right earnest without further
time lags and undue delays the Committee recommended that they be
apprised of the progress of the implementation of the project at
quarterly intervals.

3
9. The Government in their action taken reply inter alia  stated as
under:—
“India-Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) was formulated with
the assistance from the World Bank for strengthening of Indian
Statistical System with primary focus on strengthening of State
Statistical System. The ISSP has a 2-Tier approach for its
implementation. Tier-I consists of four studies, concerning
(i) Creation and Maintenance of Business Register, (ii) Improvement
of Service Sector Statistics, (iii) Assessment of Survey Capabilities
of Private Sector, and (iv) Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus.
The framework for reporting quarterly progress to the Hon’ble
Standing Committee will be finalised shortly. However, an interim
report as on 15.05.07 in respect of the activities under the ISSP is
given below:
Sl.No. Name of sub-component Present Status
Tier-I
1. Creation and Maintenance This study has been completed.
of Business Register As a follow up action, a special
cell for Business Register has
been created under the charge of
one director level officer.
2. Improvement of Service This study has been completed.
Sector Statistics
3. Assessment of Survey This study has been completed.
Capabilities of Private
Sector
4. Strengthening of State The Phase-I of Tier-I has been
Statistical Bureaus completed. Consultants have
been identified to take up the
Phase-II of the project.
Tier-II
5. The work relates to • Concept Note for Tier-II has
strengthening of State since receive the approval of
Statistical Bureaus the Department of Economic
Affairs and formally placed
it before the World Bank.
• The International Consultant
is being given the
responsibility of preparing
detailed Strategic Statistical
Master Plan for submission
to the World Bank.”

4
10. The Committee regret to note that no further information
has been furnished to the Committee regarding the progress in India
Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) after submission of interim
progress report dated 15.05.2007. The Committee would like to know
how soon the Tier-II of the ISSP Project is expected to be completed.
C. Delay in releasing reports and publications
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para 83)
11. As there was recurring delay in timely release of various reports
and publications of statistical data the Committee emphasized that
that these are released in timely manner so as to ensure that relevance
of the data is not lost. The Committee had inclined to believe that
lack of IT preparedness/readiness could be a major contributory factor
to the undue delay happening in timely release of these report and
publications. The Committee, therefore, desired the Government to
apprise them of the remedial measures taken to ensure that these are
released in time.
12. The Government in their action taken have given the detailed
reasons for delay of various reports and publications. As regards
Natural Resource Accounting, the reasons for delay are stated to be as
follows:
“The eight pilot studies on Natural Resource Accounting (NRA) in
different Sectors were entrusted by the Ministry to specialized
institutes working in the field of environment science or related
socio-economic subjects.
A Technical Monitoring Committee (TMC) was constituted by the
Ministry under the Chairmanship of Prof. Amitabh Kundu, Member,
National Statistical Commission and Dean, School of Social Science,
JNU to monitor the progress of these eight studies periodically
and also to provide technical guidance.
NRA is an emerging area. These studies on NRA for developing
methodologies under SEEA (System of Integrated Economic and
Environmental Accounting) were taken up for the first time through
outsourcing. The Institutes conducting these studies on NRA had
also taken up such studies for the first time although they had
past experience of conducting NRA under general framework and
the studies aimed at development of sector specific standard
methodology under SEEA, which could be applicable under Indian
scenario. The project directors faced a number of conceptual and

5
methodological problems from time-to-time. These problems had
to be ironed out and placed before the TMC for guidance. All
these led to delay in completion of the studies necessitating
subsequent revision of target time for completion in the Annual
Action Plan.
The TMC took stock of the situation in its last meeting held on
8th January, 2007 and necessary measures are being taken to ensure
completion of the studies by March 2008, if not by December,
2007.”
13. Taking note of the delays in adhering to the Annual Action
Plan for 2006-07, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the
efforts made to obviate delays in releasing reports and publications
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. There
is nothing in the action taken reply which discloses the efforts made
by the Ministry to set things right. The Ministry appears to have
derived satisfaction from simply spelling out the reasons for delay.
It is no surprise that the Ministry had hinted about further slippage
in completing the study in Natural Resource Accounting. The
Committee urge the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation to take concrete steps to ensure that reports and
publications are brought out within the targeted dates in future.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para Nos. 15 & 16)
The Committee note from an overview account of the Budget
allocations of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
that, barring the provisions for MPLADS, there has been an excessive
variation in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and the Actual
expenditure, particularly in respect of plan expenditure in each of the
last three financial years. While the plan expenditure proposed at the
stage of BE in 2004-05 was Rs. 13533 lakh, it was reduced to Rs. 8500
lakh at the stage of RE and the Actual plan expenditure incurred in
the year was to the tune of Rs. 8059 lakh. Likewise, the actual plan
expenditure of Rs. 7587 lakhs incurred by the Ministry in 2005-06 and
the expected expenditure of 6150 lakhs for 2006-07 is well short of the
originally budgeted plan expenditure of Rs. 8710 lakhs and 8339 lakhs
for 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively. Considering the wide variation
witnessed in the Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual
expenditure incurred in the last three financial years, the Committee
are inclined to express doubts on the objectivity with which a plan
expenditure of Rs. 9200 lakhs has been proposed in the BE for the
current year, 2007-08.
What the Committee finds to be particularly worrisome in this
regard is that the underutilization of the budgeted plan funds in the
preceding years has been mainly on account of the inability to take
up, or slippages in implementing schemes that have a significant
bearing on improving the credibility and adequacy of statistics. For
instance, while a provision of Rs. 294 lakhs and Rs. 225.10 lakhs was
proposed at the stage of BE for the years 2005-06 and 2006-07
respectively for the scheme, ‘Development of Social, Environment and
Price Statistics’, the actual expenditure incurred during the years was
only to the extent of Rs. 66.62 lakhs and 49.66 lakhs. Likewise,
the actual expenditure incurred on the programmed on
institutional Development and Capacity Building for the year 2005-06 was
Rs. 244.61 lakhs as compared to the budgeted amount of Rs. 1678 lakhs
and the expenditure estimated to be incurred under the scheme for
the year 2006-07 is Rs. 1678 lakhs as compared to the budgeted amount
of Rs. 2200 lakhs. The Committee note from the information made

7
available that the Ministry proposes to take up 10 plan schemes during
11th Plan period, which include nine ongoing schemes and one new
scheme on ‘Basic statistics for local level development’. Given the facts
relating to the trend of plan expenditure of the Ministry in the
preceding years, the Committee recommend the Government to conduct
a detailed inquiry to identify the reasons for the shortfalls in meeting
the plan expenditure and failure to undertake appropriate remedial
measures to avoid large variation in the budget estimates, revised
estimates and the actual expenditure’. The Committee also trust and
hope that the Ministry shall make every endeavour to ensure timely
and effective implementation of the plan schemes, which are, inter alia
intended to overcome the deficiencies with respect to credibility,
timeliness and adequacy of statistics.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that while every effort is made to ensure that BE
provisions under various plan schemes are fixed as realistically as
possible, often due to extraneous circumstances the estimates have to
be revised downwards. Some specific cases are cited below:
During 2005-06, under the plan scheme “Development of Social,
Environment & Price Statistics”, funds amounting to Rs. 138.56 lakh
were allocated against “Salary” against which actuals were Rs. 9.36
lakh, since the Ministry of Finance did not approve the proposal for
creation and appointment of contract employees to take up the work
relating to ‘Conduct of Market Survey for Development of New Indices
CPI (Urban)’, under which a Family Living Survey to revise the base
year of CPI (UNME) was to be taken up. This has resulted in less
expenditure on domestic travel meant for field inspection for the said
Market survey. Thus against Rs. 71 lakh provided under ‘Domestic
Travel’ the actual expenditure Was only Rs. 13.16 lakh. Hence
expenditure could not be incurred under the Salary & Domestic Travel
heads of one of the components of the scheme “Development of Social,
Environment & Price Statistics”.
Similarly, under “Professional Services” Rs. 75.00 lakh were
provided against which actuals were Rs. 21.79 lakh. The Social Statistics
Division outsourcers various projects to different organizations. This
includes “Development of methodology for Natural Resources
Accounting”, “Social Development Index” etc. When the delay occurs
as a result of default on the part of the outsourced organizations
release of funds also get delayed. Similarly, if quality project proposals
are not received, the fund earmarked remains unspent. During
2006-07, Rs. 77.00 lakh were provided under “Professional Services”.
Actuals were Rs. 15.45 lakh due to the reasons indicated in the above
para.

8
During 2005-06 & 2006-07, savings under “Institutional
Development & Capacity Building” arose due to slow progress of work
by the CPWD on Civil Works on the “National Academy of Statistical
Administration” located at Greater Noida.
It is submitted that utmost efforts would be made by the Ministry
to ensure timely and effective implementation of the plan schemes
and ensure that the budgeted provisions are judicisouly and fully
utilized during the current financial year for which weekly monitoring
system has been initiated in the Ministry involving all senior officers
responsible for project implementation.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 29)
The Committee note that in pursuance of the recommendations of
the Rangarajan Committee, which reviewed the statistical system in
the Country in 2001, the Government have, vide notification dated 3rd
July, 2006 constituted the National Statistical Commission. Though the
setting up of the National Statistical Commission has, as pointed out
by the Secretary. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
facilitated the initiation of corrective processes in the statistical system,
the Committee cannot also help noting that the Rangarajan Committee
had recommended for setting up the National Statistical Commission
through an Act of Parliament so as to enable its functioning in an
independent manner in respect of policy making, co-ordination and
maintaining quality standards of core statistics. The Committee recall
in this regard that while examining the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry during 2005-06, they were informed that the Bill to set up
the National Statistical Commission as a statutory body was being
readied for introduction in Parliament. They are, however, dismayed
to point out that despite the concern expressed by them in their earlier
report, the Bill is yet to be submitted to the Cabinet for its approval
before its introduction to Parliament. The Committee once again
emphasize the need for ensuring that the related Bill, which would
enable the National Statistical Commission to function in an effective
manner as a statutory body be brought before Parliament without any
further delay. The Committee also desires that appropriate initiatives
be taken to implement those recommendations of the Rangarajan
Committee for reform of administration of the Indian Statistical System
which remain to be acted upon. The Committee further desire that the
‘Collection of Statistics Bill’, which would inter alia, enhance the support

9
mechanism for collection of various statistics is brought before
Parliament without any undue delay.
Reply of the Government
The issue of setting up of the National Statistical Commission as
a statutory body is under active consideration of the Commission and
the Ministry.
It is expected that the draft Bill for the Legislation will be prepared
by July, 2007 and after inter-ministerial consultations, the Bill is planned
to be placed before the Cabinet for its approval by January 2008.
The Collection of Statistics Bill 2007 after due consultations has
received approval of the Cabinet and has been placed before the Rajya
Sabha on May 17, 2007.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 56)
While the Infrastructure Monitoring Division (IMD) monitors the
performance of the country’s key infrastructure sector vis-a-vis pre-set
targets, the Project Monitoring Division (PMD) plays the all important
role of monitoring implementation of all Central sector projects costing
Rs. 20 crore and above.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that as a measure of rationalization, PMD and IMD
were merged (sometime in 2004) and is now known as Infrastructure
and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD).
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 74)
The Committee also wishes to recall here that in their report on
the Demand for Grants of the Ministry (2005-06), they had emphasized
on adhering to the practice of convening the Conference of Central
and State Statistical Organizations (COCSSO) at annual internals. The
Committee note from the related information furnished that the 14th
Conference of COCSSO, scheduled for 2006 is now proposed to be
held in April, 2007. The Committee hope that the 14th conference of

10
COCSSO might have been held by now. They would like to be apprised
of the outcome of the Conference. The Conference of Central and
State Statistical Organizations being a forum for regular interaction
among the Central and States statisticians, the Committee reiterate the
need for ensuring that the conference as invariably held at annual
intervals.
Reply of the Government
The 14th Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations
(COCSSO) was held during April 10-11, 2007 at New Delhi. The two
days programme for the Conference included discussions on
strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus including Core Statistics &
role of Statistical Advisers; Basic Statistics for Local level Development
and Problems in Horticulture Statistics. Besides, these three core
subjects, the Processing of State Sample Data of National Sample
Survey; and Standardized set up of statistical products/publications
for the State were also discussed.
In accordance with the directions of the Hon’ble Committee, it is
proposed to hold the conference at annual intervals.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 95)
The Committee note that the National Statistical Commission, which
reviewed the Indian Statistical System and presented the report thereon
in 2001 had inter alia  observed that there were serious deficiencies in
the current series of Price Indices. The Commission had recommended
for development of an ‘All-India Consumer Price Index’ for rural and
urban areas. Presently, while the CSO compiles and releases the
Consumer Price Index for Urban Non-Manual Employees (CPI UNME),
the Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour releases the Consumer Price
Index for Agricultural/Rural Labbourers viz. CPI-AL and CPI-RL. From
the information furnished on the current status of the initiatives towards
developing the ‘All-India Consumer Index; for urban and rural areas,
the Committee observe that the ‘weighting diagrams’ for the new CPI
(Rural) and CPI (Urban) series are being taken from the NSSO 61st
round survey data on consumer expenditure. As admitted by the
Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation while
tendering evidence, there has been delay in the progress towards
developing the ‘All-India Consumer Price Index’ for urban and rural
areas. The Committee are of the view that having a consolidated price

11
index which captures and profiles of the urban and rural populations
would be an immense value addition. The Committee, therefore,
strongly urge that the work towards developing the ‘All-India
Consumer Price Index’ for urban and rural population should be
completed expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
For compilation of Consumer Price Index (CPI) for urban areas,
the market survey covering 310 towns is in progress. This survey is
likely to be completed by December 2007. Weighting diagram and
software development for compilation of this index are expected to be
finalized by March 2008. As regards to compilation of CPI for rural
areas, basic tables for derivation of weighting diagram have been
generated. Efforts are being made to conduct the market survey in the
selected villages after completing the survey work in the urban areas.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 112)
The Twenty Point Programme (TPP) initiated in 1975 was
restructured first in 1982 and again in 1986. The TPP-86 covers socio-
economic sectors including poverty alleviation, employment generation
especially in rural areas and comprises 119 items of which 54 are
monitored on the basis of evaluatory criteria and 65 against pre-set
physical targets. The Committee have been informed that the TPP-
1986 has been restructured to be called TPP-2006 mainly in view of
the challenges of the 21st century with particular reference to the
ongoing process of economic reforms, liberalization and globalization.
The restructured TPP (TPP-2006) has 20 points and 66 items of which
25 items have been kept for monthly monitoring by the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation. the Committee note that
the monitoring mechanism proposed under TPP-2006 involves, inter
alia  setting up of High Level Implementation and Monitoring
Committees in States, which do not have such committees at present,
establishing district and block level monitoring committees; and
awarding evaluation of impact assessment studies to non-governmental
organizations, institutions etc. Objective and realistic assessment of the
effectiveness of programmes aimed at alleviating poverty and improving
the quality of life of people being of utmost importance, the Committee
desire to have a detailed note on the monitoring mechanism proposed
under the restructured TPP-2006 vis-a-vis TPP-86, and the improvements
expected of the revised monitoring mechanism.

12
Reply of the Government
Various items under Twenty Point Programme (TPP)-2006 are
administered by Central Nodal Ministries concerned and executed by
State/UT Administrations. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation monitors the Programme in its entirety.
2. The States/UT Administrations are in the process of setting up
the monitoring committees at Block level and also at District level and
State level if not already in existence, as per the Guidelines issued for
TPP-2006. The Guidelines also indicate that the State level committees
meet twice a year, District level committees meet every quarter, and
the Block level committees meet every month. The States of Madhya
Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh have informed
that necessary notifications for setting up committees at Block level
have been issued. The matter is being followed up with other States.
3. The number of items under TPP-2006 to be monitored on
monthly basis has been tentatively kept as 25, compared to 20 items
being monitored in TPP-1986. Out of the 25 monthly monitored items,
States/UT administrations are required to send progress in respect of
21 items and for the remaining 4 items, concerned nodal Ministries i.e.
Ministry of Labour & Employment, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution, Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry
of Power will provide monthly information in respect of items
concerning them.
4. The above changes in the monitoring mechanism of TPP-2006
are expected to bring improvements.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No. G-
20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 113)
With regard to the performance of the Twenty Point Programme
perse, the Committee feel disappointed to note that as per the Annual
Report of the Ministry, the performance in respect of community health
centres, and electrification of villages is rated as ‘poor‘ for the year
2005-06. Likewise, the performance in respect of ‘area covered (under
plantation)’, Indira Awaas Yojana and primary health centres have been
rated as ‘poor’ for the period, April 1, 2006 to December, 2006. The
Committee are of the strong view that every effort must be made to
ensuring that each of the socio-economic development schemes gets
implemented effectively and serves the purposes for which it was

13
formulated. The Committee would, therefore, like to be informed how
exactly the restructuring of TPP would result in better implementation
of the programme.
Reply of the Government
The Twenty Point Programme has been restructured keeping in
view the introduction of several new schemes/programmes launched
by the Government of India. The UN Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and the SAARC Social Charter have also been considered at
the time of restructuring the programme. Various items under Twenty
Point Programme (TPP)-2006 are administered by Central Nodal
Ministries concerned and executed by State/UT Administrations. The
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation monitors the
programme in totality .
2. The total number of items that will be monitored under TPP-
2006 is 66. Out of 66 items of TPP-2006, 25 items have been tentatively
identified for monitoring on monthly basis. The remaining items shall
be monitored on annual basis. The three tier monitoring mechanism at
Central, State and district level for TPP 1986 has been widened by
including Block level monitoring for TPP-2006. The State/UT
Administrations are in the process of setting up the monitoring
committees at Block level and also at District level and State level if
not already in existence, as per the Guidelines issued for TPP-2006.
The Guidelines also indicate that the State level committees meet twice
a year, District level committees meet every quarter, and the Block
level committees meet every month.
3. With the restructuring of the Twenty Point Programme, there
will be more focused monitoring on 66 items instead of 119, by the
States, Central Nodal Ministries and this Ministry. This should definitely
result in better implementation of the programme.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para No. 123)
The Committee regret to observe that there has been a wide
variation in the budget estimates, revised estimates and the actual
expenditure under the Head Overtime Allowance (OTA). While
allocations of Rs. 13.61 lakh and Rs. 12.32 lakh were proposed at the
stage of BE for 2004-05 and 2005-06, the budgeted amounts were
reduced to Rs. 12.32 lakh and Rs. 11.49 lakhs at the stage of RE and
the actual expenditure for the years 2004-05 and 2005-06, totalled to a

14
higher amount of Rs. 13.42 and 13.40 lakhs. As informed by the
Ministry, the actual expenditure on OTA during 2004-05 was higher
than the RE allocation as some unforeseen OTA Bills had to be cleared.
The Committee do not find this information of the Ministry to be
completely tenable as the pending Bills could have been accounted for
while proposing the revised estimates under the Head for the year.
The Committee also take exception to the unhealthy practice of
appropriating amounts from other Heads of account to meet the
additional expenditure. The Committee, therefore, expresses the view
that every care should be taken to make realistic and objective
projections so that the funds available are judicially distributed and
made use of by the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
Instructions have been issued to all the concerned officers in the
Ministry to make a realistic assessment taking into consideration past
patterns of OTA payments and all the pending bills while proposing
the RE and thereafter to incur expenditure in conformity with the RE
finalized by the Ministry.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]

15
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13, Para No. 117)
The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a
substantial underutilization of the budgeted amount under the Head,
Development of Social, Environment and Price Statistics year after year.
The actual utilization during 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 has been
only Rs. 110.04 lakhs, Rs. 59.02 lakhs and Rs. 50 lakhs respectively as
against a budgetary allocation of Rs. 463 lakhs, Rs. 267 lakhs and
Rs. 212 lakhs respectively during these years. As per the information
furnished by the Ministry, the budgeted amount could not be utilized
during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 as the ‘Conduct of Market Survey
for Development of New Indices CPI (Urban)’, under which a Family
Living Survey to revise the base year of CPI (UNME) could not be
taken up as it was decided to use the results of the 61st round of
NSSO instead of carrying out a fresh survey. The Committee do not
find much credence in the reasoning furnished by the Ministry for the
shortfall in utilizing the budget amounts, as significant outlays
continued to be made under the Head. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the objectivity and the empirical basis on which the
budgetary allocations are to be made is not, in any way foregone or
compromised.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Finance did not approve the proposal for
appointment of contract employees to take up the work relating to
‘Conduct of Market Survey for Development of New Indices CPI
(Urban)’, under which a Family Living Survey to revise the base year
of CPI (UNME) was to be taken up. Hence targeted expenditure could
not incurred under the component “Development of Price statistics of
the scheme “Development of Social, Environment & Price Statistics.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]

16
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para No. 120)
The Committee express their deep concern at the mismatch between
the budget estimates, revised estimates and the actual expenditure year
after year under the Head Strengthening of Field Survey Capability of
NSSO. For instance, while an amount of Rs. 215 lakh was allocated at
the stage of BE for 2004-05, the amount was reduced to Rs. 170 lakh
at the stage of RE and the actual expenditure, which totaled to Rs. 250
lakhs was in excess of the originally budgeted amount under the Head.
Similarly, for the year 2005-06 an amount of Rs. 175 lakh was allocated
at the stage of BE, which was revised upwards to Rs. 245.84 lakh at
the stage of RE and the actual expenditure for the year, at Rs. 267.93
lakh was on the higher side of the Revised Estimates. Further, while
there has been an increase in the budgetary allocation under the Head
for 2006-07 at Rs. 351.81 lakh, the expenditure expected during the
year is to the tune of Rs. 445.26 lakh. The Committee understands
that the excess expenditure under the Head during 2004-05 and
2005-06 was mainly on account of additional office and travel expenses,
which was incurred through re-appropriation of savings from other
Heads of account. The wide mismatch between the budgetary
allocations and expenditure under this Head of account is indicative
of serious deficiencies in formulating the budget proposals. The
Committee, therefore, while recommending that utmost care is taken
while finalizing the budget estimates so that large scale variations
between BE, RE and the actual expenditure do not continue to occur,
also desire that an enquiry be conducted on the reasons for the
continued shortfall in meeting the budgeted expenditure and they be
informed of the outcome of the same within one month.
Reply of the Government
In accordance with the directions of the Hon’ble Committee, a
detailed enquiry has been conducted for the wide divergences between
BE, RE and the actuals. The exercise has exceeded the time target
allotted by the Hon’ble Committee as the Field Operations Division of
the NSSO, which operates the plan scheme, has a network of sub-
regional, regional and zonal offices located in 182 locations of the
country and hence it took time to collect, compile and tally the
information. However the delay caused is highly regretted.
It is also submitted that the BE & RE figures do not include the
provision for the NE States, while the total expenditure includes the
expenditure on NE States also.

17
2004-05: The BE 2004-05 was Rs. 215.00 lakh which was revised to
Rs. 170.00 lakh, whereas the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 250.21
lakh. The excess expenditure over BE 2004-05 included reappropriation
for the NE region of Rs. 83.21 lakh. One of the functional heads to
which reappropriation was carried out was under “Office Expenses”
from the relevant dummy head. Thus against an RE of Rs. 170.00
lakh, expenditure under heads, other than for NER was Rs. 131.79
lakh, which was less than the RE provision.
2005-06:  The BE 2005-06 was. Rs. 175.00 lakh while RE was
Rs. 245.84 lakh, and the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 267.93 lakh.
The actuals includes an expenditure of Rs. 43.49 lakh an account of
reappropriation from the relevant dummy heads to the functional heads
to incur expenditure in the NER. Thus against an RE of Rs. 245.84 lakh,
expenditure under heads, other than for NER was Rs. 224.44 lakh,
which was less than the RE provision.
It is submitted that the Field Operations Division which operates
the scheme has not spent over and above the approved outlays.
However, as per the directions of the Hon’ble Committee utmost care
will be exercised while finalizing the Budget estimates.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]

18
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 59)
With specific reference to monitoring implementation of Central
Sector Projects, the Committee note with concern that of the 837 projects
on the monitoring list, which involve an estimated investment of
Rs. 3,69,499 crore, as many as 233 projects have experienced cost
escalation to the tune of 65% as compared to the original sanctioned
estimates; and 257 projects have experienced time-overruns ranging
from 1 to 159 months. The Committee feels particularly concerned to
note that despite initiating several well-thought of and reasoned
measures, the twin problems of time and cost overruns continue to
hinder the progress of implementation of many infrastructure projects.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for identifying and
analyzing the specific contributory factors for the cost escalation of
each of the projects and initiating appropriate corrective measures, so
as to minimize the impact of this negative aspect, which does not
augur well for the economy. The Committee also desire to be apprised
of the action taken against those held to be responsible for lapses that
contributed to the cost escalation of projects as reported by the Standing
Committees on Project Monitoring of the nodal Ministries concerned,
within one month.
Reply of the Government
As directed by the Hon’ble Committee, the Infrastructure and
Project Monitoring Division requested the 10 concerned administrative
Ministries to furnish action taken or proposed to be taken within one
month, vide  D.O. No. 11025/3/2007-IPMD dated May 17, 2007.
Feedback has been received from 6 Ministries/Departments and
reminders issued to remaining 4 Ministries/Departments for providing
necessary information for the preparation of the report for submission
to the Standing Committee on Finance. On the basis of the feedback
received from 6 Ministries/Departments as interim report will be
submitted shortly for the information of the Hon’ble Committee. The
final report will be submitted once reports are received from the
4 other Ministries also.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]

19
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para Nos. 57 & 58)
From the review of the infrastructure performance during the
period, April to December, 2006 as contained in the Annual Report of
the Ministry (2006-07), the Committee find to their dismay that except
for the areas of power, cement and refinery production, most of the
key infrastructure sectors, which includes, coal and steel production,
shipping and ports, as well as roads have lagged behind the pre-set
targets for the period. While the production of coking coal and washed
coal in Coal India Mines Ltd. registered a negative growth of 5.4%
and 28.2% respectively during the period, the production of finished
steel was short of the pre-set target by 5.1%. The shortfall in meeting
the targets envisaged has been more pronounced in the case of the
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), which could undertake
widening/upgradation of only 321 Km of highways as compared to
the target of 543 Km set for the period.
The Committee recognizes the existence of strong linkages between
infrastructure performance on the one hand and economic progress
and poverty alleviation on the other. Though policy issues and matters
regarding infrastructure performance are in the domain of the
administrative Ministries concerned, the Committee expects the
Infrastructure Monitoring Division (IMD) to play an effective role in
highlighting performance slippages and taking corrective measures. The
Committee also expects the Ministry to play an effective role of
coordination in bringing about necessary amendments to the Land
Acquisition Act and formulating a standard rehabilitation package,
which are perceived to be major contributory factors in slowing down
the implementation of plan schemes and programmes of roadways
and railways in particular.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions made by the Committee are duly noted for future
guidance. However, it is submitted that proposals relating to
amendment of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, is dealt by the Ministry
of Rural Development (M/RD) and the M/RD have been requested to
furnish the latest status in this respect.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]

20
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 73)
The Committee had, in their report on the Demand for Grants
(2005-06), of the Ministry expressed serious concern on the slippages
in implementing the World Bank aided programme for modernizing
the statistical system in the Country viz., India Statistical Strengthening
Project. A review of the progress of implementation of the project
inter alia  reveals that significant budgetary allocations being made for
the project each year continue to be underutilized and surrendered on
account of slippages and frequent rescheduling of the project. From
the information furnished on the current status of the project, the
Committee note that the work on only two of the four components of
Tier-I of the project viz., Creation and Maintenance of Business Register
and Improvement of Service Sector Statistics, which was scheduled to
be completed in entirety in 2005 have since been completed. Work on
the all important Tier-I components of strengthening of ‘State Statistical
Bureaus’ as well as ‘assessment of survey capabilities of private sector’,
which are a prelude to proceeding to the actual implementation of the
modernization programme under Tier-II of the project remain to be
completed. As admitted by the Secretary, strengthening the State
Statistical Bureaus is an immediate necessity for improving the quality,
reliability and adequacy of statistics. The India Statistical Strengthening
Project, being a flagship programme, which would bring in immense
value addition to the Country by way of improving the quality of
statistics, the Committee reiterate the need of ensuring that the project
is implemented in the right earnest, without further time lags and
undue delays. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress
of implementation of the project at quarterly intervals.
Reply of the Government
India-Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) was formulated with
the assistance from the World Bank for strengthening of India Statistical
System with primary focus on strengthening of State Statistical System.
The ISSP has a 2-Tier approach for its implementation. Tier-I consists
of four studies, concerning (1) Creation and Maintenance of Business
Register, (ii) Improvement of Service Sector Statistics, (iii) Assessment
of Survey Capabilities of Private Sector, and (iv) Strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus. The framework for reporting quarterly progress to
the Hon’ble Standing Committee will be finalised shortly. However,
an interim report as on 15.05.07 in respect of the activities under the
ISSP is given below:

21
Sl.No. Name of sub-component Present Status
Tier-I
1. Creation and Maintenance This study has been completed. As
of Business Register a follow up action, a special cell for
Business Register has been created
under the charge of one director
level officer.
2. Improvement of Service This study has been completed.
Sector Statistics
3. Assessment of Survey This study has been completed.
Capabilities of Private
Sector
4. Strengthening of State The Phase-I of Tier-I has been
Statistical Bureaus completed. Consultants have been
identified to take up the Phase-II of
the project.
Tier-II
5. The work relates to • Concept Note for Tier-II has
strengthening of State since receive the approval of
Statistical Bureaus the Department of Economic
Affairs and formally placed it
before the World Bank.
• The International Consultant is
being given the responsibility of
preparing detailed Strategic
Statistical Master Plan for
submission to the World Bank.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1), dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 83)
The Committee is dismayed to note that there have been significant
slippages and undue delays in adhering to the Annual Action Plan of
the Ministry for 2006-07. For instance, the ‘Input—Output Transaction
Table, 2003-04, which was scheduled to be brought out in March, 2007
as per the Annual Plan is now expected to be ready by December,
2007, and a number of project reports on National Resource Accounting

22
originally scheduled to be finalised by July, 2006 and March, 2007 are
now expected to be released by December, 2007. More significantly,
reports and publications containing data of vital importance such as
the All India Report of the 5th Economic Census, which provides an
up-to-date frame of units/enterprises and related information as well
as the Monthly Abstract of Statistics (January, 2006-December, 2006),
Annual Issue of India in Figures, 2006, the yearly publications, Statistical
Pocket Book, India-2005 and Statistical Abstract, India, 2005 have been
unduly delayed for release. The Committee had, time and again,
emphasized that the reports and publications are released in a timely
manner, so as to ensure that the relevance of statistical data is not
lost. The Committee, upon reviewing the slippages in adhering to the
annual action plan of the Ministry is inclined to believe that the lack
of IT readiness/preparedness could be a major contributory factor to
the undue delays in bringing out publications and reports containing
statistical data of importance. The Committee, therefore, desires that
appropriate remedial measures be taken to ensure that the delays being
witnessed in bringing out the reports of the Ministry are overcome.
they would like to be apprised of the efforts made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The action plan of CSO to bring out the Input-Output Transactions
Table 2003-04, by March, 2007 envisaged reducing the time-lag in
releasing this data from 6 years to 3 years. This is an extremely
challenging task involving certain amount of risk overshooting the
deadline. The CSO has now planned this release by December 2007.
The detailed reasons for delay of various reports and publications
are given in the following paragraphs:
Economic Census:
Central Statistical Organisation undertook countrywide Economic
Census, 5th in the series during the year 2005-06 in all the States/UTs
in collaboration with State/UT, Directorate of Economics & Statistics
(DESs). The field work of the 5th Economic Census was completed in
all the States and UTs by March, 2006. The provisional results indicating
important parameters viz ., State-wise number of enterprises,
employment therein, growth rate over previous census classified by
agriculture and non-agricultural activities, rural/urban area, etc. were
released during June, 2006.
For detailed results, the data collected by the State/UT
Governments was scanned/digitized by RGI followed by processing

23
through Intelligent Character Recognition (ICR) automated process. The
error lists so generated were provided to the State/UT Government
for editing so that after receiving error free files from them, the
tabulation can be made for detailed results. The error free files from
the State of Jharkhand and Bihar are still awaited inspite of several
reminders. The Ministry is pursuing the matter at various levels
including Planning Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs to
expedite error correction work without any delay. As soon as the same
is received from these four States, the tabulation for detailed results of
Economic Census would be completed and all-India reports would be
released.
Natural Resource Accounting:
The eight pilot studies on Natural Resource Accounting (NRA) in
different Sectors were entrusted by the Ministry to specialized institutes
working in the field of environment science or related socio-economic
subjects.
A Technical Monitoring Committee (TMC) was constituted by the
Ministry under the Chairmanship of Prof. Amitabh Kundu, Member,
National Statistical Commission and Dean, School of Social Sciences,
JNU to monitor the progress of these eight studies periodically and
also to provide technical guidance.
NRA is an emerging area. These studies on NRA for developing
methodologies under SEEA (System of Integrated Economic and
Environmental Accounting) were taken up for the first time through
outsourcing. The Institutes conducting these studies on NRA had also
taken up such studies for the first time although they had past
experience of conducting NRA under general framework and the
studies aimed at development of sector specific standard methodology
under SEEA, which could be applicable under Indian scenario. The
project directors faced a number of conceptual and methodological
problems from time to time. These problems had to be ironed out and
placed before the TMC for guidance. All these led to delay in
completion of the studies necessitating subsequent revision of target
time for completion in the Annual Action Plan.
The TMC took stock of the situation in its last meeting held on
8th January , 2007 and necessary measures are being taken to ensure
completion of the studies by March 2008, if not by December, 2007.

24
Statistical Publications:
An action plan has been prepared to reduce the time lag for one
monthly and three annual publications by the end of 2007-08. The
present position of these publications is as below:
(i) Monthly Abstract of Statistics (January, 2006-December 2007);
Monthly issues for the month of January, 2006-September,
2006 and combined issue of Oct.-Dec. 2006 have been
released.
(ii) Annual issue of India in figures, 2006: Title changed to ‘India
in figures 2007’, is under preparation and will be completed
by August, 2007.
(iii) Statistical Pocket Book, India-2005: released in March, 2007.
(iv) Statistical Abstract, India 2005: Title changed to Statistical
Abstract India, 2006 released.
The Action Plan 2007-08 is being kept under strict watch to clear
the backlog of these publications.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1) dated July 26, 2007]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No. 96)
As regards, the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), which is presently of
the base, 1993-94, the Committee had in their report on the Demand
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry referred to observation of the
National Statistical Commission, that the ‘index’ was an inadequate
measure of inflation. From the information furnished on the current
status of the work relating to revising the WPI series, The Committee
observe that the Working Group set-up in 2003 to revise the current
WPI series has completed its deliberations on major technical issues
and construction of ‘weighting diagram’ etc. The new series of WPI is
to be given a trial run once sufficient price quotations are available.
The Committee understands that another expert group, namely the
Chadha Committee had recommended accounting the cost of services
too in the Wholesale Price Index (WPI). The Committee, while
reiterating the need for ensuring that the work on revising the WPI
series is completed at an early date, desire that the recommendations
made by this Expert Group for including ‘services’ in the WPI basket
is also given due consideration’.

25
Reply of the Government
The office of the Economic Adviser (OEA), Department of Industrial
Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry is responsible
for compilation and release of Wholesale Price Index. In accordance
with the directions of the Hon’ble Committee, CSO would urge the
OEA to explore the possibility of including ‘services’ in the WPI.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2007-B&F (Part-1), dated July 26, 2007]
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

26
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:—
(i) Draft action Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 51st Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

27
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)
above with modification as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FOURTH
REPORT OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION)
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 15
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have 8 53.33%
been accepted by the Government
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3,
7, 9, 11, 12 & 13]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 2 13.34%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
[Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 13 & 14]
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 1 6.67%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos 2 & 5]
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect 4 26.66%
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
[Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 4, 6,
8 & 10]

SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
DEMAND FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

COF No. 62
Price : Rs. 34.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ...................................... 15
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 18
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
28th November, 2007............................................................. 26
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the Fifty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demand for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation ................................................ 28
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri Ramesh Nebhnani — Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixty-second Report on action taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demand for Grants (2007-2008)
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th
April, 2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2007. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 26th July , 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

62
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
DEMAND FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation]
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
