REPORT
The Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 was introduced in the
Rajya Sabha on 17 May, 2007 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance on 30 May, 2007 by the Hon’ble Speaker in
consultation with Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination and report
thereon.
2. The Committee invited memoranda/suggestions regarding the
Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 from various Central Ministries, State
Governments and other Organisations and experts. The Committee
received memoranda/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill from
the Ministries of Health & Family Welfare, Home Affairs, Steel, Textiles,
Labour and Employment and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSME); Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of
Maharashtra, Economic Reforms and North-Eastern Council Affairs
Department, Government to Sikkim and Planning and Co-ordination
Department, Government of Orissa; Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII) and Educational Consultants India Ltd. (EDCIL); and
Dr. K. Srinivasan, Emeritus Professor, International Institute of
Population Sciences, Mumbai.
3. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of
Ministries of Health & Family Welfare, Home Affairs, Steel, Textiles,
Labour and Employment and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSME) on the Bill.
4. While the Central Ministries and State Governments have, in
general, welcomed the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007, the
Confederation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry (CII), in
particular, expressed reservations on certain provisions of the Bill.
5. The Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in connection
with examination of the Bill.

2
A. EXISTING LAW
6. The existing Collection of Statistics Act of 1953 was enacted to
facilitate collection of statistics relating to industry, trade and commerce.
It was an enabling legislation by which the Central Government as
well as the State Governments could make declarations through a
notification published in the Official Gazette, of their intention to collect
statistical data from various enterprises by appointing a Statistics
Authority for conducting survey operations and exercising various
powers and duties under the act. The statistics officer is expected to
issue a notice in writing to the owners/occupiers of enterprises
requiring them to furnish information within the time period specified
in the notice. The Act also provides for certain penalties for willfully
refusing to furnish, or, furnishing of false information. There are also
penalties specified in the Act against persons engaged in data collection
for violating the secrecy provisions in the Act.
7. On the extent of usage of the provisions of the existing Act for
collecting statistics, and the limitations of the Act, the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation have inter-alia stated as
follows:—
“The provisions of the Act have been, so far, effectively used in
conducting the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) by the Ministry
of Statistics & Programme Implementation for collecting information
on input, output and employment from some of the units registered
under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) and Beedi and Cigar
Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966 (32 of 1966). The
Central Government has made rules under the act, viz., the
Collection of Statistics (Central) Rules, 1959 to facilitate the conduct
of ASI. In addition nine State Governments, viz., Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan
and Tamil Nadu have also made rules under the Act to collect
data in areas not covered by the Central Government. Besides, the
Office of the Coal Controller has been collecting information on
coal mines under the provisions of the Collection of Statistics Act.
Thus, the Act has so far been used for the restricted purpose of
collecting information from a limited segment of the industrial
sector.
There are many other survey programmes in the Government setup
both at the Central and the State levels wherein information is
being collected from households, enterprises, companies, public and
private institutions, etc., on a purely voluntary basis. Besides, the

3
law enforcing authorities also collect different types of statistical
information under the powers vested with them in the respective
statutes for the purpose of enforcement. In the wake of
liberalization, privatization and globalization (LPG) resulting in
delicensing/deregulation, the system of obtaining information as a
byproduct of administering various statutes/regulations is losing
ground gradually. The need for statistical information for planning
and policy formulation has also expanded over the years due to
market driven economy in most of the sectors with the increasing
role of the private sector in areas, which were under the monopoly
of the public sector.”
Need for new Law
8. The provisions under the existing Collection of Statistics Act,
1953 are not adequate to meet the new challenges arising out of the
LPG regime manifested by the WTO agreement. The issue of adequacy
of the existing Collection of Statistics Act of 1953 was studied at length
by the National Statistical Commission under the Chairmanship of
Dr. C. Rangarajan which presented its report to the Government in
August, 2001. The limitations of the Collection of Statistics Act, 1953
as observed by the Rangarajan Commission are given below:—
(i) The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953 has been serving at
present, the limited purpose of ASI, which covers only a
part of the entire industrial sector. There are a large number
of industries in the small scale sector which are excluded
from the scope of ASI. Similarly, there is plenty to industrial
activity in the unregistered informal or household sector,
which is out of the ASI purview, though it plays a highly
significant role by way of feeding the larger units as well
as producing value added goods for non-industrial
consumers. Although there is scope under section 2(b) of
the Act to cover all “commercial concerns”, this is not being
done so far. It is also necessary to include sectors such as
information technology, bio-technology, food processing and
the services sector whose share in the economy is rapidly
growing. To include the developments in these industries
and related sectors, data must flow out of the provisions of
the Act.
(ii) Even where the Collection of Statistics Act, 1953 with
provision for prosecution can be executed, response is poor.
This is largely due to the meager penalty of a maximum
fine of Rs. 500/-, which theoretically can be extended to a

4
fine of Rs. 200/- per day on default beyond a certain period,
which has almost never been imposed. So the Act in such
cases hardly serves the purpose and becomes counter-
productive. This is despite the fact that the factories covered
under ASI are statutorily obliged to furnish the required
data in the prescribed format.
9. The Rangarajan Commission also recommended that necessary
legal provisions should be made either by expanding the scope of the
present Collection of Statistics Act, 1953 or by passing a new Act or
Acts to:—
(a) Cover any topic under Core Statistics, as defined by the
propose NSC.
(b) Make it obligatory on the part of individuals, or enterprises,
or State and private agencies to provide the information
sought for any survey under the aegis of the NSC;
(c) Provide right of access to records, including the record of
Government agencies for statistical purposes;
(d) Ensure the informant’s right to privacy by making it illegal
to publish the identity of the informant, or by requiring
him to furnish sensitive information;
(e) Provide penalties on informants, for their refusal to supply,
or for willfully supplying wrong information; and
(f) Make it a penal offence for a statistical officer authorized to
collect, process, or disseminate information collected from
any survey under the Act, if he willfully distorts or
manipulates the data.
10. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation have
stated that the recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission were
considered in the Cabinet meeting held on 27th February , 2002 and
were noted for implementation. Initially, a Bill called “Amendment to
Collection of Statistics Bill, 2002” was drafted by the Ministry and
circulated on 11.11.2002 to all the Central Ministries/Departments and
the State Governments. On the basis of the comments received from
Central Ministries/Departments and the State Governments, the new
Bill, viz., the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 was proposed in
consultation with the National Statistical Commission and the
Legislative Department.

5
Salient features of the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007
11. Some of the salient features of the Collection of Statistics Bill,
2007 vis-a-vis the provisions of the existing Act are as follows:—
(1) In the existing statute , the Central Government and the State
Governments were empowered to issue a notification for
collection of statistics on any subject from any industrial or
commercial concern.
In the proposed Bill , the scope has been enhanced to collect
all kinds of statistics, not only from industrial/commercial
concerns but also from individuals and households. The local
governments such as Panchayats and Municipalities are also
proposed to be empowered to collect statistics in the
proposed Bill.
(2) In the existing statute, the Central Government/State
Governments, as the case may be, were empowered to
appoint a Statistics authority for conducting the collection
of statistics. In the proposed Bill, the scope would be
enhanced to such an extent that any Government
Department/Organisation either in the States or at the
Center or local government could appoint a statistics officer
for each subject of data collection and/or for each
geographical unit. Thus, the proposed Bill while continuing
with the enabling nature of the existing Act enhances the
scope of the definition of ‘appropriate Government’ by the
inclusion of local governments within its ambit.
(3) In the proposed Bill , necessary provisions have also been made
for ensuring support to any statistics officer appointed by
the appropriate Government, in terms of providing necessary
inputs, manpower, etc. Such provisions are not there in the
existing statute.
(4) In the existing statute, no mechanism has been prescribed
for avoiding duplication of surveys and for ensuring
standards for the collection of statistics. In the proposed Bill ,
the Central Government is proposed to be empowered to
make rules for avoiding duplication and for maintaining
technical standards in data collection in respect of ‘core
statistics’, which are important for the country.
(5) In the existing statute, the mode of data collection was in
the form of a return, which would be obtained by the
statistics officer after issuing a notice to each industrial/

6
commercial concern. In the proposed Bill , all methods of data
collection including oral interviews and filing of returns
electronically have been covered.
(6) As per the existing statute, the information collected from
any informant under the Act cannot be made use of for
any purpose other than for prosecution under the Act or
under the IPC. In the proposed Bill, it is provided that the
information would be used only for statistical purposes.
(7) In the existing statute, the penalties were very meager and
the procedures for prosecution were very cumbersome. In
the proposed Bill, these have been rationalized. Penalties
for not furnishing information are proposed to be enhanced.
The procedure for trial has been simplified, to eliminate the
burden of proof on the data collection agencies, by way of
a summary trial.
(8) Appropriate enabling provision have also been proposed in
the Bill for notifying certain subjects of national importance
as ‘core statistics’, for the purpose of ensuring
methodological standards, timeliness, credibility and
completeness.
(9) Adequate provisions have also been made in the Bill to
avoid unnecessary duplication of data collection
programmes.
12. By way of giving the rationale for proposing enactment of the
new law, and highlighting the differences between the existing Act
and the proposed Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation stated as follows during the briefing session
with the Committee on the proposals of the Bill:—
“The first major difference between the existing Act and the
proposed Bill is that the existing Act is restricted to industrial and
commercial concerns whereas the Bill expands the scope to include
not only industrial, commercial concerns but administrative records
individuals and households and it covers a range of statistics which
is economic, demographic, social, scientific and environmental. Any
kind of data that is required for public purpose can be collected
under the proposed Bill but could not be collected under the
existing Act.
We are expanding the scope also in terms of the institutions. Earlier
it was only the Central and State Governments. Now we want to
empower the local bodies as well.”

7
13. The Committee, having examined all aspects of the Collection
of Statistics Bill, 2007 recommend consideration of the Bill, subject
to the observations made/modifications suggested in this Report. The
Bill is intended to overcome the limitations of the existing Collection
of Statistics Act of 1953, inter-alia, by expanding the scope to collect
statistics not only from industrial/commercial concerns but also from
individuals and households; granting any Ministry or Department
in the Central or State Governments or Union Territory
Administration, or any Panchayat or municipality the authority to
collect statistics; enhancing the penalties for not furnishing
information and rationalizing the procedures for prosecution; and
empowering the Central Government to frame rules for avoiding
duplication of data collection and for maintaining standards in data
collection in respect of core statistics, which are of importance for
the country.
14. During the examination of the Bill, the Committee observed
certain key issues of concern. These are discussed in the subsequent
sections of the report.

8
B. PRINCIPLES GOVERNING OUTSOURCING
15. Clause 4(3) of the Bill enables the appropriate Government to
employ on contract basis, any agency or company or organization or
association or person, as may be necessary, for the purpose of collecting
the statistics directed by it.
16. Asked what kind of checks are provided to prevent possible
tampering or interpolation of statistical data collected by an outsourced
agency, the Ministry of Statistics, in a written reply stated:
“The manner of data collection including checks against tampering
of data is survey specific and no general principle can be laid
down in the Bill. The required controls have to be made in the
respective survey specific contracts. The informants would be made
known of the intentions of the Government for collection of any
type of statistics. If any data collector goes beyond such intention,
it would be a case of impersonation which could be punished
under Clause 21 of the Bill.”
17. Clause 21 of the Bill provides that ‘whoever, not being
authorized to collect the statistics under the provisions of the Bill, by
words, conduct or demeanor pretends that he is authorized to do so,
shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees and in case of a company which may extend to ten thousand
rupees’.
18. The CII, in their memorandum, submitted to the Committee
contended that statistical information being of sensitive nature, its
collection should not be outsourced by Government to any agency
without prescribing adequate safeguards and governance process and
liability/responsibilities of such agency in the event of misuse or breach
of information/confidentiality. The CII also felt that the circumstances
in which outsourcing can be done as well as qualification of persons
to whom outsourcing can be done should be prescribed.
19. Commenting on the point, the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation in a written reply stated:
“It is for the appropriate government as defined in Clause 2 (b) of
the Bill to decide whether the collection of statistics directed by it
has to be done through outsourcing or not. Hence, the Bill enables
‘outsourcing’. Private agencies engaged in the process would be
bound by the security provisions given in Chapter III of the Bill
and they would also be subject to penalties in case of any violations
as per the penal provisions in the Bill.”

9
20. When pointed out that Chapter III of the Bill has not prescribed
any guidelines of persons to whom outsourcing can be done, the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation stated:
“Chapter III of the Bill relates to disclosure of information in certain
cases and restrictions of its use, and these provisions are applicable
to all the data collection agencies. Failure to comply with the
provisions attracts penalties provided in Chapter IV of the Bill. It
is expected that the concerned Government agency will build
appropriate provisions in the outsourcing contracts.”
21. Admitting the need to provide safeguards in the matter of
outsourcing, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation submitted as follows while deposing before the
Committee:
“All this would have to be provided for and we would have to
build in the safeguards with the agencies with whom we outsource
to not to misuse the data that they are collecting.”
22. The Committee note that though Clause 2(a) and Clause 4(3)
of the Bill enable the appropriate Government to employ on contract
basis, any agency or company or organization or association or
person, as may be necessary for the purpose of collecting the
statistics, there is no provision in the Bill to prescribe suitable
safeguards for such outsourcing the collection of statistics which is
sensitive in nature. The Committee do not agree with the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation that required controls
will have to be made in respective survey specific contracts. The
Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
however, admitted during oral evidence the need to build safeguards
governing outsourcing. The Committee desire that general principles
governing outsourcing the collection of statistics be prescribed by
the Central Government under Clause 32 of the Bill.

10
C. EXCLUSION OF ‘INSTRUMENTALITY’
23. In terms of Clause 2(b), the term ‘appropriate Government’
means:
(i) any Ministry or Department in the Central Government or
its instrumentality; or
(ii) any Ministry or Department in a State Government or Union
Territory Administration or its instrumentality; or
(iii) any local Government that is to say, Panchayats or
Municipalities, as the case may be, in relation to the
collection of statistics under a direction issued by it under
section 3.
24. The CII, in its memorandum contended that the definition of
the term ‘Appropriate Government’ under clause 2(b) should be limited
to Central Government or State Government or Union Territory
Administration and should not extend to “....its instrumentality or
Panchayats or Municipalities”. According to CII, this is necessary to
ensure control over confidential/sensitive information; to avoid
duplication in information collection; and prevent misuse of the power
to prescribe and collect information, by vested interests.
25. Asked to respond to the view expressed by CII in this regard,
the Ministry, in a written response stated, inter-alia:
“The Rangarajan Commission has described the Indian statistical
system as laterally decentralised among the Ministries of the
Government of India, and in every one of them, vertically
decentralised, between the Centre and the States. Similarly , the
requirements of local Governments are different and data collection
on such aspects should be left to them, since as per the 73rd and
74th Constitutional amendments, powers have to be given to PRIs
and Municipalities, as the third tier of Government.”
26. Similarly, on the issue of proposing to empower of the
Municipalities and Panchayats to collect statistical data, the Secretary,
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation stated as under,
while deposing before the Committee:
“.....after the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments, when we
created a new tier of Government, that tier of Government today
has no authority to collect statistics. We have gone and mandated
constitutionally the District Plans will have to be made. A district
Planning Committee is to be established and District Plans will
have to be made. But the District Planning Committee has no
teeth to collect data, which is relevant to their planning. Co, we

11
need to cover the PRIs and the urban local bodies also and
empower them to collect data.”
27. As regards the possibility of duplication in information collection
and susceptibility to misuse power to collect information by vested
interests, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
stated inter-alia:
“The apprehension that the power to prescribe and collect
information may be susceptible to misuse by vested interests is
misplaced, as no such case has been reported so far with regard
to data collection under the existing Act. With regard to the
possibility of duplication in information collection, the Bill provides
for delegation of rule making power to the Central Government
under Clause 32(2) (a) to avoid unnecessary duplication.”
28. Clause 32 cited in the Ministry’s reply, enumerates matters
with respect to which the Central Government shall have powers to
make rules under the Bill, which includes avoiding ‘unnecessary
duplication in the collection of statistics’.
29. The Ministry, however, expressed agreement with the suggestion
to remove the term ‘Instrumentalities’ from the scope of the definition
of ‘appropriate Government’.
30. By way of elaborating the reasons that led to the re-thinking
to remove the term ‘instrumentalities’ from the definition of the term,
‘appropriate Government’, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, while tendering evidence stated:
“…As far as instrumentality of the State is concerned, I think, we
are inclined to believe that the august Committee does have a
very strong point because instrumentality of the State, as a
nomenclature, covers a wide range of institutions, which were not
intended to be covered for the purpose of collecting statistical data.
31. The Committee are not inclined to agree with the suggestion
of CII for exclusion of Panchayats and Municipalities from the ambit
of the definition, ‘appropriate Government’ for the reason that the
local Governments need to collect statistical data for formulating
district plans as mandated by the Constitution. The Committee,
however, desire that, as agreed to by the Secretary, Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation, Clause 2(b) of the Bill be
amended to exclude ‘instrumentality’ of the Government from the
purview of the definition ‘appropriate government, as the
nomenclature ‘instrumentality’ covers a wide range of institutions
which are reportedly not intended to be covered for the purpose of
collecting statistical data.

12
D. NODAL FUNCTIONS
32. According to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
although the provisions of clause 4(1) of the Bill provide for
appointment of Statistics Officer by the ‘appropriate Government’, there
was an apparent dilution or absence of the role of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation as the nodal Ministry for
collection of Statistics. In response to this point, the Ministry of Statistics
and programme Implementation stated:
“The allocation of business to the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation specifies that the Ministry ill act as
the nodal agency for planning integrated development of the
statistical system in the country and coordination of statistical work
with a view to identifying data gaps or duplication of statistical
work. Thus the actual collection of data will continue to be the
responsibility of the concerned organisations, a task that is to be
made more effective through the present Bill. Consequently the
appointments of Statistical Officers have been left to the appropriate
Government rather than to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation. The intend of the Bill is to provide umbrella
legislation without giving authority to any one individual or body.
The nodal functions necessary in effective implementation of the
provisions of the Bill will be addressed while framing rules, which
power would be with the Central Government as per Clause 32 of
the Bill.”
33. Clause 32 of the Bill enumerates matters with respect to which
the Central Government shall have the power to make rules, which
include inter-alia, the ‘principles for prescribing the form and manner
in which the information may be required to be furnished’.
34. It was also added as under by the Ministry, in reply:
“Strengthening the nodal role for bringing better coordination and
standardization is also proposed to be addressed through a separate
Bill and this issue is presently under the examination of the
National Statistical Commission.”
35. Questioned about the justification for proposing a separate Bill
for brining better co-ordination and strengthening the nodal role of
the Ministry, instead of addressing the issues in the current Bill, the
Ministry, in reply stated:
“Given the enormity and complexity of the statistical system, it is
not possible to control and regulate the entire system. It is also

13
not desirable to set uniform standards for all official statistics, as
the requirements for different Government Departments could be
different. However, for certain statistics of national importance,
standards could be set. The Rangarajan Commission recommended
that statistics of national importance be designated as ‘core
statistics’. Therefore, for such statistics to be known as ‘core
statistics’, a separate Bill for standardization and coordination is
justified.”
36. The Committee hope that the rules for enabling effective
implementation of the provisions of the Bill will be made at the
earliest under Clause 32.
37. A separate Bill for standardization of statistical activities and
coordination, with specific reference to ‘core statistics’ of national
importance is reportedly on the anvil. The Committee expect that
the process of identification of ‘core statistics’ of national importance,
and the related Bill pertaining to standardization of statistical
activities and coordination is finalized and brought before Parliament
expeditiously.

14
E. INSPECTION AND POWER OF ENTRY INTO PREMISES—
CLAUSE 7 AND CLAUSE 8
38. Clause 7, of the Bill reads as under:
“Every agency shall render such help and assistance and furnish
such information to other agency or any statistics officer as it may
require for the discharge of its or his functions, and shall make
available for inspection and examination of such records, plans
and other documents, as may be necessary.”
39. Further, Clause 8 pertaining to ‘right to access to records or
documents provides as under:
“The statistics officer or any person authorised by him in writing
in this behalf shall, for the purposes of collection of any statistics
under this Act, have access to any relevant record or document in
the possession of any informant required to furnish any information
under this Act, and may enter at any reasonable time any premises
where he believes such record or document is kept and may inspect
or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any question
necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished
under this Act.”
40. As regards the provisions of Clause 7, the CII, in their
Memorandum contended that Collection of information being intended
for statistical purposes, inspection and examination of books should
not be allowed as it has the potential of misuse of authority and
breach of confidential information, and would also make the process
onerous and burdensome for the informant. For meeting the objective
of accuracy of information, the CII proposed that the Act may specify
that such information shall be attested by a responsible person. Any
limited inspection should be undertaken by senior Government official
only (prescribed rank) and not by outsourced agencies.
41. Further, as regards conferring the right of ‘access to records or
documents’ under Clause 8, CII contended that these provisions confer
unbridled power to the statistics officer. If such officer enters any
premises without notice and even without any failure on part of
informant, this would violate ‘right of privacy’.
42. Asked to respond to these contentions on the provisions of
Clause 7 and 8, and specifically as to how safe custody of information;
confidentiality obligations of Statistics Officer and their liability for

15
breaches are to be addressed, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, in a written response, inter-alia stated:
“The data collectors including the statistical officers must have the
power to see relevant records and enter the premises of informants
at any reasonable time for collecting and establishing the
authenticity of the information. However, the concerns about the
manner in which these rights would be exercised by data collectors
would be addressed while framing rules. Adequate provisions are
made in the Bill for security and confidentiality of information.”
43. Also asked to elaborate the meaning of the term ‘may enter at
any reasonable time’ as occurring in Clause 8, to suit survey specific
requirements viz., for household surveys, as distinct from accessing
company records etc. the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, in reply stated:
“With regard to the words “and may enter at any reasonable
time...” used in Clause 8, it is submitted that data collection and
verification would not be feasible unless this right is provided for.
In case of enterprises, records such as certificate of registration
and books of accounts may be relevant, whereas in case of
households, ration cards and records of medical treatment/
immunization etc., may be relevant. It is submitted that data
collectors need to enter into premises of each house/structure even
to identify how many households reside over there. Hence, right
of entry in any premises at any reasonable time is important for
data collection from households as well as enterprises.”
44. Questioned whether it would not be desirable to prescribe the
minimum rank of the officer who can be authorized to enter premises
of informants, as suggested by the CII, the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, in reply stated:
“It is not possible to prescribe the minimum rank of any person
who can be authorized to enter the premises of informants for
inspection of records or data collection, as this would vary from
case to case and private agencies may also be engaged for data
collection. Such a prescription makes the provisions of the Bill
restrictive. The qualifications of persons/agencies to be engaged
may be left to the wisdom of the appropriate Government.”
45. When pointed out that conferring power to enter premises ‘at
any reasonable time’, as provided in Clause 8 appeared to be vague,

16
which would also amount to giving unbridled power on the statistics
officer/authorized person, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, in reply stated:
“The word “reasonable time’ varies from informant to informant.
For companies and firms having an office environment, the
reasonable time may be office hours. However, for households and
household enterprises, the reasonable time cannot always be the
day time or officer hours. For example, in nuclear families where
both husband and wife go for work, they will not be available for
data collection during the day time. Hence, these matters should
be left to the field to decide on case to case basis. However, a
provision has been made in the Bill in clause 32 to lay down
principles for prescribing the manner in which the right of access
to documents and the right of entry conferred by ‘Clause 8’ may
be exercised.”
46. Clause 32(2) (d) provides for the ‘Central Government to make
rules relating to the principles for prescribing the manner in which
the right of access to documents and the right of entry conferred by
section 8 may be exercised.
47. The Committee observe that Clause 7 of the Bill which
enables inspection and examination of records, plans and other
documents, does not prescribe safeguards against misuse of authority.
The Committee feel that safeguards in exercise of power of inspection
and examination should be built into the Bill. The Committee
accordingly recommend that clause 7 of the Bill should clearly
stipulate that the power of inspection and examination of records,
plans and other documents should be exercised only by responsible
government officials of minimum rank as may be prescribed by the
Government
48. Similarly, the right of access to records or documents as
envisaged under Clause 8 of the Bill provides for entry into any
premises. As exercise of this power impinges on the rights and
liberties of citizens, it cannot be left to be exercised by any person
authorized by Statistics Officer or without any prior notice.
Considering that these are matters of extreme nature and in order to
prevent any arbitrary exercise or misuse of the power, the Committee
recommend that Clause 8 of the Bill be suitably amended to provide
that the power of entry into premises shall be exercised only by
Government officials of minimum rank as may be prescribed, only
with prior notice and only during hours of the day as may be
prescribed.

17
F. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION—CLAUSES 10, 11 AND 12
Clauses 10, 11 and 12
49. Clauses 10 (Agencies authorized to disclose certain information);
11 (Disclosure of information schedules for bona fide research or
statistical purposes) and 12 (Disclosure of historical documents) read
as follows:
(i) Clause 10
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 9 of this Act,
the agency authorised for collection of statistics may disclose the
following information, namely:—
(a) information supplied by informant in respect of which
disclosure is consented to in writing by the informant or by
any person authorised by the said informant;
(b) information otherwise available to the public under any Act
or as a public document.
(c) information in the form of an index or list of the names
and addresses of informants together with the classification,
if any, allotted to them and the number of persons engaged.
(ii) Clause 11
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in section 9 of
this Act, the agency authorised for collection of statistics
may disclose individual returns or formats or information
schedules to other agency or person or institutions or
universities solely for bona fide research or statistical purposes
pursuant to their functions and duties.
(2) No individual return or information schedule shall be
disclosed pursuant to this section unless—
(a) the name and address of the informant by whom the
schedule or related information was supplied is deleted;
(b) every agency or person or institutions or Universities
involved in the research or statistical project makes a
declaration to use the schedules disclosed to them only
for bona fide research or statistical purposes; and
(c) the agency authorised for collection of statistics, making
such disclosure is satisfied that the security contained
therein shall not be impaired.

18
(3) The published results of any research or statistical project
shall not divulge any more information than what the
agency authorised for collection of statistics could publish
under this Act.
(4) Every agency or person or institutions or universities to
whom any individual return or information schedule is
disclosed under this section shall comply with directions
given by the agency authorised for collection of statistics
making the disclosure relating to the schedules and any
information contained therein.
(iii) Clause 12
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 9 of this Act, the
agency authorized for collection of statistics may release such
documents relating to information schedules, which in the opinion of
such agency have attained historical importance.
50. With reference to Clause 11 relating to ‘disclosure of information
schedules for bona fide research etc., the CII, in their memorandum
contended that such disclosure ‘must not be made except with prior
written consent of the informant, with consequential controls’. Further,
it has also been emphasized by CII that disclosure by such institutions
should not be allowed to any third party.
51. In response to a query posed in this regard, the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation, in a written response stated:
“Clause 10(a) provides that the agency authorised for collection of
statistics may disclose information supplied by informant in respect
of such disclosure is consented to in writing by the informant or
by any person authorised by the said informant. Clause 11 is an
exception to Clause 9 and is intended to promote bona fide research
on the data collected. It is not practical to take the consent of
informants, normally large in number, prior to disclosure of
information for bona fide research. Adequate safeguards are also
provided on users of data for bona fide research in Clause 11 of the
Bill.
The situation normally seen in the statistical system is that data
collection is a specific action and dissemination/disclosure of
information is a subsequent activity. This being the case, the agency
authorised to collect statistics may be different from the one
disseminating information. This is particularly true in cases where
data collection work is outsourced. In most of the cases,

19
dissemination function is discharged by the concerned Government
Department. Hence, it would be desirable if the relevant functions
under clauses 9 to 14 are entrusted to the appropriate Government.”
52. Further, with reference to Clause 12, the Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare, expressed the view that it will be necessary to vest
the responsibility of releasing information, which may have attained
historical importance, with the appropriate Government, who may also
decide on whether the information is to be released with or without
disclosing the identity of the informant.
53. In this regard, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, in a written reply stated:
“With reference to Clause 12, the suggestion, to vest the
responsibility of releasing documents relating to information
schedules which have attained historical importance with the
appropriate government, is acceptable.”
54. Asked further to point out the provisions of the Bill that may
be available or may be necessary for ensuring that the function of
dissemination of information, provided for under Clauses 11 and 12
will be discharged by the Governments concerned and not by any
non-governmental agency, the Ministry, in response, stated inter-alia:
“In many cases, the appropriate Government may directly
undertake dissemination after completion of data collection. The
provisions in Clauses 9 and 13 of the Bill shall apply to the data
collectors as also to the data disseminators. However, in respect of
clauses 10 to 12, which are exceptions to the provisions in clause
9, it involves higher responsibility and in this context, it was
suggested that this function should be available only with the
appropriate Government, as in many cases data collection agency
may cease to exist.”
55. Clauses 10, 11 and 12 of the Bill provide for disclosure of
certain information/document by the agency authorized for collection
of statistics. It has been suggested to the Committee that the
responsibility of releasing information should vest with the
appropriate government and not with the agency authorized for
collection of statistics. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation have agreed that as releasing of information involves
higher responsibility, it would be desirable if the relevant functions
under Clause 9 to 14 are entrusted to appropriate government. The
Committee hope that suitable amendments will be made in the Bill
accordingly.

20
G. PROVISION FOR IMPRISONMENT—CLAUSES 16 AND 20
56. Clause 16 pertains to penalty for making false statement; and
Clause 20 pertains to ‘penalty for failure to carry out duties and
functions by employees’.
57. Clause 16 reads as under:—
“Whoever, makes any false or misleading statement or material
omission in any information schedule or return filled in or supplied,
or in answer to any question asked to him under this Act or the
rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with a fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with
a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees”.
58. Further, clause 20 provides as follows:—
If any person employed in the execution of any duty or functions
under this Act,
(a) omits without lawful excuse to carry out his duty, or
knowingly makes any false declaration, statement or return;
or
(b) pretends performance of his duties or obtains or seeks to
obtain information which he is not authorised to obtain; or
(c) fails to keep inviolate the secrecy of the information gathered
or entered in the information schedules collected pursuant
to this Act and, except as permitted under this Act, divulges
the contents of any schedule filled in or any information
furnished by any informant under this Act, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees.
59. Proposing that there should be a provision for simple
imprisonment for furnishing false information, the Ministry of Steel,
stated, inter-alia:
“……the provisions made in the Bill are in order excepting for
that relating to Clause 16 on Penalty for making false statement.
The proposed penalties i.e.  Rs. 1000/- for individual and
Rs. 5000/- for company seen grossly inadequate as a deterrent.
Presently, a major share of the domestic steel production is
accounted for by the secondary steel producers including the
Induction Furnace units. There is a serious apprehension of
underreporting or only providing incorrect data from many of such

21
units for reasons including tax evasion. As a reliable data base on
this segment of the industry is crucial for any effective policy
making for the steel sector, the disincentive/penalty provision for
furnishing false information should be stringent enough. Therefore,
in addition to the prescribed penalties clause 16 may also make a
provision for “simple imprisonment i.e. for a period upto 1 to 3
months” to ensure that the information furnished under the Act is
not only timely but is also correct”.
60. By way of elaborating on the inadequacy of the penal provisions
proposed under Clause 16 on account of furnishing false information,
the Secretary, Ministry of Steel, while tendering evidence stated:
“The penalty imposed is Rs. 1000 or Rs. 5000 per day in the case
of a company. Supposing the delay is by 30 days, he has to pay
a fine of Rs. 1000 multiplied by 30 days. About the incorrectness
of data we find the punishment prescribed in the provisions of
the Bill is only Rs. 1000 or Rs. 5000. In steel sector even the smallest
of producer which has those kinds of incentives in not parting
with the data will easily wait for paying Rs. 5000 rather than
giving data.
We looked at the Indian Penal Code and found that anybody who
furnishes false information to a public authority recognized under
the Indian Penal Code is punishable with imprisonment. Not that
everybody will be imprisoned or prosecuted but whenever we
find that the data is incorrect we will try to collect evidence so
that he parts with the data. Provisions are not made every day.
After a long time, we have embarked on this exercise. We have
taken a cue from the Indian Penal Code. That is our submission
in brief ”.
61. In response to a related question, the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, stated as below:
“The penalties provided in Clauses 15 and 16 of the Bill are
considered adequate to act as deterrent measures to check cases of
refusal, providing false information, etc.”
62. Responding to a query on the adequacy of the penal provisions
proposed for not furnishing data, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation, while tendering evidence stated:
“……As far as not furnishing data is concerned, I think that the
penalty that we are proposing is good enough because it is
cumulative, that is, he will be charged Rs. 1,000 every day for
each day that the data is not provided. It actually adds up to a
fairly tidy amount quite quickly”.

22
63. The CII, in their Memorandum emphasized on reviewing and
making more stringent, the penalties prescribed under Clause 20 for
failure to ‘carry out duties and functions by employees’. In response
to this point, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation stated during evidence:
“…I personally feel that penalties on the employees should be
much more stringent than penalties on the people who give us
data. I think, the experience that we have had in recent years with
the BPO, where employees in BPO companies have been leaking
confidential information to competitors and so on, I suggest that
the kind of money that is involved in selling data is so high that
unless you have something fairly stringent, it may encourage people
to do so”.
64. Asked specifically whether the penal provisions under Clause
20 should include imprisonment also, the Secretary, stated as follows:
“My personal feeling is ‘Yes’. But as I said, this was a collective
document. By and large, the majority opinion was that it was
better to get rid of imprisonment thing.”
65. It was also added as under by the Secretary:
“I will tell you what the problem was. The problem was that
when we were thinking about the Bill and when we were drafting
the bill, everybody at the back of their mind had a view that
people who would be responsible for the collection of data and
maintenance of data would be Government servants and within
the Government rules, there are fairly stringent disciplinary
procedures”.
66. In this regard, the Ministry, in a written reply stated:
“With regard to the view that the penalties prescribed for data
collectors are minimal, the existing Act provided for imprisonment
also under Section 10, but so far there was no case of improper
disclosure under the existing Act. However, this aspect could be
considered again and appropriate provision for imprisonment made
in the Bill.”
67. The Committee observe that Clauses 16 and 20 of the Bill
provide for mere monetary penalty in the event of making false
statement or failure to keep inviolate the secrecy of the information
by employees in execution of any duty under this Act. The

23
Committee are of the view that there should be provision for simple
imprisonment in the event of any one willfully furnishing false
information as provided for in the Indian Penal Code and as rightly
pointed out by the Secretary, Ministry of Steel. Attributing the
absence of imprisonment provision to the drafting changes in the
Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation has admitted the need to have this provision in the
Bill in the event of anyone furnishing false information. The
Committee desire that provision for imprisonment in such cases be
suitably incorporated in the Bill.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
17 March, 2008 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

24
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 25th July, 2007 from 1100 to
1240 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
15. Shri Vijay J. Darda
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary

25
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
1. Dr. Pronab Sen, Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Ray, Director General, NSSO
3. Shrimati Lalitha Kumar, Additional Secretary, NSSO
4. Shri J. Dash, Additional Director General, NSSO
5. Shri A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary
6. Shri T.K. Dutta, Deputy Director General, NSSO
7. Shri M.V .S. Ranganadham, Director
8. Shri M.M. Hasija, Director, NSSO
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation briefed the Committee on the purpose and
need for introducing the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 through power
point presentation. They also briefed the Committee on certain
provisions contained in the Bill. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied by the representatives. The main issues
discussed were the adequacy of the penalty provisions and the
desirability to make them more stringent, the need for ensuring the
authenticity of the data and its timely publication. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The briefing was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

26
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th November, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Shri Vijoy Krishna
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary

27
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
1. Shri A.K. Singh, Secretary (T)
2. Shri Jamini Kumar Sharma, Joint Secretary
3. Shri J.N. Singh, Textiles Commissioner
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shrimati Anita Das, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Das, Additional Director General
3. Shri P . Chattopadhyay, Chief Director
4. Shri Praveen Srivastava, Director
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS, OFFICE OF THE
REGISTRAR GENERAL, INDIA
1. Shri D.K. Sikri, Additional Secretary (Registrar General of India)
2. Shri S.K. Chakravorty, Dy. Director General
MINISTRY OF STEEL
1. Shri R.S. Pandy, Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Rath, Special Secretary & FA
3. Shrimati Chandralekha Malviya, Eco Adviser
4. Shri G.K. Basak, Executive Secretary, Joint Planning Committee
MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
1. Dr. Chandrapal, Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Padhy , Addl. Development Commissioner & Economic
Advisor.
3. Shri Deepak Goyal, Director (S&D), Office of the DC (MSME)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the
sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions
contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the represntatives of
the aforesaid Ministries/Departments and discussed various issues on
the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007, such as, designating the Textile
Commissioner as Statistics Collection Authority for textile sector under

28
the proposed Act; inclusion of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 in the definition of the term
‘informant’; facilitating action by the Central Government for collection
of statistics at a regional level for activities of national importance,
adequacy of penal measures proposed in the Bill, etc. As regards the
points on which the representatives of the Ministries could not readily
respond, the Chairman requested the representatives of the Ministries
to furnish written information within seven days.
4. A verbatim record of proceeding has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again
on 15th November, 2007.

29
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13 Dcember, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Vijoy Krishna
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
11. Shri Vijay. J. Dadra
12. Shri S. Anbalagan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary

30
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
1. Dr. Pronab Sen, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sinha, DG, NSSO
3. Shri P .K. Ray, Additional Director General
4. Dr. A.K. Yogi, Additional Director General
5. Shri A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Bhatia, Deputy Director General
7. Shri M.V .S. Ranganadham, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the
sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions
contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and discussed
various issues on the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 such as,
incorporating appropriate provisions in the present Bill for bringing
better co-ordination and standardisation; appropriatness of the provision
authorizing any person to enter premises for inspection of relevant
record or document; provision of right to appeal against instances
where information may be wrongfully called for; adequacy of the penal
measures proposed in the Bill etc. The Chairman requested the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish written information on various
points raised within fifteen days.
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
5. The Committee also decided to take up for examination the
subject, ‘Foreign Institutional Investment Inflows—An Appraisal”.
6. The Committee also proposed to undertake a Study Tour in
connection with the subjects selected for examination in the second-
third week of January, 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.

31
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12th March, 2008 from
1700 hrs. to 1740 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Shri Lakshman Seth
9. Shri A.R. Shaheen
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
11. Shri Mahendra Mohan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary Gr.-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***

32
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report
on the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007. The Chairman requested the
Members to give their suggestions on the recommendations contained
in the draft report. The Committee, after deliberation, adopted the
draft report with the modifications/amendments shown in the
Annexure.
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the report
in the light of the modifications suggested and also to make
consequential changes and present the report to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

33
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT
ON THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS BILL, 2007
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 12 MARCH, 2008]
Section Page Nos. Para Nos. Line Amendments/Modifications
D 15-16 32-36 — Delete
Section D, Para Nos. 32-36 and
renumber subsequent Section/
paras accordingly.
E1 8 4 0— For
“The Committee have been
informed that the intent of the
Bill is to provide an umbrella
legislation without giving
authority to any one individual
or body and that the nodal
functions required to be
discharged by the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme
Implementation, for effective
implementation of the
provisions of the Bill will be
addressed while framing rules
as per Clause 32 of the Bill. The
Committee hope that rules in
this regard will be made at the
earliest.”
Read
“The Committee hope that the
rules for enabling effective
implementation of the
provisions of the Bill will be
made at the earliest under
Clause 32.”
H3 3 7 1 4 Delete
“……or failure by employees to
keep inviolate the secrecy of the
information.”

34
Bill No. XXXIX of 2007
THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS BILL, 2007
——-
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
———
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
COLLECTION OF S TATISTICS
3. Collection of statistics.
4. Powers of appropriate Government to appoint statistics
officer, etc.
5. Power of statistics officer to call for information.
6. Duty of Informants.
7. All agencies to assist.
8. Right of access to records or documents.
CHAPTER III
D
ISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION IN CERTAIN CASES
AND RESTRICTIONS OF THEIR USE
9. Security of information.
10. Agencies authorised to disclose certain information.
11. Disclosure of information schedules for bona fide  research or
statistical purposes.
12. Disclosure of historical documents.
13. Security of recorded information.
14. Restrictions on use of information.
A
S I NTRODUCED IN R AJYA S ABHA

35
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. Penalty for neglect or refusal to supply particulars.
16. Penalty for making false statement.
17. penalty for mutilation or defacement of information
schedule.
18. Penalty for obstruction of employees.
19. Penalty for other offences.
20. Penalty for failure to carry out duties and functions by
employees.
21. Penalty for impersonation of employee.
22. General penalty.
23. Cognizance of offences.
24. Sanction for prosecution for offence.
25. Power of court to try cases summarily.
CHAPTER V
P
OWER IN RESPECT OF CORE STATISTICS
26. Power in respect of core statistics.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
27. Power to give directions.
28. Public servants.
29. Bar of jurisdiction.
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.
31. Overriding effect.
32. Power to make rules.
33. Repeal and savings.

36
Bill No. XXXIX of 2007
THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to facilitate the collection of statistics on economic, demographic,
social, scientific and environmental aspects, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Collection
of Statistics Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “agency” includes a person or
persons engaged by the appropriate
Government, directly or by outsourcing, for
collection of statistics;
(b) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) any Ministry or Department in
the Central Government or its
instrumentality; or
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Definitions.

37
(ii) any Ministry or Department in
a State Government or Union territory
Administration or its instrumentality; or
(iii) any local Government that is
to say, Panchayats or Municipalities, as
the case may be,
in relation to the collection of statistics
under a direction issued by it under
section 3;
(c) “informant” means any person, who
supplies or is required to supply statistical
information and includes an owner or
occupier or person in-charge or his
authorised representative in respect of
persons or a firm registered under the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or a co-
operative society registered under any Co-
operative Societies Act or a company
registered under the Companies Act, 1956
or a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or any association
recognised or registered under any law for
the time being in force;
(d) “information schedule” means any
book, document, form, card, tape, disc or
any storage media on which information
required is entered or recorded or is
required to be entered or recorded for
statistical purposes under this act;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(f) “sampling” means a statistical
procedure by which information relating to
a particular field of inquiry is derived by
applying statistical techniques to
information obtained in respect of a
proportion of the total number of persons
or units concerned relevant to the field of
inquiry;
9 of 1932.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.

38
(g) “statistical survey” means a census
or a survey, whereby information is
collected from all the informants in the field
of inquiry or from a sample thereof, by an
appropriate Government under this Act or
any other relevant Act, wholly or primarily
for the purposes of processing and
summarising by appropriate statistical
procedures;
(h) “statistics” means statistics derived
by collecting, classifying and using statistics,
specially in or for large quantities or
numbers by appropriate Government from
statistical surveys, administrative and
registration records, and other forms and
papers, the statistical analysis of which are,
whether in a published or unpublished
form;
(i) “statistics officer” means any officer
appointed under section 4 for the purposes
of any direction issued under section 3 of
this Act.
CHAPTER III
C
OLLECTION OF STATISTICS
3. The appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
the statistics on economic, demographic, social,
scientific and environmental aspects shall be
collected through a statistical survey or
otherwise, and thereupon the provisions of this
Act shall apply in relation to those statistics:
Provided that—
(a) nothing contained in this section shall
be deemed to authorise a State Government
or Union territory Administration or any
local Government to issue any direction
with respect to the collection of statistics
Collection
of statistics.

39
relating to any matter falling under any of
the entries specified in List I (Union List)
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;
or
(b) where the Central Government has
issued any direction under this section for
the collection of statistics relating to any
matter, no State Government or Union
territory Administration or any local
government shall, except with the previous
approval of the Central Government, issue
any similar direction for so long as the
collection of such statistics by the Central
Government remain to be completed; or
(c) where a State Government or Union
territory Administration or any local
Government has issued a direction under
this section for the collection of Statistics
relating to any matter, the Central
Government shall not issue any similar
direction for so long as the collection of
such statistics by the State Government
remain to be completed, except in cases
where such statistics have to be collected
with reference to two or more States or
Union territories.
4. (1) The appropriate Government may
appoint or cause to appoint an officer to be
the statistics officer for any geographical unit
for the purpose of collecting any statistics
directed by it.
(2) The appropriate Government may
appoint any agency or persons working in such
agencies to take, or aid in, or supervise the
collection of the statistics within any specified
geographical unit and such agencies or persons,
when so appointed, shall be bound to serve
accordingly.
Powers of
appropriate
Government
to appoint
statistics
officer, etc.

40
(3) The appropriate Government may
employ on contract basis any agency or
company or organisation or association or
person, as may be necessary, for the purpose
of collecting the statistics directed by it.
(4) The appropriate Government may
delegate to any statistics officer, as it thinks fit,
the power of appointing agencies or persons
working in such agencies or employing on
contract basis any agency or company or
organisation or association of persons, conferred
on it by sub-sections (2) and (3) within the
geographical unit for which such statistics
officer is appointed.
(5) The appropriate Government may, by
order specify the form, the particulars required
or the interval within which, and the statistics
officer to whom, the statistical information by
the informants shall be furnished.
(6) The appropriate Government may, by
order published in the Official Gazette, delegate
to any statistics officer, as it thinks fit, any
power conferred under sub-section (5) for the
purpose of the collection of statistics under a
direction issued by it under section 3.
5. The statistics officer may, for the purpose
of collection of statistics on any specified subject
in any geographical unit for which the said
officer was appointed—
(a) serve or cause to be served on any
informant a notice in writing asking him
to furnish the information specified under
sub-section (5) of section 4 or cause an
information schedule to be given to any
informant for the purpose of its being filled
up; or
(b) cause all questions relating to the
subject to be asked from any informant; or
(c) seek information through tele fax or
telephone or e-mail or in any other
electronic mode or in a combination of
Power of
statistics
officer to
call for
information.

41
different modes for different sets of
information so specified.
6. The informants who are asked to furnish
any information under the provisions of this
Act shall be bound to furnish the information
so asked in the prescribed manner to the best
of knowledge or belief; and in cases where only
a portion of a particular class or group of
persons or units is asked to furnish information
because of any sampling procedure, it shall not
be a defence in failure on the part of any
informant to furnish that information, if so
asked.
7. Every agency shall render such help and
assistance and furnish such information to other
agency or any statistics officer as it may require
for the discharge of its or his functions, and
shall make available for inspection and
examination of such records, plans and other
documents, as may be necessary.
8. The statistics officer or any person
authorised by him in writing in this behalf
shall, for the purposes of collection of any
statistics under this Act, have access to any
relevant record or document in the possession
of any informant required to furnish any
information under this Act, and may enter at
any reasonable time any premises where he
believes such record or document is kept and
may inspect or take copies of relevant records
or documents or ask any question necessary
for obtaining any information required to be
furnished under this Act.
CHAPTER III
D
ISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION IN CERTAIN CASES AND
RESTRICTIONS OF THEIR USE
9. (1) Any information furnished to the
statistics officer or to any person or agencies
authorised under this Act shall only be used
for statistical purposes.
Duty of
informants.
All
agencies to
assist.
Right of
access to
records or
documents.
Security of
information.

42
(2) No person other than a person engaged
in the work of collection of statistics under this
Act or preparation of statistics resultant to such
collection shall be permitted to see any
information schedule or any answer to a
question asked, except for the purposes of a
prosecution under this Act.
(3) No information contained in any
information schedule and no answer to any
question asked shall, except for the purposes
of a prosecution under this Act, be separately
published, or disclosed without suppressing the
identification of informants to any agency.
(4) All statistical information published by
any agency shall be arranged in such a manner
so as to prevent any particulars becoming
identifiable by any person (other than the
informant by whom those particulars were
supplied) as the particulars relating to the
informant who supplied it, even through the
process of elimination, unless—
(a) that informant has consented to their
publication in that manner; or
(b) their publication in that manner
could not reasonably have been foreseen
by the concerned agency or any employee
thereof.
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), the
Central Government may make such rules or
make such arrangement, as it may consider
necessary.
10. Notwithstanding the provisions
contained in section 9 of this Act, the agency
authorised for collection of statistics may
disclose the following information, namely:—
(a) information supplied by informant in
respect of which disclosure is consented to
in writing by the informant or by any
person authorised by the said informant;
Agencies
authorised
to disclose
certain
information.

43
(b) information otherwise available to the
public under any Act or as a public
document.
(c) information in the form of an index
or list of the names and addresses of
informants together with the classification,
if any, allotted to them and the number of
persons engaged.
11. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions
contained in section 9 of this Act, the agency
authorised for collection of statistics may
disclose individual returns or formats or
information schedules to other agency or person
or institutions or universities solely for bona fide
research or statistical purposes pursuant to their
functions and duties.
(2) No individual return or information
schedule shall be disclosed pursuant to this
section unless—
(a) the name and address of the
informant by whom the schedule or related
information was supplied is deleted;
(b) every agency or person or
institutions or Universities involved in the
research or statistical project makes a
declaration to use the schedules disclosed
to them only for bona fide research or
statistical purposes; and
(c) the agency authorised for collection
of statistics, making such disclosure is
satisfied that the security of the schedules
and any information contained therein shall
not be impaired.
(3) The published results of any research
or statistical project shall not divulge any more
information than what the agency authorised
for collection of statistics could publish under
this Act.
Disclosure
of
information
schedules
for bona
fide
research or
statistical
purposes.

44
(4) Every agency or person or institutions
or universities to whom any individual return
or information schedule is disclosed under this
section shall comply with directions given by
the agency authorised for collection of statistics
making the disclosure relating to the schedules
and any information contained therein.
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 9 of this Act, the agency authorized for
collection of statistics may release such
documents relating to information schedules,
which in the opinion of such agency have
attained historical importance.
13. The statistics officer or any person or
agency authorised for collection of statistics
shall, while copying or recording any statistical
information collected pursuant to this Act from
individual returns, information schedules,
worksheets or any other confidential source by
means of cards, tapes, discs, film or any other
method, whether using encoded or plain
language symbols for processing, storage or
reproduction of particulars, take and cause to
take such steps as are necessary to ensure that
the security provisions of this Act are complied
with.
14. Save as otherwise provided under this
Act,—
(a) no information obtained pursuant to
this Act and no copy of the information in
the possession of any informant shall be
disclosed or used as evidence in any
proceedings whatsoever; and
(b) no person who has access to any
information because of his official position
in the collection of any statistics shall be
compelled in any proceedings whatsoever
to give oral testimony regarding the
information or to produce any schedule,
document, or record with respect to any
information obtained in the course of
administering this Act, except in the
manner provided under this Act.
Disclosure
of historical
documents.
Security of
recorded
information.
Restrictions
on use of
information.

45
CHAPTER IV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. (1) Whoever, fails to produce any books
of accounts, vouchers, documents or other
business records or whoever neglects or refuses
to fill in and supply the particulars required in
any information schedule or return given or
sent to him or whoever neglects or refuses to
answer any question or inquiry addressed to
him as may be required under or for the
purposes of any provision of this Act and the
rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with
a fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees or, in the case of a company, with a
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
(2) The conviction of a person or company
for an offence shall not relieve him or it of the
obligations under sub-section (1) and if after
the expiry of fourteen days from the date of
conviction, he or it still fails to give the required
particulars or continues to neglect or refuses to
fill in and supply the particulars or to answer
the question or inquiry, then he or it shall be
punishable with a further fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees or, in the case
of a company, with a fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees, for each day after the
first during which the failure continues.
16. Whoever, makes any false or misleading
statement or material omission in any
information schedule or return filled in or
supplied, or in answer to any question asked
to him under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, shall be punishable with a fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees or,
in the case of a company, with a fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees.
17. Whoever, destroys, defaces, removes, or
mutilates any information schedule, form, or
other document containing particulars collected
under this Act or requesting any such
Penalty for
neglect or
refusal to
supply
particulars.
Penalty for
making
false
statement.
Penalty for
mutilation
or
defacement
of
information
schedule.

46
particulars, shall be punishable with a fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees or,
in the case of a company with a fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees.
18. Whoever, interferes with, hinders, or
obstructs any employee in the exercise of any
power or duty conferred by this Act, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to
two thousand rupees or, in the case of a
company with a fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
19. Whoever–
(a) acts in contravention of or fails to
comply with provision of this Act or any
requirement imposed under this Act; or
(b) willfully deceives or attempts to
deceive any statistics officer or any agency
or any employee thereof, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees or, in the case of
a company, with a fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees.
20. If any person employed in the execution
of any duty or functions under this Act,—
(a) omits without lawful excuse to carry
out his duty, or knowingly makes any false
declaration, statement or return; or
(b) pretends performance of his duties
or obtains or seeks to obtain information
which he is not authorised to obtain; or
(c) fails to keep inviolate the secrecy of
the information gathered or entered in the
information schedules collected pursuant to
this Act and, except as permitted under this
Act, divulges the contents of any schedule
filled in or any information furnished by
any informant under this Act, shall be
Penalty for
obstruction
of
employees.
Penalty for
other
offences.
Penalty for
failure to
carry out
duties and
functions
by
employees.

47
punishable with a fine which may extend
to two thousand rupees or, in the case of
a company, with a fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees.
21. Whoever, not being authorised to collect
statistics under the provisions of this Act, by
words, conduct or demeanor pretends that he
is authorised to do so, shall be punishable with
a fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees or, in the case of a company, with a
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
22. Whoever, commits an offence under this
Act for which no penalty is prescribed
elsewhere than in this section, shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to
two thousand rupees or, in the case of a
company, with a fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
23. No court shall take cognizance of any
offence under this Act except on a complaint
made by the appropriate Government or an
officer authorised in this behalf by such
appropriate Government or, as the case may
be, the statistics officer, and no court inferior
to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try
any offence punishable under this Act.
24. No prosecution for an offence
committed by any informant shall be instituted
except by or with the sanction of the statistics
officer, and no prosecution for an offence
committed by persons other than informants
shall be instituted except by or with the consent
of the appropriate Government.
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all
offences under this Act shall be tried in a
summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and
Penalty for
impersonation
of
employee.
General
penalty.
Cognizance
of offences.
Section for
prosecution
for offence.
Power of
court to try
cases
summarily.
2 of 1974.

48
the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both
inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may
be, apply to such trial:
Provided that when in the course of, a
summary trial under this section it appears to
the Magistrate that the nature of the case is
such that it is, for any reason, undesirable to
try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall
after hearing the parties, record an order to
that effect and thereafter recall any witness who
may have been examined and proceed to hear
or rehear the case in the manner provided by
the said Code.
CHAPTER V
P
OWER IN RESPECT OF CORE STATISTICS
26. Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare from time to time any subject for the
collection of statistics of national importance as
‘core statistics’ and make such arrangement, as
it may consider necessary, for regulating the
collection and dissemination of statistics on the
subject so declared.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. The Central Government may give
directions to any State Government or Union
territory Administration or to any local
government that is to say Panchayats or
Municipalities, as to the carrying into execution
of this Act in the State or Union territory or
Panchayats or Municipalities, as the case may
be.
28. declares the statistics officer and any
person authorised for collection of statistics or
preparation of official statistics under the Bill
to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Power in
repsect of
core
statistics.
Public
servants.
Power to
give
directions.

49
29. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of
any matter which the appropriate Government
or the statistics officer or the agency is
empowered by or under this Act to determine,
and no injunction shall be granted by any court
or other authority in respect of any action taken
or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
30. No suit or other legal proceedings shall
lie against the appropriate Government or
agency or any statistics officer or other officers
or employees in respect of anything which is
in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or the rules or directions
issued thereunder.
31. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force except in relation to the
conduct of human population census as per the
directions, if any, issued under the Census Act,
1948.
32. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, the
Central Government may make rules under this
section for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) principles for coordinating as
effectively as possible to achieve the
objectives of section 3 and also to avoid
unnecessary duplication in the collection of
statistics;
(b) principles for prescribing the form
and manner in which the information may
be required to be furnished;
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Overriding
effect.
Powers to
make rules.
37 of 1948.

50
(c) principles for prescribing the manner
in which the right of access to documents
and the right of entry conferred by section
8 may be exercised; and
(d) any other matter which is to be or
may be prescribed under this Act.
(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
33. (1) The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953
is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything
done or any action taken under the said Act
shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) All rules made under the said Act shall
continue to be in force and operate till new
rules are made under this Act.
32 of 1953.Repeal and
savings.

51
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953 (the Statistics Act) was enacted
to facilitate the collection of statistics of certain kinds relating to
industries, trade and commerce. Its provisions have been used in
conducting the Annual Survey of Industries. The State Governments
have also used the said Act to collect data in areas and not covered
by the Central Government. Briefly, the above said Act has so far been
used for the purpose of collecting information from a limited segment
of the industrial sector.
2. During the years, it is felt that the provisions of the Statistics
Act are not adequate to meet the new challenges arising out of
liberalization and globalization regime manifested by the WTO
Agreement. The need for statistical information for planning and policy
formulation has been expanded over the years due to market driven
economy in various sectors necessitating a re-look at the Statistics Act.
3. All those issues were studied by the National Statistical
Commission appointed by the Central Government. The Commission
recommended that the Statistics Act needs to be amended as it covers
only a part of the whole industrial sector, leaving out many survey
programmes in the Government set-up wherein information is being
collected presently on purely voluntary basis from households,
enterprises, companies, public and private institutions, etc. It
recommended that necessary legal provisions should be made either
by expanding the scope of the Statistics Act or by passing a new Act.
4. In view of above, it is proposed to introduce the Collection of
Statistics Bill, 2007 which is basically intended to enhance the scope of
collection of statistics and to repeal the Collection of Statistics Act,
1953.
5. Some of the salient features of the Bill are as follows:—
(i) the scope has been enhanced to collect all kinds of statistics
not only from industrial/commercial concerns but also from
individuals and households; and the local governments such
as Panchayats and Municipalities are also empowered to
collect statistics under the Bill;

52
(ii) under this Bill, any Government Department/Organisation,
either in the States or at the Centre or in the local
Government, may appoint a statistics officer for each subject
of data collection and, or for each geographical unit;
(iii) necessary provisions have also been made in the Bill for
ensuring support to any statistics officer appointed by the
appropriate Government, in terms of providing necessary
inputs, manpower, etc.;
(iv) the Central Government is empowered to make rules for
avoiding duplication and for maintaining technical standards
in data collection in respect of ‘core statistics’, which are
important for the country for the purpose of ensuring
methodological standards, timeliness, credibility and
completeness;
(v) all methods of data collection including oral interviews and
filing of returns in electronic form have also been covered;
(vi) elaborate provisions have been made to ensure that the
information collected under the Bill, shall not be used for
any purpose other than for statistical purposes; and
(vii) the penalties for offences, such as refusal to furnish
information, have been rationalized and the offences have
been proposed to be tried in a summary way to avoid
prolonged litigation.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
  New Delhi; G.K. V ASAN
The 8th May, 2007.

53
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2 seeks to define various expression used in Bill
Clause 3  empowers the appropriate Government, namely, the
Central Government or a State Government or Union territory
Administration or any local government such as Panchayats and
Municipalities to issue any direction by issuing a notification in the
Official Gazette, for collection of the statistics on economic,
demographic, social, scientific and environmental aspects, subject to
the restriction contained in the proviso to clause 3.
Clause 4 empowers the appropriate Government to appoint statistics
officer for any geographical unit for collection of statistics. The
appropriate Government may employ, on contract basis any agency,
etc., or delegate this power to any statistics officer, as may be necessary
for the purpose of collection of statistics. It also makes provision for
specifying the form and the manner in which the information may be
furnished, or delegate such power to any statistics officer.
Clause 5  provides for the powers of the statistics officer to call for
information in the form of returns or through interviews or such other
methods including electronic modes.
Clause 6 provides for duty of informant to furnish any information,
so asked in the prescribed manner, to the best of his knowledge or
brief to the statistics officer.
Clause 7  provides that every agency shall render such help and
assistance and furnish such information to other agency or statistics
officer as it may require and shall make available for inspection and
examination of such records, plans and other documents, as may be
necessary.
Clause 8 provides that the statistics officer or any person authorised
by him in writing in this behalf shall have access to any relevant
record or document in the possession of any information required to
be furnished any information under the provisions of the Bill for the
purposes of collection of statistics and may enter at any reasonable
time any premises where he believes that such record or document is
kept; and may inspect and take copies of it and ask any question
necessary for obtaining information required to be furnished under
the Bill.

54
Clause 9 provides that any information furnished to statistics officer
or any person or agency authorised under this Act shall be used for
the statistical purpose only and no person other than engaged in the
work of collection of statistics shall be permitted to see any information
schedule or any answer to a question asked, except for the purposes
of a prosecution under this Bill. It provides that no such information
or answer shall be separately published or disclosed without
suppressing the identification of informants. It also provides that all
the statistical information published by any agency shall be arranged
in such a manner so as to prevent any particulars becoming identifiable
by any person other than the informant by whom those particulars
were supplied.
Clause 10  empowers the authorised agency to disclose any
information supplied by informants in respect of which disclosure is
consented to by the informant in writing; or any information otherwise
available to public under any Act as a public document; or the
information in the form of an index or list of the names and addresses
of the infomants together with the classification, if any, allotted to
them and the number of persons engaged.
Clause 11  empowers the authorised agency to disclose individual
returns or forms, or information schedules to other agency or person
or institute or university solely for bona fide  research or statistical
purposes. It provides that no such information shall be disclosed unless
the name and address of informants is deleted; or every agency or
person or institution or university involved in the research makes a
declaration to use the information only for bona fide  research purposes;
and the authorised agency is satisfied with the declaration so made.
It also provides that the published results of any research or statistical
project shall not divulge more information than what the authorised
agency could publish in accordance with the provisions of the Bill and
every agency or person or institution or university to whom the
information is disclosed under this clause shall comply with the
directions given by the authorised agency.
Clause 12  empowers the authorised agency to release such
information which in the opinion of the agency have attained historical
importance.
Clause 13  provides that the statistics officer or any person or any
agency authorised for collection of statistical information shall take
such steps as are necessary to ensure that security provisions of the
Bill have been complied with while copying or recording any
information collected pursuant to the Bill.

55
Clause 14  restricts that any information obtained pursuant to the
provisions of the Bill shall not be disclosed and no person who has
access to such information shall be compelled to disclose such
information in any proceedings, whatsoever, except in the manner
provided in the Bill.
Clause 15  provides that whoever fails to produce any books of
account, documents, etc., or neglects or refuses to fill in and supply
the particulars required in any information schedule or return or
whoever neglects or refuses to answer any question or enquiry
addressed to him shall be punishable with a fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees or in case of a company which may extend
to five thousand rupees. It also provides that conviction under this
clause shall not relieve any person from the obligation of providing
such information and if after expiry of period of 14 days from the
date of such conviction, he, still fail to give the required particulars or
refuses to fill in or supply the particulars, he shall be punishable with
a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and in case of a
company with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for
each day after the first during which the failure continues.
Clause 16  provides that whoever makes any false or misleading
statement or material omission in the information schedule or return,
etc., shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees or in the case of a company which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
Clause 17  provides that whoever destroys, defaces, removes or
mutilates any information schedule, etc., shall be punishable with a
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and in case of a
company with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 18 provides that whoever interferes with, hinders or obstructs
any employee in exercise of any power or duty conferred under the
Bill, shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees and in case of a company which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
Clause 19 provides that whoever acts in contravention or fails to
comply with any provisions of the Bill or any requirement imposed
under the Bill or wilfully deceives or attempts to deceive any statistics
officer or an agency or employee, shall be punishable with a fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees and in case of a company
with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.

56
Clause 20  provides the penalty for failure to carry out duties and
functions by the employees. It provides that if any person employed
in the execution of any duty or functions under the Bill or omits
without lawful excuse to carry out his duty, or knowingly makes any
false declaration, etc.; or pretends in the performance of his duties or
obtains or seeks to obtain information which he is not authorised to
obtain; or fails to keep or inviolate the secrecy of the information
gathered or entered in the information schedule, collected pursuant to
this Bill and, except as permitted under this Bill, divulge the contents
of any schedule or information, shall be punishable with a fine which
may extend to two thousand rupees and in case of a company with
a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 21 provides for the penalty for impersonation of an
employee. It provides that whoever, not being authorised to collect
the statistics under the provisions of the Bill, by words, conduct or
demeanor pretends that he is authorised to do so, shall be punishable
with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and in case of
a company which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 22  provides that whoever commits an offence under this
Bill and for which no penalty has been provided elsewhere shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and
in case of a company with a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
Clause 23 provides that no court shall take cognizance of an offence
except on a complaint made by the appropriate Government or an
officer authorised in this behalf by that Government or by the statistics
officer and it also provides that no court inferior to that of a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall
try any offence punishable under the Bill.
Clause 24  provides for the sanction of the statistics officer for
prosecution for an offence committed by any informant and for the
sanction of the appropriate Government for prosecution for any offence
committed by persons other than informants.
Clause 25  provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 all offences sunder the Bill shall be
tried in a summary way, and the provisions of sections 262 to 265
(both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to
such a trial. It also provides that if it appeals to a  Magistrate that the
nature of the case is such that it is, for any reason, not desirable to
try the case summarily, the Megistrate shall after hearing the parties,
record an order to that effect and thereafter proceed to hear or rehear
the case in the manner provided in the said Code.

57
Clause 26  empowers the Central Government, without prejudice to
the provisions contained in the Bill, to declare from time to time any
subject for collection of statistics of national importance as ‘core
statistics’ and make such arrangement as it may consider necessary
for collection and dissemination of statistics on the subject so declared.
Clause 27  empowers the Central Government to give directions to
any State Government or Union territory Administration or  to any
local government that is to say Panchayats or municipalities as to the
carrying into the execution of this Bill in the State or Union territory
or Panchayats or municipalities.
Clause 28  declares the statistics officer and any person authorised
for collection of statistics or preparation of official statistics under the
Bill to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 29  provides bar of jurisdiction of a civil court. It provides
that the civil courts shall have no jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter for which the appropriate
Government or statistics officer or agency is empowered under the
Bill and any court or authority shall not grant any injunction is respect
of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred
under the Bill.
Clause 30 makes provisions so as to provide for protection of action
taken in good faith by the appropriate Government or agency or any
statistics officer or other officer or employees in pursuance of the
directions given by the said authorities.
Clause 31  gives overriding effect to the provisions of this Bill on
any other laws for the time being in force except in relation to the
conduct of human population cencus as per the direction, if any, issued
under the Census Act, 1948.
Clause 32  empowers the Central Government to make rules to
carry out the provisions of the Bill. It enumerates matters with respect
to which the Central Government shall have the power to make rules
under the Bill. It also provides for laying of rules before each House
of Parliament.
Clause 33  provides for the repeal of the Collection of Statistics Act,
1953. It provides that anything done or any action taken under the
said Act shall be deemed to have been done or  taken under the
corresponding provisions of the Bill. It also provides for continuance
of all rules made under the said Act till new rules are made under
this Bill.

58
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may, inter alia,
provide for principles for—
(i) coordinating among different agencies or instrumentalities
of the Central Government and State Governments to
achieve the objectives of clause 3 and to avoid duplication
in collection of statistics;
(ii) prescribing the form and manner in which information may
be obtained or furnished under the relevant provisions of
the Bill; and
(iii) pr escribing the manner in which the right of access to
records, documents and the right of entry conferred by
clause 8 may be exercised.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the
aforesaid provision are matters of procedure and administrative detail
and it is not practical to provide for them in the Bill. The rules made
under the Bill are also required to be laid before Parliament. The
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

59
RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to facilitate the collection of statistics on economic, demographic,
social, scientific and environmental aspects and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri G.K. Vasan, Minister of State of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation)

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS
BILL, 2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.3.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 18.3.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


COF No. 66
Price : Rs. 66.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
A. Existing Law and the need for new Law ............................ 1
B. Principles governing Outsourcing ........................................... 8
C. Exclusion of ‘instrumentality’ from the purview of
definition—Clause (2(b) .............................................................. 10
D. Nodal functions............................................................................ 12
E. Inspection and power of entry into premises—
Clauses 7 and 8 ........................................................................... 14
F. Disclosure of Information—Clauses 10, 11 and 12............. 17
G. Provision for imprisonment—Clauses 16 and 20................ 20
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings held on 25 July, 2007,
7 November, 2007, 13 December, 2007 and
12 March, 2008 ......................................................................... 24
II. The Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007 ................................. 34
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
12. Shri R. Prabhu
13. Shri K.S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri A.R. Shaheen
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Vacant
21. Vacant

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia*
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramesh Nebhnani — Committee Officer
(iv)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 6.9.2007 vice Shri Yaswant Sinha.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixty-Sixth Report on the Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007.
2. The Collection of Statistics Bill, 2007, introduced in Rajya Sabha
on 17 May, 2007, was referred to the Committee on 30 May, 2007 for
examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha in
consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha under Rule 331E of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation. The representatives of the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation also briefed the Committee
at their sitting held on 25 July, 2007.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Ministries of
Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs, Steel, Textiles, Labour and
Employment and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME);
Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Maharashtra,
Economic Reforms and North-Eastern Council Affairs Department,
Government of Sikkim and Planning and Co-ordination Department,
Government of Orissa; Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and
Educational Consultants India Ltd. (EDCIL); and Dr. K. Srinivasan,
Emeritus Professor, International Institute of Population Sciences,
Mumbai.
5. The Committee at their sitting held on 7 November, 2007 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Health and Family
Welfare, Home Affairs, Steel, Textiles, Labour and Employment and
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME).
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on 13 December,
2007.
7. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 12 March, 2008.
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministries of Statistics and Programme Implementation,

Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs, Steel, Textiles, Labour and
Employment and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) for
appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and
information which were desired in connection with the examination of
the Bill.
9. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to Directorate
of Economics and Statistics, Government of Maharashtra, Economic
Reforms and North-Eastern Council Affairs Department, Government
of Sikkim and Planning and Co-ordination Department, Government
of Orissa; Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and Educational
Consultants India Ltd. (EDCIL); and Dr. K. Srinivasan, Emeritus
Professor, International Institute of Population Sciences, Mumbai for
furnishing Memoranda on the provisions of the Bill.
10. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
17 March, 2008 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

66
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS
BILL, 2007
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/ Phalguna, 1929 ( Saka)
