STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)]
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
46

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14 December, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 December, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

SCOF No. 46
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ................................................................................ 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies .................. 18
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ........ 28
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ............................................... 32
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11 December, 2006 .................. 33
APPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee
on Finance on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) ................................................... 36

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE — 2006-2007
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
*12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. V enkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Vacant
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Forty-sixth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007)
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Thirty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 22 May, 2006. The Government furnished the written replies indicating action taken
on all the recommendations on 20 October, 2006. The Draft Action Taken Report was
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 11 December, 2006.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes arising
out of factual verification and finalise the Report.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on recommendations contained
in the Thirty-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the
Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
11 December, 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Thirty-seventh
Report (Fourtheenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue), which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 22 May, 2006.
2. The Report contained six recommendations/observations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations contained
in the Report. These have been analysed and categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 6
(Total 3) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendations Nos. 1, 2
(Total 2) (Chapter III)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 5
(Total 1) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government is still awaited:
Nil (Chapter V)
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some
of their recommendations/observations.
REFUND – DIRECT TAXES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 18)
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee were perturbed to find that
bogus income-tax returns claiming large amounts of refunds on the basis of bogus TDS
certificates were filed by some unscrupulous persons. The point of serious concern was

2
the forgery committed by the tax officials themselves who connived with these persons,
resulting in such fraudulent issue of refunds. The Committee felt that this was an ample
proof of the extent of corruption in the tax machinery which could have been
avoided, had the internal vigilance mechanism of the Department been more alert. In
Committee’s view, lack of efficiency and integrity in the tax machinery leads not only to
leakage of tax revenue but also to tax evasion. Although the Department had stated to
have issued instructions/circulars to the field formations, yet the fact could not be ignored
that this had been done only after receiving communication from the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) pointing towards irregularities in the issue of refund orders. The Committee
noted that the system of issue of refunds was to be streamlined by making ECS applicable
for all refunds in future, making it mandatory to quote the assessee’s bank account
details in the refund orders and immediate reporting of any loss / theft of refund orders
to the higher authorities, the clearing bank and the police etc. However, the Committee
were constrained to observe that corrupt officials succumbing to avarice had become
bane of Income Tax Department. Further, there had been a systemic failure in the form
of lack of proper checks and balances and a deficient supervision by the senior officials
and the internal vigilance mechanism on such officials. The Committee took strong
exception to such failures in the Department and desired the Government to furnish
complete details of the extent of such fraud in terms of Revenue loss and the penal
action taken against the tax officials found to be involved. The Committee also
recommended that the instructions of the Department on issue of refunds should be
followed scrupulously and diligently with supervision at senior level in all their field
formations.
5. The Government, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
“(i) The Department has already laid down guidelines/ instructions on procedures
and safeguards to be followed for securing refunds. Whenever non-observance
of such procedures and safeguards is found out, the guidelines/ instructions are
re-iterated or revised, as the case may be. Accordingly, when RBI pointed out
certain commonly committed irregularities noticed by them during the course of
clearing of refund cheques by them; those were immediately brought to the notice
of the field formations for compliance.
(ii) ECS has already been made applicable for all refunds, regardless of the class of
taxpayer and the amount of refund. However, presently the facilities of ECS are
available only in 12 cities. The Government is taking necessary steps to extend
ECS facilities in another 24 cities in about a year’s time. The Board has made
it mandatory to issue refunds through ECS in such centres where ECS facilities
are available. Similarly, quoting of bank account details on the refund cheque
has also been made mandatory with effect from 01.01.2006. Moreover,
the Government is also examining the feasibility of appointing a “Refund Banker”,
which would be entrusted with the work of printing and issue of refunds or
ECS of refunds to the bank account of the taxpayer, so as to prevent frauds
taking place by way of claim of refund by wrong person, issue of refund
on stolen refund stationery, forging of signature, duplicate issue of refunds etc.

3
(iii) A Committee appointed by the Board, which examined the nature and extent of
refund frauds, has submitted that incidents of refund frauds have been reported
from Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Bhubaneshwar. The following are the details
of the cases of fraud so noticed by the Committee:
a. In one CCIT charge in Delhi, 158 refunds were found to be bogus involving
an amount of Rs. 56.54 lakh. Involvement of two officers is suspected.
b. Bogus refunds aggregating to Rs.1.07 crore were found to have been issued
to 25 fictitious companies in another CCIT charge in Delhi.
c. Refunds worth Rs.1.66 crore were found to have been issued from one Circle
in Delhi, which actually has no jurisdiction over those cases in whose favour
the refunds were issued.
d. In 28 cases at Chennai, refunds were issued in cases where either refund was
not due or has already been issued before.
e. In 22 cases reported from Chennai, higher than actual refunds were claimed
on the basis of forged tax payment challans or certificates.
f. In 110 cases, refunds were found in Chennai to have been issued without
jurisdiction or to fictitious assessees.
g. A retired employee of I-T Department at Bangalore was found involved in
forging tax payment challans for claiming fraudulent refunds.
Sporadic instances of claim of refund on the basis of fictitious TDS certificates
have been reported from Bhubaneshwar.
(iv) The Income Tax Department has already initiated action against officials involved
in a few refund fraud cases detected during the last couple of years. The extent of
refund frauds in terms of revenue loss and penal action taken against the tax
officials found to be involved in the various refund frauds brought to light is as
below:
(a) A refund scam was detected in CIT-XVI, Delhi Charge wherein it was found
that refunds were fraudulently encashed by credit into accounts bearing the
same names as that of the assessee but in the account of different persons
using that name, to accounts of persons having different names than the
assessee and even to accounts of fictitious persons filing returns with bogus
TDS certificates and challans. A total of 18 refunds aggregating to
Rs. 23,29,101/- had been fraudulently encashed by credit by the banks to
accounts held by the persons other than the genuine assessees or refunds
had been issued on the basis of bogus TDS certificates and challans and
deposited in accounts of fictitious persons. The involvement of two Income
Tax Officers, namely, Shri S.M. Budhiraja and Shri Inder Kalra, who were
on the verge of their retirement during the period, along with certain
Group C officials was detected. Involvement of certain outsiders namely
(i) Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava, CA; (ii) Shri Mahipal Negi, Computer
Operator with Shri A.K. Srivastava; (iii) Shri Yogesh Sharma, earlier Branch

4
Manager of Central Bank, Gulmohar Park; and (iv) Shri Ramesh Dewan
was also detected.
(b) F.No. DGIT (V)/NZ/COM/73/05
While verifying the refunds debited in his circle by the CIT (CO), the DCIT,
Circle-4(1) found that 4 refunds totaling to an amount of Rs. 1,87,40,666/-
did not pertain to his circle. An FIR was registered with the Economic
Offences Wing of the Delhi Police and the concerned CIT also initiated
departmental enquiries to investigate the fraud which suggested the possibility
of the involvement of certain officials such as Sh. Amit Chawla in whose
bank account a pay order of Rs.1,75,000/- dated 12.01.2005 was found
credited from one of the bank accounts of the alleged bogus beneficiaries.
Subsequently, other refunds were found to have been credited into bogus
accounts. The Economic Offences Wing of the Delhi Police have arrested
Sh. Amit Chawla, TA and the official has been suspended. Final investigation
report of the Economic Offences Wing is awaited.
(c) F.No. DGIT(V)/NZ/COM/83/05
One CA by the name Sh. S.K.Bajaj, a Sr. TA Sh. V .K. Tomar, and a Daftry
Sh. Sanjay Prasad, were detected trying to present a forged advice for refund
of Rs. 17,62,786/- by officials of the RBI. The advice was forged under the
signatures of Sh. Shri Krishan, ITO, Ward 37(1). The three individuals were
arrested by the Delhi Police after an FIR was lodged against them.
In view of the spate of refund frauds, a D.O. letter was issued to the CCIT,
Delhi by the DGIT(Vig.) to constitute a team of officers of the rank of Addl.
CIT/JCIT for carrying out periodic checks and inspections on the issuance,
dispatch and encashment of refunds. Some points that may serve as a check
list for inspections, were enumerated as below:
— All refund vouchers should be in personal custody of the officers. Used/
unused refund voucher books should be handed over to the successor at
the time of handing over charge.
— Dispatch of refunds should be through centralized dispatch unit either
in the Range or the CIT charge. Periodic inspection may be made of
timely dispatch of refunds.
— Proper refund dispatch register may be maintained.
— Refunds should be sent by RPAD/Speed Post only and should not be
delivered by hand/through notice server.
— AO/Range Head may periodically do random cross checks with assessees
to ensure proper delivery and with RBI officials to prevent encashment
of bogus refunds.
— The Zonal Directors of Income-tax (Vig.) were also requested to conduct
periodic and surprise inspections in the CCIT Regions of their Zones.

5
(d) F.No. DGIT (V)/NZ/COM/33/05
During the course of an enquiry conducted by the CIT, Meerut, it was
found that in certain cases, refunds were being issued on the next day
of filing of return. Also some returns were being received without
jurisdiction. Different types of bogus refund claims detected are as under:
— Bogus receipt with reference to the investment made in the tax saving
bond;
— Photocopies of bogus NSCs;
— Bogus certificate of interest on Housing loan to claim deduction u/s
24(1 )(v) of the IT Act;
— Bogus claiming of loss on account of running of truck/taxies/doing tuition
and some business activities.
Enquiry u/s 133(6) was conducted in all such cases of fraud detected, assessments
were completed and penalty u/s 271(1)(c) was levied. Prosecution proceedings
were launched in majority of the cases, compounding was done and amounts
were collected towards revenue.
Since three Advocates were found to be involved in the refund fraud, the
case was handed over to the CBI. After completion of the investigation the
CBI registered a case No.RC-7(A)/2003/DAB under sections 120B, 420, 467,
471 of the IPC and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the PC Act against Sh. S.P. Verma,
ITO and others. The three Advocates Sh. Rajeev Dhall, Sh. Mahesh Bansal
and Sh. Kaushik were arrested along with Sh. Munna Lal Paul, TA of
the department. Sh. Munna Lal Paul, TA has been suspended and CBI has filed
a charge sheet in the trial court. The Bar Council of UP, Allahabad has been
informed regarding filing of charge sheet and arrests made against the three
Advocates.
(e) F.No. DGIT(V)/WZ/COM/115/05
A refund fraud was detected in CIT-V , Pune’s charge as a result of misuse
of refunds vouchers. An FIR was lodged with the Economic Offences Wing,
Crime Branch, Pune by the concerned assessing officers on the missing/
misused refund vouchers. A search was made in the Online Tax
Accounting System (OLTAS) which revealed that about 33 advices
amounting to Rs. 26,24,828/- have been presented before State Bank of
India, Treasury Branch, Pune, which have been encashed by transfer
to individual accounts. Out of this, a sum of Rs. 24,15,984/- has been
recovered so far due to follow-up action taken by the Department. The
Economic Offences Wing, Pune conducted a search and arrested three
Income Tax Practitioners along with Sh. Sanjay N. Misal, Income
Tax Inspector. Final report of the Economic Offences Wing, Pune is
awaited.

6
(f) F.No. DGIT(V)/WZ/COM/8/06
Another refund fraud to the tune of Rs.75,90,115/- was brought to light during
the course of a survey action u/s 133A of the IT Act in Mumbai against an
assessee Sh. N.V . Sharma. The bogus refund claims were made on the basis
of bogus TDS certificates. The matter is under investigation by the Economic
Offences Wing, Mumbai.
(g) F.No. DGIT(V)/NZ/COM/13/06
Based on a enquiry conducted by the CIT-II, Amritsar, it was brought to
light that in some cases, refunds appear to have been issued twice in the
case of the same assessee for the same Assessment Year. Further it was found
out that in nine cases, refunds appear to have been issued on the basis of
forged TDS certificates in CIT-I, Amritsar Charge and another 39 bogus
refunds were issued in CIT-II, Amritsar Charge. In four cases, refunds were
found to be issued by the fraudulent revalidation and encashment by some
officials in connivance with outsiders. The three income tax officials;
Sh. Amarjit Singh Chawla, Office Superintendent, Sh. Sham Singh, Peon
and Sh. Pardeep Kumar, Peon have been placed under suspension and the
CCIT, Amritsar have been requested to lodge an FIR with the CBI, North
Zone, Chandigarh in respect of the involvement of outsiders. Investigation
report is awaited.
(h) F.No. DGIT(V)/SZ/COM/14/06
A case of fraudulent encashment of income tax refund orders relating to
Vijayawada was noticed by the bank authorities who alerted the local officials
at Vijayawada. An FIR was lodged against Sh. P.D.N. Prasad, Income Tax
Officer and Sh. K. Devendra Prasad, TA, both of whom were arrested and
have been placed under suspension. The refund fraud has been referred to
the CBI for investigation and their report is awaited.
(v) Instructions relating to strict compliance with guidelines on issue of refunds are
periodically issued by the Board. Moreover, improvement in the system of
determination and issue of refunds is also brought about to enhance the security
of the refund, as discussed in sub-para (i) and (ii) above.
The Board has also put in place a mechanism of administrative approval by
Commissioner of Income Tax before issuance of refunds of high denomination
(Rs. 1 crore and above in the case of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore,
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Pune and Rs. 25 lakh and above for other stations).
The Government is constantly making endeavours to make the system of issue of
refund a fool-proof one under which no fraud can be committed. Suitable
administrative and criminal action is taken against the officials/assessees/others
found to be involved in any refund fraud and the system is further improved to
prevent such frauds in future.”

7
6. In response to their recommendation expressing serious concern over
the fraudulent issue of refunds with the connivance of income tax officials, the
Committee have been informed that the Income Tax Department have been routing
the refunds through ECS to reduce possibility of frauds. Presently, the facility of
ECS is available only in 12 cities and efforts are being made to extend the facility
in another 24 cities in about a year’s time. Further, the Committee have been given
to understand that the Government is also examining the feasibility of appointing
a “Refund Banker”, which would be entrusted with the work of printing and issue
of refunds or ECS of refunds to the bank account of the taxpayer so as to prevent
frauds. The Committee feel that the idea of appointing a “Refund Banker” is a
step in the right direction and thus, desire to have more details on the same. At the
same time, they urge the Government to expedite the appointment of such a banker
as well as bring as many cities under the ECS Scheme as possible; at the earliest,
the present coverage is totally inadequate. Thus, the Committee hope, would bring
down to a great extent the possibility of such refund frauds in the future.
7. The Committee observe from the facts furnished by the Government that
the fraudulent ways of obtaining refunds include bogus refunds, issue of refunds
by officials, who have no jurisdiction over those cases in whose favour the refunds
were issued, cases where either refund was not due or has already been issued
before, and refunds issued to fictitious companies/assessees. The Committee view
these lapses very seriously and wish to be apprised of the specific penal action
taken against person responsible for these lapses as well as corrective steps taken
by the Department to overcome lacunae in such future cases.
8. The Committee would also like to reiterate their recommendation in one
of their earlier reports on the Demands for Grants that the Department should
ensure that the refunds are issued within the stipulated time frame of three months
from the date of filing of refunds claims. Further, they would urge the Government
to ensure that the refund cheques invariably reach the assesees within 10 days
from the date of issue of the cheques, in order to prevent any chances of corrupt
practices on this account and reduce the difficulties faced by the assesees.
9. The Committee further note from the Government’s reply that certain
bogus claims under the charge of CIT, Meerut were detected and the types of such
bogus claims included bogus receipt with reference to the investment made in the
tax saving bond, photocopies of bogus NSCs, bogus certificate of interest on housing
loan etc. Similarly, a refund fraud to the tune of Rs. 75,90,115/- was found during
a survey in Mumbai. From the foregoing, the Committee wonder whether any
mechanism/procedure exists at all to cross-verify the genuineness of loans/savings
certificates with the agencies concerned with the issue of such certificates. In case
such a mechanism already exists, the Committee desire that the I.T.
Commissionerates should devise a mechanism urgently to cross-check such
certificates, submitted by assessees, with these institutions/issuing authorities so
that a fraud, if any, could be detected at the initial stage itself. In so far as the
Committee’s recommendation on the penal action taken against the tax officials

8
found to be involved in forgery and fraudulent issue of refunds is concerned, the
Committee find from the reply of the Government that more than 16 income tax
officials, alongwith certain outsiders viz. Advocates, Chartered Accountants and
an assessee, have been found to be involved in Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore, Mumbai,
Meerut, Pune, Amritsar and Bhubaneswar. Though, the Committee note that in
CIT Delhi Charge, four officials have been arrested by the police, criminal action
is yet to be taken against other income tax officials as the matter is either under
investigation in those cases or the final reports of investigation are awaited. As per
the reply of the Government, two income tax officers found to be involved in the
refund fraud in Delhi charge were on the verge of retirement. The Committee
desire that these officials must not be spared and criminal action must be taken
against them. The Committee further desire that the Department must complete
their investigations and inquiries in connection with the involvement of their own
officials in fraudulent claims of refunds and initiate criminal action against all of
them at the earliest. The Committee expect the Government to apprise them of
details thereof at the action taken stage positively.
10. Also, the Committee are particularly concerned about the fact that apart
from Income Tax Officials, certain outsiders have also been found to be hand-in-
glove with them in facilitating refund frauds. From the information furnished to
them, they note that some Chartered Accountants and advocates have been found
guilty by the CIT-XVI, Delhi charge and the CIT Meerut charge for forgery and
fraudulent encashment of reunds. The Committee desire that apart from initiating
penal action against them as per the law, such cases need to be reported also to the
ICAI and the Bar Council of India respectively urging them to take stringent
possible action against such persons, who bring a bad name to their professions.
EXEMPTIONS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 62)
11. The Committee in their Thirty-Third report had conveyed their apprehension
on the possible misuse of exemption provisions by research institutions. They noted
that the Government had now formed a Committee of secretaries to review existing
incentives for scientific research, including research and development in the
pharmaceutical industry. The Committee hoped that the review would be completed in
a time bound manner and the Government would strive its best to consider and implement
the recommendations at the earliest so as to prevent the misuse of exemption provisions
to the extent possible. The Committee desired to be apprised of the position in this
regard.
12. The Government, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:—
“In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held on January 30, 2006,
Secretary (Revenue) expressed the view that the Government was keen to have a
clear, transparent and quick mechanism evolved through a budgetary route, instead

9
of allowing deductions under the Income-tax Act, to ensure that funds for research
and development were made available in a controlled and effective manner. In
the meeting, Secretary, Expenditure added that a short, medium and long-term
plan was needed to be laid down by Secretary, DSIR with contributions from
experts in his Department. The Department of Revenue in its last communication
dated 30.5.2006 to DSIR have reiterated the need to work out a suitable medium-
term plan which would minimize the scope of misuse, ensure minimum
bureaucratic intervention and a more simplified R&D support system through
discussions in the Committee. A request has been made to DSIR to urgently
convene the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries for discussion on these
aspects.”
13. Misuse of exemption provision by research institutions have quite often
been noticed, which, in the opinion of the Committee, need to be reviewed urgently
as this trend is not only defeating the very purpose of such exemptions but is also
causing loss of tax revenue to the Government exchequer. In their earlier
recommendation, the Committee had taken note of the fact that the Government
had formed a Committee of Secretaries to review incentives for scientific research
and thus had expected that the review would be completed in a time bound manner
and the Government would strive its best to consider and implement the
recommendation at the earliest. In this regard, the Committee have now been
informed that the Government is keen to have a clear and quick mechanism evolved
through the budgetary route to ensure that funds for research and development
were made available in a controlled and effective manner. The Committee have
also been made to understand that in a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries
held in January 2006, it was agreed that a short, medium and long term plan was
needed to be laid down by the DSIR with contributions from experts in their
Department. However, they are dismayed to note that even after a lapse of more
than six months, DSIR have not even bothered to respond to the communication
sent by the Department of Revenue with regard to formulating a suitable medium-
term plan as well as convening a meeting of Committee of Secretaries for discussion
on the aspects that are to be covered under the plan. They feel that this is one
typical instance of the bureaucratic delay which causes many innovative ideas to
ultimately lose their steam. They, hence, desire the Ministry to convey their
sentiments to the DSIR with a view to set in motion the desired efforts on their
part, in the interest of augmenting the revenues to the Government.
COMPUTERISATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5 , Para Nos. 91, 92 & 93)
14. The Committee observed that so far as the computerization projects taken
up by the Central Board of Direct Taxes were concerned, implementation of many small
projects that would enhance the effective functioning of the department like computerized
processing and country-wide matching of TDS claims, matching of data compiled in

10
the Annual Information Returns (AIRs) with that of tax returns etc. depend to a large
extent, on the completion of the creation of a single National database. They noted that
as per the original target, the database was to be completed by June 2006. However, the
target date for completion was shifted to September 2006. The Committee were of the
strong view that the Government should take all-out efforts to complete the project
within the rescheduled target i.e., by September 2006 to reap the designated benefits
that would accrue from the database. Further, the Committee felt that there existed a
gap between the information obtained through Annual Information Report (AIR), which
was fully computerized, and the information coming from returns of income, which was
partly computerized. The Government had assured that the gap would be filled and they
would be able to complete all processing, data matching and select on of cases for
scrutiny on computers by the end of the current Financial Year i.e. 2006-07. The
Committee expected that the whole process would be completed within the stated time.
Further, the Government had stated that the work relating to appointment of system
integrator was still at the stage of evaluation of technical bids. The Committee urged the
Government to expedite the process without further delay so that this should not adversely
affect the project.
15. In so far as the overall computerization of the Department was concerned,
the Committee were given to understand that expenditure sanction for the third phase of
Computerization Plan of the Income Tax Department had been approved by the Cabinet
way back in December, 2002. The plan had included networking of IT offices in remaining
440 cities out of the proposed 510 cities. The original target date for the same was
31.01.2006. The Committee further noted that the Department sought fresh sanction for
additional requirements from the Committee of Secretaries on Non-plan Expenditure
on 11.5.2005. In the Committee’s view, the pace of work with respect to computerization
project had been slow. Despite urging the Government to expedite the various
computerization projects repeatedly in their earlier reports and the assurances given by
them that it would be completed in time, the Committee were dismayed to note that
certain components of the project like linking of cities under a single national database
and setting up National Data Centre were yet to be completed. The Committee noted
that as per the revised schedule, the dates of completion of the above two components
of Phase-III of the computerization projects were 31.05.2006 and 30.09.2006
respectively. The Committee hoped that the Government would not extend the date
furthermore and take all out efforts to complete the project as per the revised schedule.
16. The Committee noted that so far as the computerization projects under the
Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) were concerned, the Government had
taken the stand that some of those were under implementation and some others were in
the proposal and testing stages – the important ones being the creation of a National
level Data Center, Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES), Risk
Management System (RMS) and Electronic Accounting system in Excise and Service
Tax (EASIEST). The Committee recommended that all the projects under implementation
as well as under consideration should be followed up by the Government in the right
earnest so as to avoid avoidable delay in their implementation.

11
17. The Government, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:—
“As of now only 60 stations are on network where the processing is done through
ITD application and in other stations the processing is done on stand alone basis.
The IT department has utilized the information available in the AIR to the extent
of about 65% of the total value of transactions for F.Y . 2004-05 relevant to A.Y.
2005-06 while selecting the cases for scrutiny using CASS during this year at the
60 network stations of the IT department. The balance information is being used
for manual selection of cases for scrutiny. Department’s new network and the
National Data Centre is expected to become fully operational during the F.Y.
2007-08. The new uniform processing software will then be implemented in all
the 510 stations. Thereafter the data matching of all the income tax returns
processed on the new system with the information from the Annual Information
Returns can be done and used for selection of cases for scrutiny.
The original tender for appointment of Systems Integrator was cancelled by
Government. New tender for appointment of Systems integrator has been floated
and the bid submission date is 16.10.2006 As per the timelines, the tender is
expected to be finalized by January 2007, and finally the National Data Centre is
exoected to be functional by June 2007.
The Status of project tracks for augmentation of computer infrstructure is given
at Annexure I.
The Current status of various benchmark activities identified in the Project is
given in the Annexure-II.
The delay in commissioning of the Single National Data Base and National Data
Centre had occurred due to the elaborate government procurement procedures
laid down for this scale of work. Due to the first tender ending up midway in an
uncompetitive situation re-tendering became necessary.
The progress of projects under implementation as well as under consideration is
being monitored closely by the Government. These projects are being executed
under the supervision of an ‘Empowered Committee.”
18. Though the Committee have been repeatedly urging the Department to
expedite their various computerisation projects, they seem to be in no hurry at all.
The Committee in particular, are very disappointed with the inordinate delay in
setting up of National Data Centre as its targets are being constantly shifted. From
original target of June 2006 it was shifted to September 2006. The Committee
have now been informed that it has again been shifted to June 2007 due to
cancellation of the original tender for appointment of Systems Integrator. They
are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that the project got delayed due to
elaborate Government procedures. The Committee are of the view that the
Government should not try to justify their slow pace on the basis of such excusser
since adequate time limits must have been set for the tendering process at the time

12
when the project was designed. They, therefore, recommend that the Government
should refrain from further delaying the project and every effort should be made
to complete it in the current financial year itself. For this, they desire that the
Government should expedite the appointment of Systems Integrator as early as
possible so that the project is not hindered on that account. They also desire that
the Government should apprise them with the progress made in this regard at bi-
monthly basis.
19. Regarding overall computerization of the Department, which was
originally scheduled to be completed by 31st January, 2006, the Committee
note from the reply furnished by the Government that Phase -1 of the project
related to the networking of Income-Tax offices in 510 cities to single national
database has been completed. Work on Phase - II is in progress and this project is
scheduled to be completed by 31st January, 2007, which, the Committee hope, will
be adhered to.
20. Overall, the Committee deprecate the snail’s pace in which the
computerization projects progressing, despite repeated recommendations of the
Committee in this regard and assurances given by Government that it would be
completed in time. This approach on the part of the Government, in the Committee's
view, is nothing but regrettable. Therefore, they reiterate that the Government
should expedite the work and complete the project within the revised schedule
positively.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 61)
The matter concerning exemptions given both under direct and indirect taxes
had engaged the attention of the Committee earlier also. The Committee, in their
Thirty-third Report (14th Lok Sabha) had recommended, inter-alia , that since
prolonged continuance of exemptions may turn detrimental to the economy as they
deplete considerable portion of tax base, leave tremendous scope for evading tax and
prompt people to resort to unwarranted tax planning, there is a need for urgently
withdrawing the exemption provision under the tax laws or reducing the list of
exemptions and rationalizing the same. The Committee are in total agreement with the
observation made by the Rustogi Committee that exemptions cause distortions, are prone
to misuse and not always easy to implement. The Committee appreciate that the
Government have taken right steps in this direction by withdrawing quite a few
exemptions which are no longer justified. The Committee would further consider it to
be a necessary and beneficial exercise to conduct a cost-benefit analysis on the tax
exemptions, which would enhance the credibility of either extending or withdrawing an
exemption. Therefore, the Committee recommend that a comprehensive exercise may
be conducted by the Government to analyse the cost-benefit ratio on all the existing tax
exemptions.
Reply of the Government
CBDT: It is proposed that a study to analyse the cost benefit analysis of existing
exemptions and deductions under the Income-tax Act, 1961 be undertaken by the National
Institute of Public Finance and Policy.
CBEC: The Government agrees with the recommendation of the Committee.
However, it may not be feasible to have a cost benefit study of each and every exemption,
Government is considering taking up a study in respect of following exemptions having
major revenue implications:
Excise
 Small Scale Industries exemption
 Exemptions for Textile Sector
 Area-based exemptions

14
Customs
 Export related exemptions
 Exemption for Research Institutions
 Exemptions for Leather and Textile Sector
Agencies like National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), National
Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations (ICRIER) are being approached to undertake such
cost benefit analysis in respect of above-mentioned exemptions.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 62)
The Committee in their Thirty-third Report had also conveyed their apprehension
on the possible misuse of exemptions provisions by research institutions. They note that
the Government have now formed a Committee of secretaries to review existing
incentives for scientific research, including research and development in the
pharmaceutical industry. The Committee hope that the review would be completed in a
time bound manner and the Government would strive its best to consider and implement
the recommendations at the earliest so as to prevent the misuse of exemption provisions
to the extent possible. The Committee would like to be apprised of the position in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held on January 30, 2006, Secretary
(Revenue) expressed the view that the Government was keen to have a clear, transparent
and quick mechanism evolved through a budgetary route, instead of allowing deductions
under the Income-tax Act, to ensure that funds for research and development were made
available in a controlled and effective manner. In the meeting, Secretary, Expenditure
added that a short, medium and long-term plan was needed to be laid down by Secretary,
DSIR with contributions from experts in his Department. The Department of Revenue
in its last communication dated 30.5.2006 to DSIR have reiterated the need to work out
a suitable medium-term plan which would minimize the scope of misuse, ensure minimum
bureaucratic intervention and a more simplified R&D support system through discussions
in the Committee. A request has been made to DSIR to urgently convene the meeting of
the Committee of Secretaries for discussion on these aspects.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 75)
The Committee observe that restructuring of the Department under the Central
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Excise & Customs (CBEC) had
been undertaken resulting in perceptible difference in the performance of the departments.
However, the Committee have been told on many occasions that shortage of manpower,

15
particularly at the level of Inspectors etc. is affecting the efficiency of the tax departments.
In this regard, from the data submitted to them by the Government, the Committee note
that the restructuring process in CBDT has resulted in an increase of 222.22 % of the
posts of Chief Commissioner but a rather poor 17.07 % augmentation at the level of
inspectors. In CBEC, the posts of Chief Commissioner have been increased by 123.80%
and at the level of Inspector, there has been a decrease of 14.32%. This exercise, in the
Committee’s view, has made the top slots heavy, and negligible or even negative growth
in the number of posts at the cutting edge levels like that of Inspectors, Income-Tax
Officers, Superintendents and Custom Appraisers. This, the Committee feel, may further
worsen the much-felt shortage of work force at these levels leading to serious problems
in the overall functioning of the two departments. The Committee note that the
Government have now started taking measures to fill up these gaps. Nevertheless, the
Committee are led to the conclusion that the restructuring proposal was done in a manner,
that chose to ignore the requirements at the middle and lower level of the functionaries,
resulting in continuation of shortage of manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to again assess the present structure of the department under both the
Boards carefully and set right the anomalies that have creped up as a result of
restructuring.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to again assess the present
structure of the Department under both the Boards carefully and set right the anomalies
that have crept up as a result of restructuring.
Reply of the Government
CBDT: The Committee comprising Secretaries in the Departments of Expenditure,
Personnel and Revenue assessed the additional manpower requirement of the department
at 7,051 personnel in various cadres and 4,500 personnel by outsourcing under GFR-
163 and GFR-178. After a presentation before the Committee of Secretaries on 15.9.2006,
the Committee has concurred with the proposal and asked the Department to bring the
entire proposal for additional manpower, including the phasing for filling up of posts
and net intake of manpower into the system at various levels, before the Cabinet for
approval.
A note for consideration of the Cabinet for seeking sanction for creation of
7,051 posts at different levels is under process.
CBEC: It is observed that the main objective of the cadre restructuring in 2001
was creation of a tax administration, which is officer-oriented, technology-driven,
responsive and assessee-friendly. It also aimed at reduction of interface of the taxpayer
with the lower levels of staff by having more number of senior level officers in the
field formations. The Department has achieved this objective by creating compact Zones
and Commissionerates of Central Excise and Customs, having smaller span of control.
Six exclusive Service Tax Commissionerates have since been created. Hence, it would
not be correct to suggest that the last cadre restructuring has made the Department top
heavy.

16
As regards shortage of staff strength in various cutting edge levels including the
levels of Assistant Commissioner, Group ‘B’ Executive (Gazetted) and Group ‘B’
Executive (Non-gazetted), it is observed that the shortage of staff strength in various
grades is due to various factors such as changes in indirect tax scenario after 2001 that
could not be factored in at the time of last cadre restructuring, creation of many new
Commissionerates and other formations, shortage of eligible officers in the feeder grades
for promotion to higher grades etc., resulting in vacancies in different grades especially
in Inspector and TA/ STA grades. To address the problem of shortage of staff strength in
various grades, the process of recruitment against direct recruitment vacancies in different
grades has already been initiated by the Department after getting approval of the
Departmental Screening Committees for Annual Direct Recruitment Plans for the years
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06. Once the process of recruitment gets completed
and the selected candidates join the Department, the shortage of staff strength would
get reduced to some extent.
As regards assessment of the present organizational structure under CBEC, a
Committee was constituted under the Chairpersonship of Member (P&A), CBEC for
preparation of a comprehensive report regarding restructuring / optimizing the overall
manpower requirement of CBEC. The said Committee has submitted its report to the
Government for consideration. In the said report, the Committee has assessed the
additional requirements of 7229 posts at various levels, which would address the problem
of shortage of manpower atleast for the time-being. The said report is presently under
the active consideration of the Government.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 110)
The Committee take note of the fact that the extent of spot recovery of service
tax—which works out to 66% of the total service tax evaded, as a result of detection of
evasion of the tax by the Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI) is
a cause for serious concern, as it reveals the extent to which service tax evasion exists in
the system. The trend shows that there is hardly any fear of detection and punishment in
the minds of service providers, which the Committee feel is the result of the lighter
punishment that is meted out to the offenders. Even if the fact remains that the Government
is being cautious, as Service Tax is a relatively new concept, the Committee feel that
having no legal provision that provides for conviction for such evaders will prove to be
detrimental at a later stage. The Committee also take note of the fact that on the contrary,
the law provides for an escape route in the sense that if the evader deposits 25% of the
tax evaded in addition to the total tax to be paid, he is let free without any further action
against him.
Reply of the Government
The provisions relating to payment of penalty equal to twenty five per cent of
service tax liability stipulates that such penalty along with the service tax liability and

17
interest, as applicable, has to be necessarily paid within thirty days of receipt of notice
by the assessee or date of communication of order by the Central Excise Officer, as the
case may be. This condition of payment of dues within thirty days ensures speedier
recovery of revenue / arrears of revenue. Therefore, this facilitation measure of settling
dispute by way of deposit of reduced penalty is available only to compliant assessee
who makes payment within the stipulated period. Similar provisions also exist in Central
Excise and Customs Laws.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 111)
Further still, the minimum penalty fixed, if such a case reaches the adjudication
level, is also fixed at 25% of the tax due. The Committee, taking the above into
consideration, recommends the Government to bring in the necessary legal changes
early for enabling conviction of the tax offenders as well as increase the rate of survey
and searches in order to inculcate a sense of fear among the tax evaders.
Reply of the Government
It is the conscious view of the Government not to incorporate provisions relating
to conviction in Service Tax Law at this stage and also to resort to searches and surveys
only in such cases where these are essential, so that undue hardship is not caused to the
assessee in this phase of exponential growth of service tax regime. At present, the stress
is on facilitation to the taxpayer and revenue risk based scrutiny. However, it is also
submitted that gradually Government is incorporating deterrent provisions in the law.
In this regard two such provisions, namely, provisional attachment of property of persons
against whom any proceeding for evasion of service tax is pending adjudication, and
publishing of names of defaulters have been incorporated in the Service Tax Law.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]

18
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 18)
The Committee are perturbed to find that bogus income-tax returns claiming
large amounts of refunds on the basis of bogus TDS certificates were filed by some
unscrupulous persons. The point of serious concern is the forgery committed by the tax
officials themselves who connived with these persons, resulting in such fraudulent issue
of refunds. The Committee feel that this is an ample proof of the extent of corruption in
the tax machinery which could have been avoided, had the internal vigilance mechanism
of the Department been more alert. In Committee’s view, lack of efficiency and integrity
in the tax machinery leads not only to leakage of tax revenue but also to tax evasion.
Although the Department has stated to have issued instructions/circulars to the field
formations, yet the fact cannot be ignored that this has been done only after receiving
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)’s communication pointing towards irregularities in the
issue of refund orders. The Committee note that the system of issue of refunds is going
to be streamlined by making ECS applicable for all refunds in future, making it mandatory
to quote the assessee’s bank account details in the refund orders and immediate reporting
of any loss/theft of refund orders to the higher authorities, the clearing bank and the
police etc. However, the Committee are constrained to observe that corrupt officials
succumbing to avarice has become bane of Income Tax Department. Further, there has
been a systemic failure in the form of lack of proper checks and balances and a deficient
supervision by the senior officials and the internal vigilance mechanism on such officials.
The Committee take strong exception to such failures in the Department and desire the
Government to furnish complete details of the extent of such fraud in terms of Revenue
loss and the penal action taken against the tax officials found to be involved. The
Committee also recommend that the instruction of the Department on issue of refunds
should be followed scrupulously and diligently with supervision at senior level in all
their field formations.
Reply of the Government
(i) The Department has already laid down guidelines/instructions on procedures
and safeguards to be followed for securing refunds. Whenever, non-observance
of such procedures and safeguards is found out, the guidelines/ instructions are
reiterated or revised, as the case may be. Accordingly, when RBI pointed out
certain commonly committed irregularities noticed by them during the course of

19
clearing of refund cheques by them; those were immediately brought to the notice
of the field formations for compliance.
(ii) ECS has already been made applicable for all refunds, regardless of the class of
taxpayer and the amount of refund. However, presently the facilities of ECS are
available only in 12 cities. The Government is taking necessary steps to extend
ECS facilities in another 24 cities in about a year’s time. The Board has made it
mandatory to issue refunds through ECS in such centers where ECS facilities are
available.
Similarly, quoting of bank account details on the refund cheque has also been
made mandatory with effect from 01.01.2006. Moreover, the Government is also
examining the feasibility of appointing a “Refund Banker”, which would be
entrusted with the work of printing and issue of refunds or ECS of refunds to the
bank account of the taxpayer, so as to prevent frauds taking place by way of
claim of refund by wrong person, issue of refund on stolen refund stationery,
forging of signature, duplicate issue of refunds etc.
(iii) A Committee appointed by the Board, which examined the nature and extent of
refund frauds, has submitted that incidents of refund frauds have been reported
from Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Bhubaneshwar. The following are the details
of the cases of fraud so noticed by the Committee:
a. In one CCIT charge in Delhi, 158 refunds were found to be bogus involving
an amount of Rs.56.54 lakh. Involvement of two officers is suspected.
b. Bogus refunds aggregating to Rs.1.07 crore were found to have been issued
to 25 fictitious companies in another CCIT charge in Delhi
c. Refunds worth Rs.1.66 crore were found to have been issued from one Circle
in Delhi, which actually has no jurisdiction over those cases in whose favour
the refunds were issued.
d. In 28 cases at Chennai, refunds were issued in cases where either refund was
not due or has already been issued before.
e. In 22 cases reported from Chennai, higher than actual refunds were claimed
on the basis of forged tax payment challans or certificates.
f. In 110 cases, refunds were found in Chennai to have been issued without
jurisdiction or to fictitious assessees.
g. A retired employee of I-T Department at Bangalore was found involved in
forging tax payment challans for claiming fraudulent refunds.
Sporadic instances of claim of refund on the basis of fictitious TDS certificates
have been reported from Bhubaneshwar.
(iv) The Income Tax Department has already initiated action against officials involved
in a few refund fraud cases detected during the last couple of years. The extent of

20
refund frauds in terms of revenue loss and penal action taken against the tax
officials found to be involved in the various refund frauds brought to light is as
below:
(a) A refund scam was detected in CIT-XVI, Delhi Charge wherein it was found
that refunds were fraudulently encashed by credit into accounts bearing the
same names as that of the assessee but in the account of different persons
using that name, to accounts of persons having different names than the
assessee and even to accounts of fictitious persons filing returns with bogus
TDS certificates and challans. A total of 18 refunds aggregating to
Rs. 23,29,101/- had been fraudulently encashed by credit by the banks to
accounts held by the persons other than the genuine assessees or refunds
had been issued on the basis of bogus TDS certificates and challans
and deposited in accounts of fictitious persons. The involvement of two
Income Tax Officers, namely, Shri S.M. Buidhiraja and Shri Inder Kalra,
who were on the verge of their retirement during the period, along with
certain group C officials was detected. Involvement of certain outsiders
namely (i) Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava, CA , (ii) Shri Mahipal Negi, Computer
Operator with Shri A.K. Srivastava (iii) Shri Yogesh Sharma, earlier Branch
Manager of Central Bank, Gulmohar Park and (iv) Shri Ramesh Dewan was
also detected.
(b) F.No. DGIT (V)/NZ/COM/73/05
While verifying the refunds debited in his circle by the CIT (CO), the DCIT,
Circle-4(1) found that 4 refunds totaling to an amount of Rs. 1,87,40,666/-
did not pertain to his circle. An FIR was registered with the Economic
Offences Wing of the Delhi Police and the concerned CIT also initiated
departmental enquiries to investigate the fraud which suggested the possibility
of the involvement of certain officials such as Sh. Amit Chawla in whose
bank account a pay order of Rs.1,75,000/- dated 12.01.2005 was found
credited from one of the bank accounts of the alleged bogus beneficiaries.
Subsequently, other refunds were found to have been credited into bogus
accounts. The Economic Offences Wing of the Delhi Police have arrested
Sh. Amit Chawla, TA and the official has been suspended. Final investigation
report of the Economic Offences Wing is awaited.
(c) F.No.DGIT(VVNZ/COM/83/05
One CA by the name Sh. S.K.Bajaj, a Sr. TA Sh. V .K. Tomar, and a Daftry
Sh. Sanjay Prasad, were detected trying to present a forged advice for refund
of Rs. 17,62,786/- by officials of the RBI. The advice was forged under the
signatures of Sh. Shri Krishan, ITO, Ward 37(1). The three individuals were
arrested by the Delhi Police after an FIR was lodged against them.
In view of the spate of refund frauds a D.O. letter was issued to the CCIT,
Delhi by the DGIT(Vig.) to constitute a team of officers of the rank of Addl.
CIT/JCIT for carrying out period checks and inspections on the issuance,

21
dispatch and encashment of refunds. Some point that may serve as a check
list for inspections were enumerated as below:
— All refund vouchers should be in personal custody of the officers. Used/
unused refund voucher books should be handed over to the successor at
the time of handing over charge.
— Dispatch of refunds should be through centralized dispatch unit either
in the Range or the CIT charge. Periodic inspection may be made of
timely dispatch of refunds.
— Proper refund dispatch register may be maintained.
— Refunds should be sent by RPAD/Speed Post only and should not be
delivered by hand/through notice server.
— AO/Range Head may periodically do random cross checks with assesses
to ensure proper delivery and with RBI officials to prevent encashment
of bogus refunds.
— The Zonal Directors of Income-tax (Vig.) were also requested to conduct
periodic and surprise inspections in the CCIT Regions of their Zones.
(d) F.No.DGIT (V)/NZ/COM/33/05
During the course of an enquiry conducted by the CIT, Meerut, it was found
that in certain cases refunds were being issued on the next day of filing of
return. Also some returns were being received without jurisdiction. Different
types of bogus refund claims detected are as under:
— Bogus receipt with reference to the investment made in the tax saving
bond;
— Photocopies of bogus NSCs;
— Bogus certificate of interest on Housing loan to claim deduction u/s
24(1 )(v) of the IT Act;
— Bogus claiming of loss on account of running of truck/taxies/doing tuition
and some business activities;
Enquiry u/s 133(6) was conducted in all such cases of fraud detected, assessments
were completed and penalty u/s 271(1)(c) was levied. Prosecution proceedings
were launched in majority of the cases and compounding was done and amounts
were collected towards revenue.
Since three Advocates were found to be involved in the refund fraud the case was
handed over to the CBI. After completion of the investigation the CBI registered
a case No.RC-7(A)/2003/DAB under sections 120B, 420, 467, 471 of the IPC
and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the PC Act against Sh. S.P. Verma, ITO and others. The
three Advocates Sh. Rajeev Dhall, Sh. Mahesh Bansal and Sh. Kaushik were
arrested along with Sh. Munna Lal Paul, TA of the department. Sh. Munna Lal
Paul, TA has been suspended and CBI has filed a charge sheet in the trial court.
The Bar Council of UP, Allahabad has been informed regarding filing of charge
sheet and arrests made against the three Advocates.

22
(e) F. No. DGIT(V)/WZ/COM/115/05
A refund fraud was detected in CIT-V , Pune’s charge as a result of misuse of
refunds vouchers. An FIR was lodged with the Economic Offences Wing,
Crime Branch, Pune by the concerned assessing officers on the missing/
misused refund vouchers. A search was made in the Online Tax Accounting
System (OLTAS) which revealed that about 33 advices amounting to
Rs.26,24,828/- have been presented before State Bank of India, Treasury
Branch, Pune, which have been encashed by transfer to individual accounts.
Out of this, a sum of Rs.24,15,984/- has been recovered so far due to follow-
up action taken by the Department. The Economic Offences Wing, Pune
conducted a search and arrested three Income Tax Practitioners along with
Sh. Sanjay N. Misal, Income Tax Inspector. Final report of the Economic
Offences Wing, Pune is awaited.
(f) F.No.DGIT(V)/WZ/COM/8/06
Another refund fraud to the tune of Rs.75,90,115/- was brought to light during
the course of a survey action u/s 133A of the IT Act in Mumbai against an
assessee Sh. N.V . Sharma. The bogus refund claims were made on the basis
of bogus TDS certificates. The matter is under investigation by the Economic
Offences Wing, Mumbai.
(g) F.No.DGIT(V)/NZ/COM/13/06
Based on a enquiry conducted by the CIT-II, Amritsar, it was brought
to light that in some cases refunds appear to have been issued twice in
the case of the same assessee for the same Asstt. Year. Further it was found
out that in nine cases, refunds appear to have been issued on the basis of
forged TDS certificates in CIT-I, Amritsar Charge and another 39 bogus
refunds were issued in CIT-II, Amritsar Charge. In four cases refunds were
found to be issued by the fraudulent revalidation and encashment by some
officials in connivance with outsiders. The three income tax officials;
Sh. Amarjit Singh Chawla, Office Superintendent, Sh. Sham Singh, Peon
and Sh. Pardeep Kumar, Peon have been placed under suspension and the
CCIT, Amritsar have been requested to lodge an FIR with the CBI, North
Zone, Chandigarh in respect of the involvement of outsiders. Investigation
report is awaited.
(h) F.No.DGIT(V)/SZ/COM/14/06
A case of fraudulent encashment of income tax refund orders relating to
Vijayawada was noticed by the bank authorities who alerted the local officials
at Vijayawada. An FIR was lodged against Sh. P.D.N. Prasad, Income Tax
Officer and Sh. K. Devendra Prasad, TA both of whom were arrested and
have been placed under suspension. The refund fraud has been referred to
the CBI for investigation and their report is awaited.

23
(v) Instructions relating to strict compliance with guidelines on issue of refunds are
periodically issued by the Board. Moreover, improvement in the system of
determination and issue of refunds is also brought about to enhance the security
of the refund, as discussed in sub-para (i) and (ii) above.
The Board has also put in place a mechanism of administrative approval by
Commissioner of Income Tax before issuance of refunds of high denomination
(Rs.1 crore and above in the case of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore,
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Pune and Rs. 25 lakh and above for other stations).
The Government is constantly making endeavours to make the system of issue of
refund a fool-proof one under which no fraud can be committed. Suitable
administrative and criminal action is taken against the officials/ assessees/ others
found to be involved in any refund fraud and the system is further improved to
prevent such frauds in future.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 19)
Another disquieting feature about issue of refunds as noted by the Committee
has been the inordinate delay in the issue of refunds. The Committee find that though
there are administrative instructions to issue refunds within a period of four months,
there have been several cases of delays. The Committee advise the Government to go
into the discrepancies that have been stated to delay issue of refunds and take necessary
action so that such instances do not recur.
Reply of the Government
Normally, returns are processed within four months and refunds are issued. Only
in exceptional cases verification of TDS Certificate is required causing delay in issuing
of the refund till verification process is over. The Government has already taken
cognizance of the problems being faced by the taxpayers in receipt of refunds and to
make it more convenient to the taxpayers. Dematerialization of TDS certificates is already
under process and verification will be done through computer from e-TDS returns filed
by the tax deductor. The whole process of issue of refund is going to be streamlined as
24 more cities are going to be covered under Electronic Clearing System which is
presently working in 12 major cities.
Recommendations (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 40)
Taking a serious view of the recurring trend of huge pendency of arrears, the
Committee had, in their 33rd Report (14th Lok Sabha) desired the Government to take
concerted efforts to reduce such arrears. Although the Government are stated to have
taken measures to recover the arrears, there has been hardly any substantial increase in
the collection of arrears over the years. It is evident from the fact that as on 31.1.2006
the outstanding arrears demand in direct taxes amounts to a whopping Rs. 84662 crore
(approx.) and in indirect taxes, it is around Rs. 21,368.11 crore. The Committee would
also like to particularly point out that majority of the arrears are pending to be recovered

24
from the two cities of Mumbai and Delhi. The Committee find that an amount of
Rs. 35000/- crore in Mumbai alone is outstanding against stock-scam related cases of
Harshad Mehta Group and Ketan Parekh Group, and are stated to be at the initial
stages either at the first appellate authority or the Tribunal. No serious efforts seem to
have been made to get the cases decided early. From this, the Committee are led to
conclude that recovery of arrears is moving at a painfully low pace. The Committee
hope that at last now the Government would make concerted efforts to realise the arrears
with due despatch.
Reply of the Government
As regards the concentration of the arrears in the Mumbai and Delhi region, it is
submitted that these regions account for about 50% of the direct tax collections of the
country and are the largest centers of financial activities. It is, therefore, natural that the
arrears are also concentrated in these two regions.
As regards recovery in the securities scam cases, it is submitted that these persons
have been notified under section 3 of Special Court (Torts) Act, 1992 as a consequence
of which, no recovery can be made directly from such persons. In these cases, the Special
Court, after considering the claims of all stakeholders, periodically releases funds for
appropriation towards outstanding taxes. Recovery in these cases over and above the
amount ordered and released by the Special Courts is beyond the control of the Income
Tax Department.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 40)
In so far as indirect taxes are concerned, the Committee note that as on 31.1.2006,
out of the total outstanding arrears of Rs. 21,368.11 crore the unstayed arrears demand
is around Rs. 14236.6 crore. From the information furnished to them, the Committee
also note that the targets of recovery of arrears are being reduced over the years in
both Central Excise and Customs. Moreover, the targets of recovery fixed for 2006-07
is even below than the recoverable amount. In this connection, the Committee
have been given to understand that a task force has been constituted to expedite the
realisation of arrears with certain specific measures e.g. sensitization at the level of
Commissioners/Chief Commissioners etc., filing application for vacation of stay orders
etc. Though the Committee feel that this is a step in the right direction, yet in their view,
as the adjudication of cases attribute, to a great extent, to realise the arrears, they are of
the opinion that the Government may examine fixing a time-limit to expedite the
adjudication procedure.
Reply of the Government
It is mentioned that the Task Force for Arrears Recovery (TAR) has been
functioning since August, 2004. It’s functions include co-ordinating, facilitating,
monitoring and overseeing the efforts in respect of realization of arrears. For the financial
years 2005-06 and 2006-07, the recovery targets of Rs. 2700 crore & Rs. 2450 crore

25
respectively were fixed for indirect tax. The comparative performance in the collection
of arrears of revenue vis-à-vis targets during the last two financial years i.e. 2004-05 &
2005-06 is as under:—
Head of duty 2004-05 2005-06
Targets Realisation % of Targets Realisation % of
targets target
Central Excise 2250 1799.38 80 1682.4 1657.94 99
Customs 750 843.49 112 717.6 600.29 84
Service Tax Not fixed - - 300 881.42 294
Total 3000 2642.87 88 2700 3139.65 116
The following major initiatives/steps have been taken to expeditiously realise
the arrears:—
(a) Sensitization at the level of Commissioners/Chief Commissioners by holding
meetings at Nodal/Zonal levels;
(b) steps for getting the stay orders vacated;
(c) filing early hearing applications in Courts/ CESTAT;
(d) targeting defaulters with coercive action;
(e) persuading major units to pay outstanding arrears;
(f) follow-up of cases pending before BIFR/DRT/OL/COD;
(g) faster disposal of adjudication cases pending before departmental
adjudicating officers;
(h) quick implementation of favourable orders of CESTAT/ Courts; and
(i) posting of defaulters list on CBEC website.
Due to the concerted efforts, the department was able to increase recovery of
arrears during the financial year 2004-05 (272% growth over previous year) and exceeded
the target by 16% during the financial year 2005-06 (18.8% growth over previous year).
Further, in keeping with the earlier performance, the department is expected to achieve
the assigned target during the current financial year.
Fixing a time limit to expedite the adjudication procedure: The Central Excise
Act, 1944 and the Customs Act, 1962 provide that the adjudication of cases should be
done within 6 months (or 1 year in specified cases) as far as possible. However, fixing
rigid time-limit is not feasible since circumstances may arise wherein it is not possible
to finalize a demand within the stipulated time period. Sometimes a large number of
Court decisions are referred and relied upon which require deeper analysis. Further, in
cases involving clandestine removal etc. a thorough examination of the relied upon

26
evidences is required to be done. Sometimes the party employs delaying tactics by
asking for more time and not appearing at the time of Personal Hearing. In some cases
cross examination of panch witnesses, investigating officers are sought. As the principles
of natural justice have to be followed in each case and also keeping in view other factors
mentioned above, rigid time limit for adjudication cannot be fixed.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 42)
The Committee note that one of the major reasons for concluding certain portion
of arrears as ‘non-recoverable’ is that the assessees are not traceable. In this backdrop,
the Committee recommend the Government to further strengthen their institutional and
procedural safeguards so that traceability of assessees could be managed well and revenue
due to the Government could be recovered.
Reply of the Government
CBDT: In a situation when an assessee has shifted from his disclosed location
without intimating the Department, there already is a mechanism for tracing him through
field enquiries, enquiries from the Directors, partners, promoters, legal heirs, legal
representatives, authorized representatives, etc. Assistance of law enforcement agencies
is also requisitioned in suitable cases for tracing the assessee.
The task of tracing a defaulting business entity is difficult in view of the legal and
institutional framework within which business is conducted in the country and the large
presence of unorganized sector allowing business entities to close down business at will
or re-start business under a new/ re-constituted entity. Lack of a national identity number
and loose registration norms for businesses are some of the loopholes, which are misused
by the taxpayers to change identity or become untraceable when proceeded against by
the authorities.
However, the Government wishes to assure the Committee that their suggestions
have been noted with full earnestness by the Government for policy formulations in the
future.
CBEC: To take care of this problem, new provisions have been inserted in the
current year in the Indirect Tax laws for provisional attachment of property to protect
revenue during the pendency of proceedings relating to the determination of indirect
taxes evasion. Commissioners can order such attachment after receipt of a report from
jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner justifying the reasons for seeking
provisional attachment. It is envisaged that the department should provisionally attach
the property so that evaders cannot alienate or create encumbrance by way of sale or
transfer of property.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 43)
The Committee is given to understand that a sizeable number of cases are either
pending with IT authorities/Appellate Tribunals/Courts or the demands have been stayed
by them. The Committee while expecting that cases pending before IT authorities would

27
be disposed of expeditiously, desire to either get the stays vacated as early as possible
or persuade the Tribunal not to allow stays beyond 180 days as provided under Section
254 (2A) of Income Tax Act, 1961. In so far as the huge pendency of recovery cases at
the level of Tribunal/courts is concerned, the Committee note that there exists an
institutional mechanism through which the Revenue Secretary can interact the Law
Secretary on bi-monthly basis to discuss the matter. However, going by the past record
of pendency, the Committee are of the opinion that this mechanism, perhaps, has not
been utilised fully. The Committee urge the Government to optimally utilise this
mechanism to expedite the disposal of cases and thereby increase the realisation of tax
arrears. They desire to be apprised of the outcome of such meetings on a regular basis.
Reply of the Government
CBDT: The Commissioners (Appeals) have been issued directions to dispose of
all old high demand appeals pending with them by November 30, 2006 and the current
high demand appeals within 4 months of filing of appeals.
Instructions have been issued to the field authorities to identify high-demand
cases pending before the Tribunal, particularly the ones where stay has been granted,
and to request the Tribunal for early disposal of such cases.
As regards grant of stay by the Tribunal beyond the prescribed 180 days, the
matter was earlier taken up with the President of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
However, he has declined to intervene in the matter as such extended stay is being
granted by the Benches of the Tribunal in exercise of their judicial powers. The field
authorities, accordingly, have been instructed to challenge such stay orders before the
High Court in suitable cases.
A meeting of the Revenue Secretary and the Law Secretary was held on 8.5.2006,
in inter alia, the following decisions were taken to facilitate better representation of the
cases of Revenue before the Supreme Court:
(i) Assigning of exclusive advocates for representing matters of CBDT and
CBEC.
(ii) Extension of the panel of Counsel for looking after the cases of CBDT and
CBEC, which, presently includes the Solicitor, General of India and the
Addl. Solicitor General of India.
(iii) Briefing of the Law Officers and the Panel Counsels by senior officers from
Revenue Department for better Success in cases.
(iv) Steps for avoiding delay in filing of appeals.
CBEC: As regards existence of an institutional mechanism through which the
Revenue Secretary can interact with the Law Secretary, it is to state that such meetings
are being held from time to time.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]

28
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 91)
The Committee observe that so far as the computerization projects taken up by
the Central Board of Direct Taxes are concerned, implementation of many small projects
that would enhance the effective functioning of the department like computerized
processing and country-wide matching of TDS claims, matching of data compiled in
the Annual Information Returns (AIRs) with that of tax returns etc. depend to a large
extent, on the completion of the creation of a single National database. They note that as
per the original target, the database was to be completed by June 2006. However, the
target date for completion has now been shifted to September 2006. The Committee are
of the strong view that the Government should take all-out efforts to complete the project
within the rescheduled target i.e., by September 2006 to reap the designated benefits
that would accrue from the database. Further, the Committee feel that there exists a gap
between the information obtained through Annual Information Report (AIR), which is
fully computerized, and the information coming from returns of income, which is partly
computerized. The Government have assured that the gap would be filled and they will
be able to complete all processing, data matching and selection of cases for scrutiny on
computers by the end of the current financial year i.e. 2006-07. The Committee expect
that the whole process will be completed within the stated time at least now. Further, the
Government have stated that the work relating to appointment of system integrator is
still at the stage of evaluation of technical bids. The Committee urge the Government to
expedite the process without further delay so that this should not adversely affect the
project.
Reply of the Government
As of now only 60 stations are on network where the processing is done through
ITD application and in other stations the processing is done on stand alone basis. The
IT department has utilized the information available in the AIR to the extent of about
65% of the total value of transactions for F.Y. 2004-05 relevant to A.Y . 2005-06 while
selecting the cases for scrutiny using CASS during this year at the 60 network stations
of the IT department. The balance information is being used for manual selection of
cases for scrutiny.
Department’s new network and the National Data Centre is expected to
become fully operational during the F.Y . 2007-08. The new uniform processing software

29
will then be implemented in all the 510 stations. Thereafter the data matching of
all the income tax returns processed on the new system with the information from
the Annual Information Returns can be done and used for selection of cases for
scrutiny.
The original tender for appointment of Systems Integrator was cancelled by
Government. New tender for appointment of Systems Integrator has been floated and
the bid submission date is 16.10.2006. As per the timelines, the tender is expected to be
finalized by January 2007, and finally the National Data Centre is expected to be
functional by June 2007.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 92)
In so far as the overall computerization of the Department is concerned, the
Committee were given to understand that expenditure sanction for the third phase
of Computerization Plan of the Income Tax Department was approved by the Cabinet
way back in December, 2002. The plan had included networking of IT offices in
remaining 440 cities out of the proposed 510 cities. The original target date for the
same was 31.01.2006. The Committee further note that the Department sought
fresh sanction for additional requirements from the Committee of Secretaries on
Non-plan Expenditure on 11.5.2005. In the Committee’s view, the pace of work
with respect to computerization project has been slow. Despite urging the Government
to expedite the various computerization projects repeatedly in their earlier reports
and the assurances given by them that it would be completed in time, the Committee
are dismayed to note that certain components of the project like linking of cities
under a single national database and setting up National Data Centre are yet to
be completed. The Committee note that as per the revised schedule, the dates of
completion of the above two components of Phase-Ill of the computerization
projects are 31.05.2006 and 30.09.2006 respectively. The Committee hope that the
Government will not extend the date furthermore and take all out efforts to complete the
project as per the revised schedule.
Reply of the Government
The Status of project tracks for augmentation of computer infrastructure is given
at Annexure-I.
The Current status of various benchmark activities identified in the Project is
given in the Annexure II.
The delay in commissioning of the Single National Data Base and National Data
Centre has occurred due to the elaborate government procurement procedures laid down
for this scale of work.
Due to the first tender ending up midway in an uncompetitive situation, re-
tendering became necessary.

30
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 93)
The Committee note that so far as the computerization projects under the Central
Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) are concerned, the Government have taken the
stand that some of those are under implementation and some others are in the proposal
and testing stages — the important ones being the creation of a National Level Data
Center, Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES), Risk Management System
(RMS) and Electronic Accounting System in Excise and Service Tax (EASIEST). The
Committee recommend that all the projects under implementation as well as under
consideration should be followed up by the Government in the right earnest so as to
avoid avoidable delay in their implementation.
Reply of the Government
The progress of projects under implementation as well as under consideration is
being monitored closely by the Government. These projects are being executed under
the supervision of an ‘Empowered Committee.’
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 94)
The Committee further note that roughly eighty per cent of the international trade
is covered under the Customs’ EDI system and over ninety per cent of the documents
are processed electronically in these stations. The Committee urge the Government to
increase this coverage to hundred per cent at the earliest. They observe that once the
work relating to automated workflow system of central excise assessment as well as
service tax assessment is completed, it would be possible for the Department to provide
quality service to the taxpayers. Also, the Government are expected to roll out the Risk
Management System (RMS) to major ports like Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, etc., with the
aim to cover all the major locations by June 2006. In this background, the Committee
expect the Government to show tangible results in the near future.
Reply of the Government
The work relating to automated workflow system of Central Excise and Service
Tax to provide quality service to taxpayers is going on satisfactorily and is being
monitored regularly. Expeditious customs clearance-based on Risk Management System
(RMS) has since been implemented in Mumbai, Nhava Sheva, Chennai, Delhi and
Bangalore. Further extension is dependent upon the availability of necessary
infrastructure and manpower resources. Efforts are being made to provide these
requirements.
The road map for extension of EDI to new locations:  Under the I.T.
Infrastructure Project of CBEC, a countrywide network and National Data Centre is
being set up to host all CBEC’s applications. Once this infrastructure is in place EDI
would be extended to new Customs locations in a phased manner. The new locations
would be prioritized on the basis of factors like revenue generated at the locations, the
document load as well as requirements of the trade.

31
The extension of EDI to more locations involves a large number of preparatory
steps which include:—
(i) site preparations including setting up of Service Centres;
(ii) requirement of LAN / W AN connectivity (which is a component of the
I.T. Infrastructure Project);
(iii) determination of power requirements and augmentation, wherever
necessary (particularly in case of small / hinterland sites);
(iv) air-conditioning and power back-up (DG Sets);
(v) financial approval for the above mentioned works;
(vi) EDI related preparations by local banks and local custodians; and
(vii) making appropriate changes in the software particularly for considering
the requirement of Land Customs Stations and also for migrating the
existing software to a new platform.
The schedule for extension of Migrated ICE to the new locations is expected to
begin from December 2006 / January 2007 and may take about 8 months to complete.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 95)
The Committee note with concern that irrespective of the assurance given by the
Government to furnish the White Paper on ‘Information Technology in Tax
Administration’ the said ‘White Paper’ has not been furnished so far. They expect the
Government to do the same immediately.
Reply of the Government
The draft White Paper on Information Technology in Tax Administration of the
Department is under submission for final approval.
[F.No. H-11012/1/2006-Parl. Dated 13.10.2006]

32
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AW AITED
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2006 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

33
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th December, 2006
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
8. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr.(Smt) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **

34
5. The Committee, then took up for consideration the draft report on action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
37th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) and adopted the same with the modifications/amendments shown in
Annexure.
6. ** ** ** **
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of
suggestions received from the Members and also make consequential changes arising
out of factual verification and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON THE
37TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) OF
THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)]
Page Para Amendment / Modification
8 Add new The Committee would also like to reiterate their
para after recommendation in one of their earlier reports on the
para 7 Demands for Grants that the Department should ensure
that the refunds are issued within the stipulated time frame
of three months from the date of filing of refunds claims.
Further, they would urge the Government to ensure that
the refund cheques invariably reach the assesees within
10 days from the date of issue of the cheques, in order to
prevent any chances of corrupt practices on this account
and reduce the difficulties faced by the assesees.
35

APPENDIX
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SEVENTH
REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Total % of total
(i) Total number of recommendations 6 100%
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been 3 50%
accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 3,4,6)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee 2 33.33%
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1,2 )
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which 1 16.66%
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 5)
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of which 0 Nil
final replies of the Government are still awaited
(Vide Recommendations at SI. No. Nil)
36