 
 
 
8 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FINANCE 
(2004) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation] 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2004) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   22  December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   22  December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
                   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER I       Report                                                                                                 
 
CHAPTER II      Recommendations/observations which have been   
                            accepted by the Government (1,3 & 5 )              
                                  
CHAPTER III     Recommendations/observations which the Committee   
                            do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
                            replies (6,7 & 8)        
 
CHAPTER IV    Recommendations/observations in respect of which   
                            replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                            by the Committee (Nil)          
 
CHAPTER V    Recommendations/observations in respect of which   
                           final replies of the Government are still awaited..(Nil).            
 
         Minutes of the si tting of the Committee held on    
                           20 December, 2004  
 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of the action taken by government on the recommendations   
contained in the Fourth report of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005)  
of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation  
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
                        MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sh. P.D.T. Achary  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. S andhu - Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Sh. R.C. Kakkar  - Under Secretary  
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Standing Committ ee on Finance (2004-05) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Eighth 
Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the fourth 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok S abha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) 
of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation.    
 
2. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 
2004.  The Government furnishe d the written replie s indicating action  taken on all the 
recommendations on 20 October, 2004.  The dr aft action taken report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20 December, 2004. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
  
4. For facility of reference observati ons/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI, 
20  December, 2004                                            Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1926(Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

CHAPTER 1 
 
REPORT 
 
1 This Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Finance deals with action 
taken by Government on the recommendations  contained in their fourth Report 
(Fourteenth  Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004. 
     
2 The Report contained eight reco mmendations.  Action taken notes 
have been received from the Government in respect of  all the recommendations 
contained in the Report.  These have been analysed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
SL.Nos  1,3,6,7 & 8  
 
(Total 5)                               (Chapter II)  
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
 
SL Nos. 5 
 
(Total 1)                               (Chapter III)  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in re spect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
     SL No. 2 & 4 
 
(Total  2)        (Chapter IV) 
                              
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited: 
 
Nil         (Chapter V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that reply in respect of the recommendation 
contained in Chapter I of the Report may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4.   The Committee will now deal with action taken by Government on one of 
their recommendations: 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 18 & 19) 
 
 5.   The Committee were perturbed with the reply of the Government wherein 
they had stated that National Statistical Commission (NSC) would be set up through an 
administrative order instead of an Act of Parliament in pursuance of recommendations 
of Rangarajan Commission. They  recalled that during 13 th Lok Sabha, a Bill for 
constituting the National Statistical Commission was introduced in Lok Sabha on 31 st 
July, 2003 and referred to them  for consider ation but it  lapsed on dissolution of Lok 
Sabha. It was not understood to the Committ ee as to why there was sudden change in 
the attitude of the Govern ment with regard to National Statistical Commission. They 
expected that such an important meas ure would be brought forward through a 
legislative proposal instead of rushing thr ough by an administrative order. In their 
opinion that move would not only provide  Parliament an opportunity to deliberate on the 
Bill threadbare but also enhance the status of the National St atistical Commission itself. 
The Act of Parliament would provide Nati onal Statistical Commission statutory status. 
Hence, they desired Government to come out with a Bill for setting up of National 
Statistical Commission and refrain from ru shing such an important measure of far 
reaching implications by issuing an administrative order. 
6.   The Government in their Action Taken reply, stated as under:- 
“A Bill to constitute the National Statistical Commission was introduced in 
the Lok Sabha on July, 31, 2003.  It was referred to the Standing 
Committee of Parliament.  In the meantime, the Thirteenth Lok Sabha was 
dissolved and consequently the Bill l apsed.The Ministry re-examined the 
desirability of re-introducing the Bill in the Lok Sabha and decided to set 
up the Commission through a Government order.  This was referred to the 
Committee of Secretaries (COS).  T he COS in it’s meeting  held on 
6.8.2004 have taken decision, on the bas is of which a draft note for the 
Cabinet has been circulated to  the Planning Commission and the Finance 
Ministry.  Views of the Finance Ministry have been received and those of 
the Planning Commission are awaited.” 
 

7.   The Committee deprecate the casual  approach of the Government 
for not taking the recommendation of the Committee  seriously with regard 
to setting up of National Statistical Commission (NSC) through legislative 
proposal instead of rushing through by an administrative order.  They have 
been informed that a Committee of Secr etaries had already taken a decision 
before this Committee made its recommendation. The matter ought to have 
been re-examined keeping in view th e recommendation of the Committee. 
Since the Cabinet is yet to  take a final decision in this regard, the Committee 
are of the view that it be re-examine d thoroughly. They are of the view that 
such an important matter should be brought forward through a legislative 
proposal only. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and recommend the Government to come out with a Bill for 
setting up of National Statistical Commission by the end of first part of 
Budget Session, 2005. The Committee would like to be informed in this 
regard within two months after the presentation of this Report.    

Central Statistical Organisation – Statistical Activities 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para Nos. 32) 
 
8.  The Committee took serious note of the fact that though they had been 
impressing upon the need to have timely and qualitative collection of data in the past, 
no tangible improvement had so far been noticed. They were also concerned to find that 
different methodologies were be ing adopted by various Minist ries for collection of data 
which did not conform to the standards laid down by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. Th e Central Statistical Organi sation (CSO) working under 
the Ministry had reportedly been unable to maintain statistical standards due to 
ineffective statistical co-ordination with ot her Central Ministries /Departments, some of 
which even did not have statistical cells a nd professional statisticians. The result had 
been that the surveys were cond ucted one after another at thei r own level resulting into 
collection of sub-standard dat a which could hardly be reli ed upon. As regards data 
collection in the States, the situation was even more pathetic. Most of the statistical data 
in the States was generated at the level of Block Development Officers and approved by 
the Agriculture Production Commissioner in the State c apital who was the final 
authority. The Committee were of the view t hat the main problem with regard to State 
statistical system related to lack of infras tructural facilities which included lack of 
qualified enumerator s as well. They were of the opinion that unless quality of data 
collection ,methodology of carrying out th e operation and quality of enumerators was 
improved, the desired goal of data collection would never be met. They were given to 
understand that under the scheme ‘Modernisation of Statistical System in India’ which 
was being funded by World Bank the infrastruc tural facilities at the State level were 
going to be upgraded and the State Statistical Bureau s would be strengthened. In view 
of the fact that this proj ect had already been delayed, the Committee desired that all 
earnest efforts should be made to ensure that  the different components specified under 
the Project were achieved in a time bound manner so that the improvement could be 
effected in the present statistical system and uniform method of data collection could be 
achieved. They desired that Collection of Statistics Act which would bestow more 
powers on the Ministry with regard to collect ion of statistics should also be amended 
forthwith. 

9.   The Government in their Action Taken reply, stated as under:- 
“All efforts are being made to ensure that different components of Tier-I of 
‘India Statistical Strengthening Project’ are completed by 2005.  Steps are 
also being taken for the amendment of Collection of Statistics Act.” 
 

 10.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government 
which states that “efforts are being made to ensure that different components of 
Tier-I of India Statistical Strengthening Project” are completed by 2005 and  steps 
are being taken for the amendment of Collection of Statistics Act.  The Committee 
had specifically desired the Government to  amend the Collection of Statistics Act 
so that more power could be bestowed on the Ministry with regard to collection of 
statistics. The Committee are constrained to note that no efforts have been made 
by the Government to amend the Act even after a lapse of four months since the 
presentation of the Report of this Committee. The Committee cannot but 
deprecate this casual approach of the Government in not taking seriously the well 
considered recommendation of the Commi ttee.  They, therefore, desire the 
Government to amend the Collection of Stat istics Act without further delay.  They 
would also like to be apprised of progress of the implementation of India 
Statistical Strengthening Project from time to time.  
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1 Para nos. 11,12&13) 
 
The Committee note that there are violent fl uctuations in the Budget allocations 
of the Ministry between Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actuals leaving 
aside the provision for MPLADS. During the year 2001-02, BE was Rs. 160 crore and 
the Actual expenditure was only Rs. 30 crore. In the year 2002-03, BE was Rs. 128 
crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 34  crore. In the year 2003-04 BE was Rs. 69 
crore whereas the expected expenditure is Rs. 29 crore. Government has again made 
provision of Rs. 135 crore for the year 2004 -05. Although the Government has stated 
that the provisions have been made for various projects which could not take off in time 
but now have been kicked off, yet the Committee are not convinced with the reply. 
The Committee strongly recommend that ut most care must be taken to avoid 
large variations in BE, RE and Actuals.  While making budgetary provisions, the 
provisions should be made onl y for those schemes/project s which have either been 
kicked off or are likely to be taken up during that particular year. They are of the view 
that such unrealistic projec tions at BE stage deprive other Ministries/Departments of 
available funds. 
From the budgetary provisions  of the Ministry, the Committee take note with 
concern that the Ministry has not been ma king any separate provisions for the IT 
(information technology) and show its proj ections separately in its Demands. They, 
therefore, feel that since t he Ministry of Statistics and Pr ogramme Implementation is IT 
driven, it should lay special emphasis on IT spendi ngs. They also want that in future the 
Ministry should come out with a separate head for IT. 
 
Reply  of the Government 
 
The fluctuations in BE, RE and actual expenditure during 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-
04 were primarily due to non-take off of t he Plan scheme, ‘Modernisation of Statistical 
System in India’.  During 2001-02, the scheme had budget allocation of Rs. 119.02 
crore which was reduced to Rs. 5.00 crore in RE . During 2002-03, the scheme had a 
budget allocation of Rs. 47.94 crore which was reduced to Rs. 0.01 crore in RE.  During 
2003-04, the scheme had a budget allocation of Rs. 4.50  cr ore which was reduced to 
Rs. 0.70 crore in RE.  Budget used to be allocated at BE stage in anticipation of take off 

of the scheme.  However, since the scheme could not take off during any of the above 
years, the budget used to be reduced at RE stage in each year.  Finally, the 
participating agreement with the Department of Economic Affairs was signed on 
February 9, 2004.  During the current year, Tier I of the scheme has been 
operationalised.  The five studies, which ar e components of the Tier-I of the Scheme, 
are well in hand and the study re ports will be available during the course of next year.  
The higher allocation of Rs. 135.00 crore during the current year is due to the 
introduction of a new scheme, ‘Fifth Econom ic Census’ with a budget allocation of Rs. 
69.50 crore in BE 2004-05.  The scheme has already been operatio nalised during the 
current year.  
 
The Committee’s recommendation is noted.  The two new schemes for which budget 
provision has been made during the current financial year are:- 
(i) Tier I of India Statistical Strengt hening Project (Modernisation of Statistical 
System in India)   
(ii) Fifth Economic Census 
 
Both the schemes have already been op erationised during the current year.  
While it is expected that t he allocation of Rs. 69.50 crore for the “Fifth Economic 
Census” will be fully utilized during the year, considering the tendering process involved 
in the World Bank assisted scheme “Tier-I of the India Statistical Strengthening Project” 
a more realistic allocation will be made for the scheme in RE 2004-05.   
 Though there was no separat e provisions for Information Technology (IT) in the 
budget of the Ministry, the expenditure for Information Technology was being incurred 
under the object heads “Machin ery and Equipment” (Capital)  and “Office Expenses” 
(Revenue).  As per the advice of Standi ng Committee on Finance, Ministry has 
requested Finance Ministry to provide a separate budget head for IT. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 3 Para nos. 26) 
 
 The Committee are well aware that Modern isation of Statistica l System in India 
is a World Bank project. It is stretched in tw o phases namely tier-I and tier-II. They are 
given to understand that  ground work in respect of ti er-I of the project has been 
completed and the actual work  will be commenced soon and the studies are expected 
to be over by the end of 2005. They desire that Government shou ld strictly adhere to 

the time schedule in right earnest so that tier -ii of the project which is dependent on the 
outcome of the tier-I takes off in time. They want the Government to inform them 
periodically in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All steps are being taken to ensure completi on of studies under tier-I by end of 
December, 2005. 
2. The present status in respect of t he five components of t he “India Statistical 
Strengthening Project” is given below:- 
Sl.No. Component Present Status 
 
1. Study for identifying the 
specific requirements of 
Strengthening of State 
Statistical Bureaus. 
 
Short-listed professional agencies have been asked 
to submit proposals. 
 
2. Study for the Establishment 
of an all India Statistical 
Network. 
Request for Proposal (RFP) of this Component is 
under finalisation.   This component can be taken up 
only after the component at S.No. 1 is completed. 
 
3. Study for the Creation and 
Maintenance of Business 
Register 
The agreement has been signed with the 
International Consultants for guiding the study on 
Creation and Maintenance of Business Register.  
Technical evaluation of the proposals submitted by 
the national institutional consultants has been 
completed and financial evaluation is in process. 
 
4. Survey for Improvement of 
Service Sector Statistics. 
Short listed agencies have been asked to submit the 
proposals. 
 
5. Study for assessing the 
survey capabilities of 
private sector. 
The method of implementing this component is being 
reviewed. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para nos. 41&42) 
 
  The Committee note that ther e has been a manifold incr ease in the BE during 
2003-04 in comparison to the Actuals during 2002-03. The main reason for higher 
allocation at BE stage during 2003-04 is due to  provision for the construction of Central 
Training Facility for creating necessary infras tructure for providing training to statistical 
personnel.  In BE 2003-04, an allocation of  Rs. 7.15 crore was made under the budget 
head in the plan scheme “Institutional De velopment and Capacity Building” for 
Construction of Central Training  Facility fo r the statistical personnel of the country.  
However, since preparation and approval of the plan for cons truction of the building by 

Central Public Works Department (CPWD) was taking  ti me, the budget under the head 
at RE stage was reduced to Rs.50 lakh, result ing in overall reduction under the Head at 
RE stage.  During BE 2002-03, although an initial allocation of Rs. 4.46 crore was made 
under the head, there was no provision for acquiring land   for construction of Central 
Training Facility.  Since ther e was a distinct possibility of acquiring land for the purpose 
from the Greater Noida Author ity, Rs. 4.28 crore additional allocation was made for the 
purpose in RE 2002-03 which raised the overall budget   under the head.  The land was 
acquired in March, 2003 at a cost of Rs. 431.59 lakh.  During the current year 2004-05, 
an allocation of Rs. 8.86 cr ore has been made for construction of Central Training 
Facility through Central Public  Works Department.  This has  resulted in sharp increase 
in BE allocation under the head during the current year. 
 The Committee therefore recommend that  since the land for construction of 
Central Training Facility has now been acquired and an allocation of Rs. 8.86 crore has 
also been made the allocated budgetary pr ovisions should be fully utilized for 
construction of the building an d desired that the expenditure may be watched carefully 
and revised accordingly at RE stage so as to minimi ze the gap between RE and 
Actuals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The committee’s recommendation is noted for co mpliance.  In the Revised Estimate 
(RE),  the budget requirement for construc tion of Central Training Facility will be 
realistically assessed on the basis of t he requirement projected by CPWD.  The 
appropriate allocation will be made for the purpose at RE stage so that the gap between 
RE 2004-05 and actual 2004-05 is reduced to the minimum. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 Para nos. 44&45) 
 
The Committee regret to observe that t here had always been substantial under-
utilisation of budgetary provisions under the head ‘Professional Services’ meant for 
“Modernisation of Statistical System in India”. The reasons adduced in support of under-
utilisation has been due to non- operationalisation of the scheme as the scheme was 
taking time to take off. They are given to understand that duri ng 2002-03, certain 
studies and projects under t he Plan schemes “Institutional  Development and Capacity 
Building in Programme Proj ect Planning Implementation Monitoring and Performance 
Management of Infrastructure in Public and Private Sector”,   “Development of Social 

Environment and Price Statistics” and ‘Improve ment of National Acc ounts Statistics’ as 
envisaged could not take place resulting in underutilization of funds. 
The Committee are concerned to note t hat huge amount has been allocated 
under this Head since 2002-03 which remained unutilized for non-operationalisation of 
the scheme ‘Modernisation of Stat istical System in India’. They feel that instead of 
making full allocation, the Government coul d have made notional provisions under this 
Head when the scheme was at its nascent  stage in 2002-03. The Scheme has now 
been operationalised during th e current year 2004-05. They  want that Government 
should come forward with only realistic budgetary allocations in future. 
 
 
Reply  of the Government 
 
The Committee’s advice is noted for compli ance in future.  Possible delays will 
be factored in while making b udget provision in future. Since, tier-I of the scheme 
‘Modernisation of Statistical Sy stem in India’ has taken off during the current year, 
realistic budgetary allocations will be made under different heads for the scheme so that 
the gap between budget allocation and actual expenditure is reduced to the minimum. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 Para nos. 47&48) 
 
The Committee regret to observe t hat there had been s ubstantial under-
utilisation of budgetary provisions under the object head ‘Other Charges’. One of the 
reasons adduced in support of under-utilisati on has been mentioned that the allocation 
of Rs. 2.08 crore was made under the head in  the component “awards and fellowships 
for outstanding and meritorious  research work in statistics” of the plan scheme 
“Institutional Development and Capacity Building” for creation of chair which was an 
objective of the scheme.  This resulted in ma nifold increase in the BE during 2003-04 in 
comparison to the actuals in 2002-03.  The amount was, however, not spent as a 
decision was ultimately taken that instituting a Chair would not be advantageous. 
The Committee, therefore, take a strong exception to  such a casual approach 
and desire that in future before planning t he Plan Schemes it should be properly 
assessed as to whether the proposed sc hemes will be advantageous or not and the 
budgetary exercise should be  undertaken with due serious ness so that budget 
estimates are utilized fully without altering at RE stage. 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
The component, ’Awards and Fellowships for Outstanding and Meritorious Research 
Work in Statistics’ included creation of chair in addition to a number  of sub-components 
such as: 
(i) Doctoral/Post-doctoral fellowships 
(ii) Research collaboratio n between the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and universities/institutes. 
(iii) Travel Grants Assistance. 
(iv) National award in the memory of Pr of. P.C. Sukhatme and in the honour of 
Prof. C.R. Rao. 
(v) International Award in memo ry of Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis. 
 
While other sub-components have been operationalised, the proposal for 
creation of chair was reviewed.  Since no distinct advantage coul d be foreseen if the 
sub-component was implemented, it was dropped.  However, the Committee’s advice is 
noted for compliance in future. 
 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. G-20017/4/2004-B&F dated  20.10.04 

CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 5 Para no. 39) 
  
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that many ambitious projects have 
been held up due to time and cost over-run, re sulting in wastage of  precious national 
wealth. This is despite the fact that 29 Standing Committees hav e been set up in 
different Ministries/Department s to look into this phenomenon in which the officers of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Im plementation are also represented. These 
Committees despite looking into the specific reasons for time and cost over-runs also fix 
responsibility. Though the Standing Committee on Fi nance have repeatedly been 
emphasizing the need to minimize the delays by introduci ng an effective mechanism of 
monitoring in the past, not much improvement  in the results has been noticed so far. 
The same reasons are adduced  time and again while explai ning the delays and cost 
escalations. This position is not acceptabl e to the Committee. Th ey desire that the 
various factors which cause the delays should  be identified and tackled in an effective 
manner on priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As a result of the close monitoring by this Ministry and review mechanism in 
position and system improvements adopted by the concerned Ministries, the cost 
overrun as well as time overruns in proj ects have been declining. The study made by 
the Ministry reveals that cost overrun in projects stands at 22% in March, 2004 with 
respect to the original approved cost. The co st overrun in all projects together with 
respect to their latest approved cost is only 6.3%. 
The  study carried out by the Ministry show s that the cost overrun in project with 
respect to originally approved costs has come down from 62% in 1991 to 22% in March, 
2004.  The graph below depicts the trend.   
 

Trends of cost overruns
48.4
55.1 55.8
61.6
53.9
56.8 57.5
51.4
46.9 45
37.3
40.9
36 36
26
22 22.4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Years
% of cost overrun
 
On an average 500 projects costing Rs.1 ,60,000 crores (original) have been 
on the monitor of the Ministry.  Assumi ng 6 to 7 years as average period of  
completion of project, the direct saving ov er a period of 13 years as a result of  
decrease in cost overruns of 40% is of the order of Rs.1,18, 857 crore (1,60,000 x 
0.40 (% saving in cost) x 1.85 (13 ÷ 7). 
 The Institution of Standing Com mittee set up in the Ministries concerned (29 at 
present) have focused on time and cost overr un in projects costing Rs. 50 crore and 
above and on fixing respons ibilities on the c oncerned agencies for delays. This has  led 
to improvement in the manage ment of contracts, financia l dis cipline in respective 
organisations and close review by the impl ementing agencies. T he awareness created 
through this system has shown a positive sign. 
 
 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. G-20017/4/2004-B&F dated  20.10.04 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 2, Para no. 18,19) 
 
The Committee are perturbed with the repl y of the Government wherein they 
have stated that National Statistical Commission (NSC) will be set up through an 
administrative order instead of an Act of Parliament in pursuance of recommendations 
of Rangarajan Commission. They recall that during 13 th Lok Sabha, a Bill for 
constituting the National Statistical Commission was introduced in Lok Sabha on 31 st 
July, 2003 and referred to them also for consideration but it lapsed on dissolution of Lok 
Sabha. It is not understood to the Committee as  to why there is sudden change in the 
attitude of the Government with regard to Na tional Statistical Commission. They expect 
that such an important meas ure will be brought forward through a legislative proposal 
instead of rushing through by an administrative order. In their opinion this move will not 
only provide  Parliament an opportunity to deliberate on the Bill  threadbare but also 
enhance the status of the Nation al Statistical Commission itse lf. The Act of Parliament 
will provide National Statistical Commission statutory status. 
Hence, they want that Government should come out with a Bill for setting up of 
National Statistical Commission and refrain from rushing su ch an important measure of 
far reaching implications by issuing an administrative order. 
 
 
Reply  of the Government 
 
A Bill to constitute the National Statistical Commission was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on July, 31, 2003.  It wa s referred to the Standing Co mmittee of Parliament.  In 
the meantime, the Thirt eenth Lok Sabha was dissolved and consequently the Bill 
lapsed. 
The Ministry re-examined the desirability of  re-introducing the Bill in the Lok 
Sabha and decided to set up the Commission through a Government order.  This was 
referred to the Committee of Secretaries (C OS).  The COS in it’s meeting  held on 
6.8.2004 have taken decision, on the basis of  which a draft note for the Cabinet has 
been circulated to
 the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry.  Views of the 
Finance Ministry have been received and t hose of the Planning Commission are 
awaited. 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4 Para no. 32) 
The Committee take serious note of the fact that though they have been 
impressing upon the need to have timely and qualitative collection of data in the past, 
no tangible improvement has so far been noticed.  They are also concerned to find that 
different methodologies being adopted by various  Ministries for collection of data do not 
conform to the standards laid down by t he Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. The Central St atistical Organisation (CSO) working under the Ministry 
has reportedly been unable to ma intain statistical standards due to ineffective statistical 
co-ordination with other Central Ministries /Departments, some of which even do not 
have statistical cells and professional statisti cians. The result has been that the surveys 
are conducted one after another at  their own level resulti ng into collection of sub-
standard data which can hardly be relied upon. As regards data collection in the States, 
the situation is even more pathetic. Most of the statistical data in the States is generated 
at the level of Block Development Officers  and approved by the Agriculture Production 
Commissioner in the State capi tal who is the final authorit y. The Committee are of the 
view that the main problem with regard to State statisti cal system relates to lack of 
infrastructural facilities which includes lack of qualified enumerators as well. They are of 
the opinion that unless quality of data co llection ,methodology of carrying out the 
operation and quality of enumerators is improved, the desired goal of data collection 
can never be met. They are given to underst and that under the scheme ‘Modernisation 
of Statistical System in Indi a’ being funded by World Bank the infrastructural facilities at 
the State level are going to  be upgraded and the State St atistical Bureaus will be 
strengthened. In view of the fact that th is project has alread y been delayed, the 
Committee desire that all earnest efforts s hould be made to ensure that the different 
components specified under the Pr oject are achieved in a time bound manner so that 
the improvement could be effected in the pr esent statistical system and uniform method 
of data collection can be achieved. They desi re that Collection of Statistics Act which 
will bestow more powers on the Ministry with regard to collection of statistics should 
also be amended forthwith. 

Reply  of the Government 
 
All efforts are being made to en sure that different compone nts of Tier-I of ‘India 
Statistical Strengthening Project’ are completed by 2005.  Steps are also being taken for 
the amendment of Collection of Statistics Act. 
 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. G-20017/4/2004-B&F dated  20.10.04 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI, 
20 December, 2004                                                       Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1926(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance 

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Monday, 20 December, 2004 from 1530 to 1600 hrs.  
PRESENT 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta 
3. Shri Shyama Charam Gupt 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri K. S. Rao 
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX..  
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX.. 
5. Thereafter, they took up for consi deration the draft action taken report on 
the Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of t he Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and adopted the same with changes as suggested by some of the 
Members.  
6. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX..  
7. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX.    
8. The Committee then authorised the Chai rman to finalise the Reports in the 
light of amendments suggested as also to make verbal and other consequential 
changes and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX 
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2004-2005) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
             
                                Total         % of total 
(i)    Total number of recommendations              8  
 
(ii)    Recommendations / observations which have been          5        62.5% 
        accepted by the Government              
 
        (Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1,3,6,7 & 8) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the Committee   1         12.5% 
       do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
       (Vide Recommendations at SI. No. 5 ) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the    2               25%                       
       Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
               
(Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos.  2 & 4) 
 
(v)   Recommendations/observations in respect of which final         0  Nil 
       replies of the Government are still awaited 
     
      (Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos.  Nil ) 
 
 
 