42
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject
‘Widening of Tax Base and Evasion of Tax’]
FORTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 ( Saka)

FORTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject
‘Widening of Tax Base and Evasion of Tax’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.11.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.11.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 42
Price : Rs. 71.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................. 53
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................... 56
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 59
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 27 October, 2006 ................................................. 60
APPENDIX
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government
on the Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee
on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject ‘Widening of Tax Base and Evasion
of Tax’.......................................................................... 64
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2006-2007)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijay Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
*12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
29. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
30. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
31. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
5. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Forty-Second Report on the action taken by the
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
‘Widening of Tax Base and Evasion of Tax’.
2. The Thirty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 17 February, 2006. The Government furnished the
replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 26 May,
2006. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 27 October, 2006.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential
changes arising out of factual verification and finalise the Report.
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
16 November, 2006 Chairman,
25 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirty-Third Report on the subject ‘Widening of Tax
Base and Evasion of Tax” which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in
Rajya Sabha on 17th February.
2. The Report contained 16 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation No. 1 (Para Nos. 148-150), 2. (Para Nos.
151-154), 3. (Para Nos. 155-159), 4. (Para No. 160), 5. (Para
Nos. 161-162), 7. (Para Nos. 165-166), 10. (Para No. 171),
11. (Para No. 172-176), 12. (Para No. 177-179), 13. (Para Nos.
180-183), 14. (Para Nos. 184-185) & 15. (Para Nos. 186-187)
(Total 12)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 9. (Para Nos. 169-170) & 16.
(Para No. 188)
(Total 2)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 6. (Para Nos. 163-164) & 8. (Para
Nos. 167-168)
(Total 2)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
(Total Nil)
(Chapter-V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee also desire that going by the thrust and tenor
of the recommendations, the Government gives focused attention on
cantering the long term tax policy on broadening of the tax base
and checking evasion of tax.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Tax Deducted at Source (TDS)
Recommendation Sl.No. 6 (Para No. 163-164)
(Para No. 163-E-filing of TDS Returns)
6. The Committee observed from the data furnished by the
Government that the number of electronic TDS returns received from
the Corporates had gone down in the year 2004-05. This was in spite
of the increase registered in the number of transactions that were
covered under the scheme over the years. This being indicative of
lower compliance with the provisions of electronic filing of TDS returns,
the Committee wanted the Government to probe into the matter and
furnish a note on the issue at the earliest.
7. The figures pertaining to the number of electronic TDS returns
filed by corporates in the last three years, as furnished to the
Committee, and on the basis of which, the afore-mentioned
observation/recommendation was arrived at read as under:
F.Y. No. of electronic TDS returns
received from corporates
2002-03 1,28,762
2003-04 3,27,434
2004-05 3,09,475
8. While furnishing the action taken notes, however, the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Revenue (Central Board of Direct Taxes)
replied as follows:
“CBDT:
For the tax deducted during F.Y. 2004-2005, 2,86,148 annual e-
TDS returns have been filed by corporate deductors as against

3
2,38,350 for the F.Y. 2003-2004. Therefore it is not correct that
number of e-TDS returns has gone down. However, a regular
procedure for identifying non-filers, sending reminders to them,
and initiating penalty proceedings in appropriate cases in being
initiated.”
9. The Committee feel constrained to note that the figures
pertaining to the number of electronic TDS returns received from
the corporates in 2003-04 and 2004-05 as furnished in the action taken
reply are in variance with the figures furnished earlier. It was only
on the basis of the information furnished at the stage of examination
of the subject that the Committee had noted that the number of
electronic TDS returns received from the corporates had witnessed a
downward trend in 2004-05, which was indicative of poor compliance
with the provisions pertaining to e-filing of TDS returns. The
Committee take serious exception to the Government having retracted
from their own data at the stage of furnishing the action taken
notes. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to furnish
in clear terms, at an early date, the reasons for the variation in the
data on the number of electronic TDS returns filed by the corporates
during 2003-04 and 2004-05. They may also be apprised of the number
of e-TDS returns received from the corporates during the year 2005-
06.
Service Tax
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para Nos. 167-168)
(Para No. 167—Comprehensive Coverage of Services in the Tax Net)
10. The Committee observed that the contribution of the service
sector to the tax revenues was disproportionate to the contribution of
this sector to the country’s GDP . While the service sector contributed
to more than 50% of the GDP , the tax revenue generated from the
sector had ranged between 3.1% and 4.6% of the Gross Tax Revenues
from 2003-04. The Committee noted that while the service sector had
to be encouraged for its contribution to the economy as well as the
society at large, other sectors of the economy too needed to be given
an equal amount of encouragement. The unanimous view expressed
before the Committee was that the time had come to bring all the
services barring the basic and essential ones in the tax net. The
Committee, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation that all
the services, barring the essential or basic ones, should be brought
under the tax net in one go. With the facility of availing CENV AT

4
credit paid on the manufactured input utilised in a service and vice-
versa, the Committee felt that comprehensive extension of tax on all
services, though might be difficult, may not be an impossible task to
achieve.
11. While furnishing the Action Taken notes, the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Revenue (Central Board of Excise and Customs)
replied as follows:
“CBEC
In the budget for 2006-07, considerable widening of service tax
base has been undertaken. 15 services have been specifically
included in the list of taxable services and in respect of 26 services,
the scope has been expanded. With the proposed amendments,
total number of taxable service is 99.”
12. Mainly on the basis of the tenor of the recommendations of
various expert groups and the depositions made before them, the
Committee had emphasized on extending service tax to cover all
services barring the basic or essential ones. Instead of viewing the
thrust of the Committee’s recommendation in the right perspective,
the action taken reply of the Government merely recounts the fact
that additional services have been included in the list of taxable
services in the budget for 2006-07. It was only after being convinced
of the need and desirability of transiting from selective taxation of
services to general taxation of all services, barring the essential ones,
that the Committee had recommended for the same. The Committee,
therefore, expect the Government to view their recommendation in
the right perspective and prepare and pursue a road map for
transiting to comprehensive coverage of all services in the tax net
by specifically exempting basic or essential ones, which would be
in the interest of the revenue.
Stamp Duty
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 172–176)
(Para No. 176—Uniformity in Stamp Duty Charges)
13. The Committee observed that real estate transactions were a
major area for creation of black money. The high rate of stamp duty
levied by the States was also perceived to be a reason for restoring to
undervaluation of property transactions. The Committee, therefore,
urged the Government to impress upon the State Governments to bring

5
in rationalized and uniform rates of Stamp Duty on lines similar to
the one that paved the way for arriving at uniform VAT system in the
States.
14. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue replied as follows:
“The Committee has emphasized the need for rationalization and
uniformity of rates of stamp duty on real estate transactions in the
manner similar to State VAT. Since it is a State subject, the matter
requires consultation with the States, with a view to evolve a
consensus on this issue. To start the process, it has been decided
to place the matter in the next meeting of the Standing Committee
of State Secretaries of stamps & Registration, likely to be held
shortly. Further plan of action will be decided based on
deliberations in the meeting of the Committee.”
15. The Committee note that in response to their recommendation
for working towards rationalising and bringing about uniformity
across the States in the rates of stamp duty applicable on real estate
transactions, the matter has been proposed to be placed for
consideration in the next meeting of the Standing Committee of
State Secretaries of Stamps & Registration. Differential and especially
high rates of stamp duty levied on real estate transactions by some
of the State Governments are perceived to be a major reason for
undervaluation of property transactions. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the deliberations of the Standing Committee of State
Secretaries of Stamps & Registration on the issue of rationalising
and bringing about uniformity in the application of stamp duty on
real estate transactions. The Committee also reiterate the need for
preparing and vigorously pursuing a plan of action for coordinating
with the State Governments, as in the case of the V AT System to
bring uniformity in the application of stamp duty on real estate
transactions.
Appeals/Legal Issues
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 177-179)
(Para No. 177-178—Representation of Cases)
16. In their interim report on the subject, the Committee had, inter-
alia expressed concern on the manner in which Government cases were
represented at various judicial for a and called for overhauling the
processes involved in appointment of Government counsels. Form the

6
information furnished, the Committee were deeply concerned to note
that the success rate of both the CBDT and CBEC in pursuing cases,
particularly at the higher levels of the judiciary do not speak well of
the departments. For instance, in the case of CBDT, 42.69% of the
appeals filed in the High Court and 77.50% of appeals filed in the
Supreme Court were informed to have been decided against the
department. Similarly, the success rate in representing cases pertaining
to customs and excise duties was only to the extent of 23% and 28%
in the Supreme Court in the year 2003-04. These figures gave credence
to the opinion often expressed that Government cases were represented
in a routine manner in the higher levels of the judiciary. The Revenue
Secretary too admitted before the Committee that there were problems
at the departmental level in enabling effective pursuance of cases, for
overcoming which, appropriate steps were said to have been taken.
These, as informed to the Committee, included, putting in place a
system for ensuring expeditious movement of data to the law officers;
and identification and selection of lawyers with proven expertise in
taxation matters for representing the Government. The Committee
expected the Government to address the problems relating to
representing its cases in various judicial for a expeditiously.
17. The Committee also noted, from the information furnished,
that though the field formations of the CBDT had been empowered to
engage special counsels to represent important cases involving complex
legal issues, similar powers had been denied to the CBEC. The
Committee expected the Government to resolve the matter
expeditiously, so as to enable the field formations of CBEC also to
engage special counsels for representing complex cases in the Tribunals,
High Courts and the Supreme Court.
18. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue, Central Board of Excise & Customs (CBEC)
replied as follows:
“CBDT
The department is taking due care for proper representation of its
cases at various judicial fora and for expeditious flow of
information. At the level of ITAT, Sr. Departmental officers of the
rank of Commissioners and Additional Commissioners are deputed
to represent while before the High Courts, Standing Counsels with
proven track record are being selected for handling the cases.
Matters before the Supreme Court are represented by Law Officers
appointed by the Government of India, including the Solicitor

7
General and the Attorney General. Compliance with CBDT’s norms
for selection of standing counsels is being ensured. Further,
performance of counsels is also monitored by the Chief
Commissioners/Commissioners of Income Tax concerned specially
at the time of renewal of engagement. Further, in cases involving
complex legal matters, Revenue engages the services of Ld. Law
Officers as special counsels before the High Courts. For expeditious
filing of appeals/SLPs before Supreme Court and regular
monitoring of cases and liaisoning, a Directorate of Legal Research
has been created which is headed by an officer of the rank of
Chief Commissioner.
CBEC
CBEC has already created a Directorate of Legal Affairs for
monitoring the Supreme Court cases on day-to-day basis. One of
the major problems relating to monitoring of the cases is the delay
in procurement of certified copies of the order of the High Court
by advocates who are required to apply for the same either on the
date of the order of within reasonable time. The same could not
be successfully reduced in spite of best efforts. As the CBEC is
conducting litigations through the counsels appointed by the
Ministry of Law, a rule to enforce timely supply of certified copies
for filing appeals is not being enforced in true spirit. Law Ministry
has been advised to instruct the counsels for timely delivery of
certified copies with the condition that non-compliance of same
shall render deduction of 30% of fee to the advocates, as being
enforced by the CBDT in respect of counsels representing their
cases before the High Courts. As regards other measures such as
speeding up of the communications between both the Ministries
and the advocates and also to enhance the quality of litigations,
the decisions taken in the meetings held between the law officers
and the officers of both the Ministries are being implemented.”
19. Further replying on the aspect of enabling the field formations
of CBEC also to engage special counsels, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue stated as follows:
“The provisions for engagement of Special Counsels for representing
complex cases in the Tribunals, High Courts and the Supreme
Court is being exercised by the CBEC. The issue which was
addressed before the Committee relates to empanelment and
maintenance of a panel of advocates for conducting the cases
through the Office of the Chief Commissioners akin to the option

8
exercised by the CBDT for conducting direct tax cases before the
High Courts. Though a proposal for empanelment of advocates to
represent before all the High Courts on similar lines of the panel
being maintained by CBDT was addressed in the year 2001, the
Law Ministry did not concur with the proposal. It is proposed to
address the issue afresh in the light of the recommendation of the
Committee.”
20. The Committee observe from the reply that one of the major
problems faced by the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC)
in monitoring of the Court cases is the delay in procurement of
certified copies of the orders of the High Court by advocates. The
Committee note that this situation is prevalent mainly because unlike
the case of the other arm of the Department of Revenue viz., the
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), who maintain a panel of
advocates for representing cases in the High Courts through the
Offices of the Chief Commissioners, and are, therefore, able to strictly
enforce the rule of ensuring timely delivery of certified copies of
the Court orders on the part of the Advocates, the CBEC is solely
dependent on the Law Ministry’s panel of Advocates for representing
cases in the High Courts. It is also noted from the information
furnished by the Ministry that the Law Ministry had not concurred
with the Ministry of Finance’s proposal for empanelment of advocates
to represent CBEC’s cases before the High Courts on lines similar to
the panel maintained by the CBDT. The Committee are surprised
that an option already available with CBDT is being denied to CBEC
by the Law Ministry. The Committee wish to be apprised of the
reasons for not providing the CBEC with the option of maintaining
a panel of advocates for representing cases as is the case with the
CBDT. They also wish to be apprised whether the issue has been
addressed afresh by the Ministry as stated, and if so, the outcome
of the effort.
21. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the Law
Ministry’s response to the advice reportedly tendered by the Ministry
of Finance (CBEC) to instruct the counsels to ensure timely delivery
of certified copies of the Court orders and also enforce the situation
of deducting 30% of the fee dues in cases of non-compliance, as is
being done by the CBDT in respect of counsels representing their
cases in the High Courts.
National Tax Tribunal (NTT)
Recommendation (Sl.No. 12, Para No. 177-179)
(Para No. 179—Operationalisation of NTT)
22. The National Tax Tribunal (NTT) Bill had been passed by the
Parliament. The Committee desired that the Government expedite the
process of setting up of the NTT and frame the related rules.

9
23. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue replied as follows:
“National Tax Tribunal is administered by Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice. The comments received from
that Department in this regard are as under:
…National Tax Tribunal has been established on 06.01.2006. The
National Tax Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and other Conditions of
Service of the Officers and Employees) Rules, 2005 have been
notified on 9th January, 2006. However, it has not been made
functional in view of the court cases pending in various High
Courts. Transfer Petition has already been filed in the Supreme
Court. SLPs filed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court for annulment of
stay granted by various High Courts have been tagged to the
Transfer Petition. The matter will be taken up by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court when the Transfer Petition comes up for hearing.”
24. The proposal to establish the National Tax Tribunal has been
necessitated owing to the large number of cases pending in various
High Courts. The Committee however, feel dismayed to note that
though the National Tax Tribunal has been established and the
related rules and regulations notified, it is yet to be made functional
on account of cases pending in various High Courts. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the contentions relating to the T ribunal
as made in the petitions filed in the High Courts. The Committee
also wish to emphasise on the need for ensuring close co-ordination
between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Law to pursue
the matter in the Supreme Court so that the National Tax T ribunal
becomes functional at the earliest.
Survey-Ostentatious Display of Wealth
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14, Para Nos. 184-185)
(Para No. 184—Number of Searches and quality thereof)
25. The Committee, upon taking note of the fact that ostentatious
display of wealth was done through extravagant spending of money
on personal functions like marriages and high value luxury articles,
recommended that the same has to be followed up effectively to detect
concealment of wealth and evasion of tax. However, from the data
furnished by the Government it was seen that only 75 enquiries into
such spending have been conducted from the year 2001-02 to 2003-04
which resulted in disclosure of Rs. 43.58 crore. Further, it was also

10
observed from the data on searches that the number of searches in the
years 2003-04 and 2004-05 had gone down by more than half of that
conducted in the year 2002-03 with the value of seizures during the
years also going down by more than fifty per cent. Reduction in the
number of searches had actually resulted in greater reduction in the
value of seizures made. The Committee did not agree with the policy
of the Government to merely reduce the number of searches. Instead,
they were of the view that the number of searches should be enhanced
with added emphasis on the quality of searches. They, therefore,
recommended that the number of searches conducted should be
increased which should be of high quality and based on solid evidences
of evasion.
26. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue (Central Board of Direct Taxes) replied as
follows:
“CBDT
The observations of the Committee have been noted and
communicated to the Directors General of Income Tax (Inv.) for
necessary compliance so as to increase the number of searches as
well as the quality thereof.”
27. Instances of large scale evasion of taxes are often unearthed
on account of measures such as the banking Transaction T ax (BTT)
and Annual Information Returns (AIRs). Such instances of unearthing
of unaccounted income have the affect of giving credence to the
perception about the existence of a huge amount of tax evasion,
particularly in the metropolitan cities. Though it is has been informed
that the recommendation for increasing the number of searches and
also improving the quality thereof has been accepted and appropriate
instructions issued to the field formations, the Committee feel that
the Government could do well by analyzing the trends of evasion
as well as ostentatious display of wealth and huge spending in
different regions/cities of the Country. The Committee, therefore,
expect the Government to carry out a detailed analysis of the entire
nature of pay-outs on personal functions, which involve ostentatious
display of wealth and huge spending on the basis of which a region/
city specific plan of action could be formulated for unearthing
unaccounted income.
28. The Committee would also like to be kept apprised of the
details of the searches carried out and the seizures/disclosures made
as a result thereof on a regular basis at six monthly intervals.

11
Scrutiny
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15, Para Nos. 186-187)
(Para No. 186-Percentage of Returns scrutinized)
29. The Committee observed from the data furnished by the
Government that the demands raised and the corresponding realisation
had been increasing by a huge percentage even though the number of
scrutiny of tax returns had been maintained at 2 per cent. Leaving a
large percentage of tax returns left unassessed, might prompt the
assessees to take a calculated risk in concealing their actual income.
Hence, a need arose to ensure a fair percentage of assessment with a
view to, on the one hand, increase the detection of evasion, and on
the other hand, to act as a deterrent to reduce such risk taking by
those who file their tax returns. In view of the above as well as the
large scale computerization of various aspects of tax administration
and the resultant efficient functioning of the department, the Committee
recommended that the percentage of scrutiny should be raised suitably.
30. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue, Central Board of Direct Taxes, replied as
follows:
“CBDT
Although the overall percentage of cases selected for scrutiny has
remained below 2%, in absolute terms there has been steady
increase in the number of cases selected for scrutiny every year.
Figures of cases scrutinized in the last few years are as under:—
Sl.No. Financial Year No. of Cases Scrutinized
1. 2001-02 168010
2. 2002-03 172410
3. 2003-04 197390
4. 2004-05 210866
In view of the recommendation of the Committee, the issue of
increasing the ceiling of 2% will be considered.”
31. The Committee note that the Government have responded
positively to the suggestion for raising the 2% ceiling applicable on
the percentage of tax returns taken up for scrutiny in a year. Mainly
in view of the comprehensive computerization of the Department of

12
Revenue that has already taken place and the perceived increase in
the ability of the assessees, particularly the corporates, to file the
returns electronically, the Committee re-emphasize on the need to
consider raising the ceiling limit on the percentage of cases taken
up for scrutiny immediately without any delay. The Committee also
feel that as a step towards increasing the overall percentage of the
returns taken up for scrutiny, the Government could initially consider
increasing the percentage of scrutiny of tax returns filed by the
corporates.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 148)
The Committee note that though the total tax revenue collections
registered significant increases in the preceding three years—from
Rs. 2,14,372 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 2,52,382 crore in 2003-04 and
Rs. 3,03,169 crore in 2005-06, the corresponding impact on the tax-
GDP Ratio has only been marginal. The Tax-GDP Ratio which is
reported to have risen to 9.75% in 2004-05, continues to be low, and
as pointed out by the Committee in their earlier report, does not
compare well even with the developing countries. The strategy being
pursued for augmenting tax resources mainly centres on proposed
usage of the benefits of computerization, prominent of which are the
Annual Information Reports (AIRs), and the Tax Information Network
(TIN). Added emphasis is being paid on plugging loopholes in the tax
provisions, monitoring conspicuous consumption, streamlining tax
administration, and rationalising tax laws and rules. While these
measures are expected to yield positive results in augmenting the tax
revenues, the Committee are of the view that the long term tax policy
of the Government should essentially centre on expanding the tax
base inter-alia by limiting and rationalising the exemption provisions
and factoring the changing sector profile of the GDP growth in the
tax base.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
It is the long-term policy of the Government to expand the tax
base, inter-alia, by limiting and rationalizing the exemption provisions.
To this end, vide Finance Act, 2006, the following measures have been
taken:
• Exemption under section 10(23G) of income by way of
dividends, interest, and long-term capital gains of
infrastructure capital companies, infrastructure capital funds
and Cooperative Banks from investments in approved
eligible businesses has been withdrawn.

14
• The rate for Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) has been
increased from 7.5% to 10% of profits.
• The base of MAT has been expanded by not excluding long-
term capital gains on transfer of securities on which
Securities Transactions Tax (STT) has been paid from book
profits and by adding depreciation claimed on account of
revaluation of assets.
•T ax benefits under section 80P for cooperative banks other
than Primary Agricultural Credit Societies and Primary
Cooperative Agricultural and Rural Development Banks have
been withdrawn.
• Exemption under section 10(23EA) available to income of
notified investor protection funds has been restricted to
income by way of contributions received from recognised
stock exchanges and the members thereof.
With a view to minimize tax avoidance and increase tax base,
Finance Act, 2005 has inserted a new section 206A in the Income Tax
Act requiring Banking Companies, Co-operative Societies and Public
Companies referred to in section 194A(3) to furnish quarterly return in
respect of payment of interest less than Rs. 5,000/-to residents without
deduction of tax. As a first step, every Branch of Banking Company
is required to keep and maintain the particulars of non-deduction of
tax on computer media and such Banking Company is required to
furnish quarterly returns as per the procedure notified by the Board
in March, 2006.
CBEC:
On the basis of a comprehensive review, a number of exemptions
(broadly, exemptions that were end-use based or had outlived their
utility or needed certification or give rise to disputes) that were granted
through notifications have been removed in the 2006-07 Budget. Some
more notifications which need to be removed have been identified.
However, before taking a final view, it has been decided to put a list
of such notifications on the Finance Ministry’s website and invite
comments.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 149)
The assessee-base being composed of an incredibly small number
has been a cause for serious concern to the Committee. Though there
has been an increase in the number of persons filing their returns in

15
the year 2005-06, considering the growth rate being witnessed in the
economy and the resultant spurt in both corporate and individual
incomes, the Committee feel that the number of tax assessees should
be much higher possibly 5 times the existing number. The Committee,
therefore, urge upon the Government to bring a larger number of
people in the assessee base. For the specific purpose of formulating
the ways and means of bringing in a larger number of people under
the tax net, the Committee feel that it would be essential to undertake
a focused study, preferably with the involvement of a specialized
institutions/bodies like reputed business schools.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
It has been the constant endeavour of the Government to widen
the tax base through various schemes and measures. Persons are
required to file their return of income voluntarily. Only on the basis
of concrete information a person may be asked to file his return of
income. Further, non-intrusive techniques like public awareness
campaigns through print and electronic media are regularly being
undertaken to make the persons aware of their various tax related
obligations.
The number of PAN cardholders has already crossed 4 crore mark,
which may be taken as a reasonable projection for short term. The tax
base has been steadily increasing and presently consists of more than
3 crore assessees, which is 3% of the total population. Further, the
direct tax-GDP ratio has also crossed the level of 4% for the first time
in FY 2004-05.
On the issue of relatively narrow tax base, it may be appreciated
that there are a number of specific reasons which contribute to the
relatively small tax base. A large percentage of urban as well as rural
population is below poverty line, and still a larger percentage is below
the threshold limit of taxation. Moreover, about 75% of Indian
population is rural and mostly dependent on agriculture for their
livelihood and presently, agricultural income is not subject to taxation.
Further, the average size of households is about 5 and in most of the
households, not more than one person may be the earning member. In
addition, various exemptions and deductions are allowed to different
category of taxpayers which also reduces the tax base. Taking into
account the above facts, it is felt that the maximum tax base would
not be more than 5% of the population.

16
Concerted efforts are already underway to increase the tax base.
Recent initiatives like comprehensive computerization of the Income
Tax Department and implementation of various measures like Annual
Information Return (AIR), Tax Information Network (TIN), compulsory
quoting of PAN in various high value transactions, introduction of
Banking Cash Transaction Tax etc. are expected to yield further sharp
increase in the tax base. In view of the above, the focused study may
not be required at present. However, if need arises, study may be
undertaken in due course.
CBEC:
This suggestion is aimed at increasing the tax base in Income
Tax/Corporation Tax.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para No. 150)
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003, as
amended in 2004 envisages reduction of Fiscal Deficit by 0.5% each
year starting from 2004-05, and Revenue Deficit by 0.3% so as to
eliminate the revenue deficit by the end of the financial year, 2009 and
there after build up adequate revenue surplus. Mainly on account of
the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission, the Finance
Minister, in his Budget Speech, 2004-05 announced the press of the
‘pause’ button vis-a-vis FRBM Act. The Committee hope that the
objective of eliminating the deficits as envisaged under the FRBM Act
would be put back on track by reclaiming the ground lost in reducing
the fiscal deficit due to pressing of the ‘pause’ button.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
Despite the fact that the Government paused the operation of the
guidelines under the FRBM Act for the year 2005-06, there has been
significant improvement on the front of both revenue deficit and fiscal
deficit. According to the revised estimates, the revenue deficit for the
year 2005-06 will be only 2.6% and the fiscal deficit will be only 4.1%
of the GDP as against 2.7% and 4.3%, respectively, estimated at the
time of the presentation of the Union Budget for 2005-06.
The process of fiscal correction has been put back on track in
2006-07 and consequently, revenue deficit is estimated to be 2.1% and
fiscal deficit is estimated to be only 3.8% of the GDP for 2006-07.

17
Department of Economic Affairs:
The FRBM Act is administered by Department of Economic Affairs.
The comments received from DEA in this regard is as follows:
“The Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement presented along with
the Budget for 2006-07 indicate that the medium term fiscal
projections are in line with the commitment made in Budget 2005-
06 to resume the process of fiscal correction with effect from 2006-
07 and achieve the FRBM goal by 2008-09. The deficit indicators
in Budget Estimates of 2006-07, with Revenue Deficit at 2.1% and
Fiscal Deficit at 3.8%, compared to RE 2005-06 with Revenue Deficit
at 2.6% and Fiscal Deficit at 4.1%, are consistent with the FRBM
roadmap which envisages an annual reduction of at least 0.5
percentage points in Revenue deficit and 0.3 percentage points in
Fiscal deficit.
Government continues to follow comprehensive policy of fiscal
rectitude, aimed at revenue mobilization based on reasonable tax
rates, better compliance and wider coverage, as well as moderation
in the growth on non-plan expenditure while adequately providing
for social and infrastructure needs.”
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 151)
Committee note that as recommended by them in their preliminary
report on the subject, the proposal of compulsory filing of returns by
trusts/institutions as well as educational institutions and hospitals
entitled for exemptions under the Income Tax Act has been included
in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. As per the proposals of
the Bill, which has been examined and recommended for enactment
by the Committee in the related report presented to Parliament,
institutions, inclusive of those engaged in scientific research are to
compulsorily file their returns of income. The enactment of the
proposed legislation is expected to plug loopholes in the provisions
and aid in monitoring and processing the income of the institutions.
Yet, the Committee also feel that a lot more needs to be done to bring
in credibility in this area which is entitled for exemptions under the
Income Tax Act. With specific reference to the role of the tax department
in this regard, the Committee wish to emphasise on the need for
ensuring an effective system of scrutiny of the tax returns filed by the
institutions so as to enable the Department in effectively tackling cases
of misuse of the provisions, which result in loss of revenue.

18
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
In the scrutiny guidelines issued by the Board for the preceding
financial year, specific clauses for selecting such cases having annual
receipts above specified limits had been incorporated.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 152)
The Committee note that various exemptions and concessions
extended under the Tax Laws are to serve a number of social and
economic objectives. They, however, feel that prolonged continuance of
such exemptions may turn detrimental to the economy as they deplete
considerable portion of tax base, which, in their opinion is badly needed
to be strengthened in order to meet the developmental objectives. It
has been brought to the notice of the Committee that continuance of
the exemption provisions in the tax statute not only leaves tremendous
scope for evading tax but also promotes people to resort to
unwarranted tax planning. One such issue is exemptions applicable to
educational institutions, hospitals, charitable trusts etc. which are
registered as trusts/societies, but in reality, are run on commercial
lines and in spite of earning huge income are exempted under the Tax
Law. The Government too have admitted that loopholes relating to the
exemption provisions are a major means of evading tax, particularly
by the high income groups.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
The issue of misuse of exemptions available to charitable trusts
and institutions (including educational and medical institutions) under
the Income-tax Act was examined during the budgetary exercise for
the Finance Bill, 2006. One such misuse i.e., channelising of unaccounted
money to these trusts and institutions by way of anonymous donations,
has been sought to be addressed. A new section has been inserted by
the Finance Act, 2006 to provide that anonymous donations made to
wholly charitable trusts and institutions (including educational and
medical institutions) shall be taxed at the rate of 30% (plus surcharge
and education cess). Anonymous donations to party charitable and
partly religious trusts and institutions will be taxed only if donations
are made for any educational or medical institutions run by them.
Such donations to wholly religious institutions are not to be taxed.

19
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 153)
So far as indirect taxes are concerned the Committee agree that
exemptions are necessary but prolonging the exemptions indirectly
encourage incompetence and makes domestic industry shy away from
competition and growth. Further, they erode a major part of the revenue
base. The Committee feel that with the rapid globalization and opening
of the economy, the country and its industry should be better prepared
to stand on their own without any substantial fiscal assistance from
the Government. This gets further necessitated by the international
treaties and agreements.
Reply of the Government
CBEC:
On the basis of a comprehensive review, a number of exemptions
(broadly, exemptions that were end-use based or had outlived their
utility or needed certification or gave rise to disputes) that were granted
through notifications, have been removed in the 2006-07 Budget. Some
more notifications which need to be removed have been identified.
However, before taking a final view, it has been decided to put a list
of such notifications on the Finance Ministry’s website and invite
comments.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 154)
The Committee understand that the tenor of the recommendations
of the Expert Groups/Institutions such as the Task Force of Direct
Taxes (Kelkar Committee, Advisory Group on Tax Policy and Tax
Administration for the Tenth Plan (Schome Committee) and National
Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) has been that most of
the exemption provisions have not served the purpose of meeting the
objectives envisaged and should, therefore, be withdrawn. In view of
the foregoing, the Committee reiterate the need for urgently reducing
the exemption provisions under the Tax Laws and rationalizing the
same.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
The tax-GDP ratio of the Centre has improved substantially in the
last few years and is projected to reach 11.2 per cent in financial year
2006-07. One of the reasons, among others, for this increase in the

20
rationalization/removal of tax exemptions and concessions laid down
in the Income-tax Act.
The Government is moving towards a taxation system having
moderate tax rates and minimum exemptions which otherwise cause
distortions. Sunset provisions have been introduced in various
exemption/deduction provisions of the IT Act. On the other hand,
certain exemption provisions have been sought to be removed
altogether from the tax statute from time-to-time. One significant
measure taken in this regard is the removal of tax concessions that
has been available under sections 80HHC, 80HHD & 80HHE to
exporters of various goods and services.
In continuance of the Government’s policy to minimize exemptions,
the following legislative steps have been taken by the Finance Act,
2006: (i) section 10(23G) which granted tax exemption to income of an
infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or
cooperative banks has been deleted from the financial year 2006-07,
(ii) withdrawal of tax concession under Section 80P available to all
Cooperative Banks other than Primary Agricultural Credit Societies
(PACS) and Primary Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development
Bank (PCARD). Further, tax concessions available to 100% Export
Oriented Units (EOUs) and to Units operating from Software
Technology Parks (STPs), Export Processing Zones (EPZs), etc. have
been covered by a sunset clause i.e. no tax benefits would be available
to such units after assessment year 2009-10. Besides, general area-based
tax deductions have already been phased out. The only area-based
concessions that are available now are those which have been provided
for certain select States like Sikkim, Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh
and the North-Eastern States. These concessions have been provided
pursuant to the new industrial policy framed by the Ministry of
Commerce & Industry. However, even these concessions are covered
by a sunset clause.
As can be inferred from above, tax concessions available under
the Income-tax Act are being removed/rationalized on a continuous
basis. The Department of Revenue is continuously reviewing all
deductions/concessions and wherever such concessions are found to
have outlived their utility and economic rationale, they would be either
removed or rationalized. Therefore, the recommendation of the Standing
Committee on Finance is already under implementation.
CBEC
The position in respect of Indirect Tax has been explained in reply
to the recommendation contained in Paragraph No. 154.

21
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 155)
The Committee, considering the wide and far reaching benefits
that would accrue to the entire tax administration, have all along been
advocating for comprehensive computerization of the tax departments.
The approach of the Government in trying to integrate the entire tax
administration and synergise it with the other financial systems of the
country is in consonance with the views of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The implementation is being monitored by an Empowered
Committee. All efforts are being made to adhere to the stipulated time
frame and to complete the setting up of National Computer Centre on
time.
CBEC
The Committee has agreed with the approach of the Government
in trying to integrate the entire tax administration and synergise it
with the other financial systems of the country. It may be submitted
that the CBEC would pursue the ongoing projects as per the timelines.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 156)
The Committee observe that the computerization efforts of both
CBDT and CBEC have been brought under the purview of an
Empowered Committee on Computerization, and exchange of
information between the two arms of the revenue department will be
a reality once the consolidation of regional databases taken up for the
Boards is completed. The PAN and PAN-based taxpayer identification
by the CBDT and CBEC respectively, is to form the basis for mutual
exchange of information.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
The Committee has observed that after the consolidation of regional
database of the two Boards (CBEC and CBDT), the information between
them would freely flow. It may be submitted that the efforts would
continue to meet the timeline in this regard.

22
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 157)
As regards the computerization efforts of the CBDT, the Committee
note that the proposal seeks to create a National Computer Centre at
the apex level, through a System Integrator, with the objective of
consolidating and migrating 36 regional databases into one single
National Data base. As for the CBEC, a Data Centre is being set up
with consolidated servers and a Wide Area network, linking all the
field formations under the Board upto the level of Division with further
connectivity upto the Ranges. The expected timeline for completion of
the project is 30th April 2007. The Committee expect the Government
to ensure completion of the CBEC project within the projected timeline
and also synchronise completion of the CBDT project with that of the
CBEC, so that the benefits accruing from the programme are reaped
at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
The Committee expect the Government to ensure completion of
the CBEC project relating to Data Centre being set up with consolidated
servers and a Wide Area Network by the expected time-line i.e.
30.4.2007. It is submitted that efforts would continue to meet the
timeline in this regard.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para Nos. 158 & 159)
The Committee also expect the Government to prepare a roadmap
for arriving at a larger scenario that could unfold with the possible
integration of these projects, when completed with that of State tax
departments and ultimately, with the financial systems in the country.
To achieve this larger objective, the Committee understand that, at
first, a synergy is to be created between State V AT, CENVAT and
Customs, which necessitates having a PAN-based State tax identification
number, adoption of Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) and
automation of VAT systems by the States. The Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendation that the Government should take up the
matter in right earnest and convince the Empowered Committee of
State Finance Ministers about the importance and expeditious
implementation of the same. Simultaneously, the Committee want the
Government to take up, with the concerned Government departments
and financial regulatory authorities like RBI, SEBI the case for common
use of PAN at the earliest.

23
The Committee, in particular, emphasise on ensuring that the
computerization programmes are implemented as per the time-frame
stipulated and also provide for an inbuilt mechanism for upgrading
the systems in the light of technological advancements. The processes
involved in implementing the Computerisation programmes should
ensure that delays are avoided. The Committee also wish to be kept
apprised of the progress of the computerization programmes on a six
monthly basis.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The department is striving to adhere to the timelines for
implementation of the computerization programmes. The system is also
being upgraded from time-to-time as a result of technological
advancements.
CBEC
The Committee desire that computerisation programmes are
implemented as per the timeframe stipulated and there is an inbuilt
mechanism for upgrading the systems in the light of technological
advancements. The Committee desire a progress report on a 6-monthly
basis (progress as on 30th June and 31st December of the year). The
observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 160)
The Committee note that filing of Annual Information Returns has
commenced and the data would be available to the authorized officers
of the field formations for selecting scrutiny cases and for detection of
evasion from April 2006 onwards. However, it is seen from the
information furnished that unlike the other entities, the sub-registrars
are either not compliant or are slow in filing the returns. This, being
an area where a lot of concealment of actual transaction money is
perceived to take place, the Committee urge upon the Government to
pursue the matter with State Governments, so as to ensure that the
sub-registrars file the AIRs in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
Only those Sub-registrars who have registered transactions of
purchase and sale of immovable property valued at Rs. 30 lakhs or

24
more are required to furnish AIRs. The matter has been taken up with
the State Governments to ensure that AIRs are filed by all registrars/
sub-registrars who are required to do so. Commissioners of Income-
tax (CIB) are following up the matter with the Inspector General
(Registration) of State Governments. As a result of measures taken the
number of Registrars/Sub-registrars who have filed AIRs has risen to
1170 as on 15.3.06 from 372 as on 7.12.05 against total number of 3626
Registrars/Sub-registrars in the country.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 161)
The Committee observe that in cases where an applicant makes
changes in any of the key parameters, it is possible for a second PAN
to be generated. The Committee are particularly concerned to note
that as per the Government’s own admission, at least 27 lakh cases of
issue of multiple PAN involving 11 lakh entities have been detected.
What is worrisome in this regard is that holding multiple PANs may
be used as a means for evading tax and also lead to scams or
irregularities such as the one relating to IPOs witnessed recently where
multiple PANs were reported to have been used for opening a number
of Demat Accounts by the same individuals. The Committee, therefore,
urge upon the Government to give focused attention in overcoming
this problem and ensure a foolproof system of allotment/issue of PAN
to the applicants. The Committee also expect the Government to ensure
strong punitive action against persons identified to have wilfully
obtained multiple PANs.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The existence of duplicate PANs in the database is due to reasons
given below:
• In the initial stages, the allotment of PAN was handled by
the Assessing Officers (AOs). Due to teething problems of
acceptability, compliance by taxpayers, applications for PAN
in the statutory Form 49A were not forthcoming.
• In the absence of applications in Form 49A, the AOs were
advised to allot PAN based on the particulars in the return
of income. Due to the fact that in the returns, the taxpayers
did not fill particulars in fields, which were ‘core’ fields for
PAN, in a disciplined way, more than one PAN got allotted.

25
• As the allotment process was slow, many assesses applied
more than once to different Assessing officers. In some of
these cases more than one PAN did get allotted due to
variations in the data in core fields.
• Even though there was a software facility for detecting
duplicates, due to rush of work and long queues, the signals
from the system warning a possible duplicate were ignored
by AOs and this resulted in allotment of multiple PANs.
In order to overcome the deficiencies in the PAN process, a part
of the process has been outsourced to UTITSL and NSDL. Under the
new procedure following steps have been introduced to ensure that
more than one PAN is not allotted to one person:
• The applicants are required to submit proof of ‘identity’
and ‘address’ along with the application.
• It is the responsibility of the UTITSL and NSDL to ensure
that applications are complete in all respects.
• Five fields are treated as core fields: name, date of birth,
father’s name, status and sex. As per the agreement with
these service providers, their front offices have to check
whether crore fields in the application which ensure
detection of duplicates are filled correctly.
• In any new request for PAN the system checks if a PAN
has already been allotted for the given core fields, throws
up a message of existence of duplicates, promoting a manual
decision.
• The stipulated procedure for resolving such cases is strictly
adhered to at the Regional Computer Centers of Department
in co-ordination with NSDL and UTITSL.
Removal of Duplicates
In order to remove duplicate PANs that exist in the database the
following two-pronged approach has been adopted:
•V oluntary surrender by holders of duplicate PANs
• Assessees have been given the facility to surrender
duplicates through the website or by calling Aakyar Sampark
Kendra (ASK)
• Identification and deletion of duplicates by the department

26
• Through a well defined algorithm, a computer based
clubbing of likely duplicates has been done.
• The identified list of likely duplicates has been forwarded
to the respective charges.
•A  software program has been developed to enable assessing
officers to delete the identified duplicates.
• AO’s have been given detailed instructions to proceed with
deletion after issuing notice to the PAN holders to make
sure that the identified duplicates correspond to the PAN
holder.
• Such clubbing of PANs belonging to the same person, makes
it difficult to misuse the duplicate PAN.
It is clarified that investigations have confirmed that in the recent
I.P .O. scam there was no instance of use of duplicate PAN, as PAN is
not required to be quoted in applications for allotment of shares for
less than Rs. 50,000/-.
International possession of more than one PAN is an offence liable
for penalty under section 272 B read with section 139 A of the Income
Tax Act. Further, if any applicant has intentionally furnished incorrect
particulars or false documents he is liable for prosecution under the
Income Tax Act. Appropriate legal action will be taken as and when
such cases come to notice.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 162)
It is also seen that about 61 per cent of the financial transactions
are to compulsorily include PAN and the rest are not required to meet
this stipulation. This, the Committee feel warrants attention as tracing
of such non-PAN transactions may not be easy. The Committee
therefore, feel the need to impress on the Government to consider
making it compulsory to quote PAN in all types of financial
transactions.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
61 percent of the transactions reported in Annual Information
returns do not have PAN. This is also because this is the first year of
implementation of AIRs. Realising the difficulty in pursuing non-PAN

27
data, the Government has introduced the following amendments the
Finance Act, 2006:
(a) A new sub-section (1B) in section 139A has been inserted
so as to provide that for the purpose of collecting any
information which may be useful for or relevant to the
purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Central
Government may by way of notification specify any class
or classes of persons, and such persons shall within the
prescribed time apply to the Assessing Officer for allotment
of a Permanent Account Number;
(b) Sub-section (2) of section 139A has been amended so as to
provide that the Assessing Officer may, having regard to
the nature of transactions as may be specified by the rules
made by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, also allot a
permanent account number to any person (whether any tax
is payable by him or not), in accordance with the procedure
as may be specified by such rules.
Rule 114B of Income-tax Rules 1962 read with sub-section (5) of
Income-tax Act 1961 requires quoting of PAN in specified financial
transaction covered by AIR. However, certain exceptions are provided
for persons who have either no taxable income or who have agricultural
income. The aforesaid provisions of the Finance Act, 2006 will enable
the Government to require all persons who enter into specified financial
transactions to apply for and obtain PAN. Even where PAN is not
quoted in any transactions, the Government will be able to allot PAN
based on information in its possession.
These provisions would go a long way in addressing the problems
of processing non-PAN data.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 165)
The Committee note that the Government have responded
positively to the emphasis paid by them on improving the environment
in tax offices and reducing the interface between the taxpayer and tax
officials. In addition to the proposals of the department to undertake
construction of ‘modern, intelligent tax office buildings’ etc. the
Committee feel that there is a need to consider introducing measures
such as Business Process Reengineering, which would be more
userfriendly and also act as a more effective mechanism in dealing
with problems of tax evasion. They feel that the introduction of other
measures like Help Centres and Risk Management Systems would
further ease the tax compliance procedures.

28
Reply of the Government
CBDT
A task force on Business Process Reengineering has been
constituted. Tender process for hiring a Management Consultant for
this purpose has been initiated.
Help Centres or Aayakar Sahayata Kendras were set up at
43 stations across the country as a facilitation measure for small
taxpayers through a collaboration between the Income Tax Department
and non-governmental organizations, trade/industry associations,
professional bodies on PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP model on a
voluntary basis. The Help Centres were set up as a result of the
announcement made by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
2005. The Help Centres facilitated taxpayers in preparing the returns
of income and filling up challans, computing taxable income, calculating
tax payable, rendering tax related advice and to accept application
forms for Permanent Account Number (PAN).
In order to make the public aware of this facility, wide publicity
was given to this programme through TV advertisement on
DD/Satellite channels and vernacular/English press as well as contact
meetings of Chief Commissioners of Income Tax with Trade
bodies/local market bodies highlighting the purpose and details of
the scheme of the help centers and the conveniences it offers to the
small taxpayers.
These help centres for small Income Tax payers functioned from
1st July, 2005 to 30th Sept., 2005 (a period of three months). These
were re-energized in the last week of October, 2005 to enable late
filers and non filers to file the returns of income. Feedback and
suggestions from the field offices as well as from general public have
been obtained for improving the effectiveness of help centers. These
have been examined. Guidelines for increasing the effectiveness of the
help center programme in the financial year 2006-07 have been
communicated to the field formations for implementation. The help
centers will function from 1.6.2006 to 31.8.2006.
Risk Management in the form of Computer Assisted Selection of
Cases for Scrutiny (CASS) was introduced in November 2004. First
cycle of selection of cases through CASS was introduced in Nov.’ 04
while the second round was done in July ’05. Second phase of CASS,
which would include information from the Tax Audit Reports and
AIR data, is being developed and will be implemented in April-May
2006.

29
CBEC
The Directorate of Housing & Welfare in CBEC has been entrusted
with the work to monitor and coordinate with the field formations to
identify shortcomings in each of the offices in their jurisdiction on the
basis of recommendations of the Infrastructure Task Force which was
constituted to bring about improvement in office infrastructure and to
standardise the requirement of a ‘Modern Customer Friendly Office.’
The pre-requisites of a ‘Model Open Office’ in short as recommended
by the ‘Task Force’ are as under:—
•P rovision of New Modular Furniture suitable for “Open
Modular Office System” e.g. Work Stations etc.
• Up gradation of existing reception, visitors’ lounge and/or
waiting room.
•P reparation of new layout of office viz. construction of cabins
in halls and bigger rooms, providing false ceiling and wall
panelling, replacement of flooring with vitrified tiles.
•T o provide Waiting Bays at each floor for visitors.
•T o provide for ‘Modern Record Room’ for in-built storage
system.
• Facilitation counters for providing forms/departmental
publications etc.
•F ixing of illuminated signage indicating directions of various
sections.
• Fully-furnished Conference Room with audio-visual system
in Commissionerate Hqrs.
• Upgradation of existing library .
• Upgradation of centralised receipt system.
• Using of smart card for entry/exit for ensuring punctuality.
• Adequate power backup system for computers, lifts, essential
light and fans.
• Adequate recreation facilities and canteen facilities.
The Commissionerates and the Directorate are making continuous
effort to improve the infrastructure to transform the existing offices
into Modern Customer-friendly offices and to provide required
amenities such as visitors’ rooms, waiting bays, toilets, installation of
water coolers etc. It is ensured that the new office buildings constructed

30
and/or under construction incorporate all such ingredients to give an
assessee-friendly look and conform to specifications of Model Open
Office. However, in Metro cities, there is constraint of acquiring plot
of land for construction of offices. Hence, the existing offices are being
modified to provide and improve such basic amenities by the concerned
field formations. The endeavour of this Directorate is to ensure
implementation of such proposals that emphasise on integrated and
comprehensive planning with proper amenities for taxpayers.
Help Centres have been set up in all the Customs and Central
Excise Commissionerates in public-private partnership in tune with
the accepted international practice all over the world. Help Centres
are envisaged to provide an institutional mechanism for small tax
payers, assesses, importers, exporters and service providers to guide
and educate them on all matters relating to Indirect Taxes.
The Committee emphasised the need for introducing measures such
as Business Process Re-engineering and Risk Management Systems to
further ease the tax compliance procedures. It may be submitted that
the observations of the committee would be kept in view while
implementing the projects. Risk Management System has started
functioning at Air Cargo, Sahar and Jawaharlal Nehru Port, Nhava
Sheva, Mumbai Custom House and Mulund CFS and is being extended
to other major locations. It is also mentioned that the Directorate
General of Systems have taken up a project named ACES (Automation
of Central Excise and Service Tax), which is a workflow based
application and seeks to cover all the aspects of business in Central
Excise and Service Tax.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 166)
The Committee have also been impressed upon the need for
creating an Ombudsman scheme on lines similar to that of Banking
Ombudsman, for enabling redressal of the grievances of the tax
assesses. The Committee note that though a ‘Tax Ombudsman’ scheme
is presently prevalent in two places, a proposal for strengthening the
mechanism has been worked out, which is awaiting approval. The
Committee desire that the re-worked and strengthened Tax Ombudsman
scheme be made operational at the earliest, which would contribute in
redressing the grievances of the taxpayers.
Reply of the Government
The Income Tax Ombudsman Guidelines 2004 have been revised
with the approval of the Cabinet. In all 12 Income Tax Ombudsman

31
have been created across the country at the following places:—
1. New Delhi
2. Mumbai
3. Chennai
4. Kolkata
5. Bangalore
6. Hyderabad
7. Ahmedabad
8. Pune
9. Kanpur
10. Chandigarh
11. Bhopal
12. Kochi.
The Income Tax Ombudsman have the power to receive complaints
from taxpayers on any matter alleging deficiency in the working of
the Income Tax Department and facilitate their settlement by agreement,
through conciliation and mediation between the Income Tax Department
and the aggrieved parties. If complaint is not settled by agreement in
the stipulated time he may pass an ‘award’ after affording the parties
reasonable opportunity to present their case as per the Income Tax
Ombudsman Guidelines 2006.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 10, Para No. 171)
The Committee, considering the fact that focus on the high-end
tax payers would result in more tax revenue, advised the Government
to give specific focus on them. They note with satisfaction that the
Government are taking all possible steps to tap the potential of such
sections of the society to enhance the tax collections, like conducting
surveys/enquiries in respect of transactions of certain high value items.
However, there exist certain general problems like exemptions, and
specific problems like lack of information on high-spending and
predominant use of cash as a mode of payment for high value items.
Moreover, the Government are in agreement with the concept that
high income tax payers with greater capacity to pay must pay more.
Keeping in mind all the concerns, the Committee advise the
Government to bring all such dealers who deal with such high-cost

32
items as well as the persons with very high regular spending, under
Section 285BA of the Income Tax to mandatorily file Annual Information
Returns.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
Section 285A provides for filing of Annual Information Return (AIR)
by prescribed persons regarding certain specified high value transactions
entered into after 1st April, 2004. The transactions in respect of which
the Annual Information Return is required to be filed are the following:
Sl.No. Class of persons required to Nature and value of transactions
file AIR
1. Banks Cash deposits of Rs. 10 lac and
above in a year in any savings bank
account maintained by a person.
2. Any company or institution Payments made by a person against
issuing credit card. credit card aggregating Rs. 2 lac and
above in a year.
3. A trustee of a Mutual Fund Investment in a Mutual Fund of
or person authorized to Rs. 2 lacs or more by a person.
manage such funds.
4. A company or institution Investment of Rs. 5 lac or more in
issuing bonds or debentures. bonds or debentures issued by a
company or an institution.
5. A company issuing shares Investment of Rs. 1 lac or more in
through public or rights a public or rights issue of company.
issue.
6. Registrar/Sub-Registrar of Purchase or sale by any person of
Properties. immovable Property valued at
Rs. 30 lacs or more.
7. An officer of the RBI Investment by a person for an
amount aggregating Rs. 5 lacs or
more in a year in bonds issued by
the RBI.
The Finance Minister has announced in the Budget Speech, 2006
to expand the base of the AIR by prescribing some more transactions
to be reported in the same.

33
Recommendation (Sl.No. 11, Para No. 172)
Evasion of taxes is a major cause for serious concern, which creates
a severe dent in the total realizable tax kitty. The Committee note that
in response to the concerns raised by them, the Government have
taken certain initiatives in this regard. However, the Committee find
certain glaring and persistent instances of evasion by misuse of some
provisions.
Reply of the Government
Initiatives taken to tackle evasion of Central Excise and Customs
duty are as under:
Central Excise:
• Developing intelligence in respect of manufacturers who are
suspected of evading the revenue.
•T o monitor the revenue on the basis of number of machines
installed in respect of manufacturers like Pan Masala/
Gutkha.
•T o monitor the input-output ratio in respect of certain
evasion prone commodities.
• Issuing modus operandi circulars regarding evasion of
Central Excise Duty.
• Studying the price structure, marketing patterns and
classification of certain evasion prone commodities.
• Conducting searches to unearth documentary evidence in
support of clandestine production and clearance.
Customs:
• The intelligence gathering machinery has been strengthened
so as to generate effective intelligence.
•V arious equipment, which are essential for an effective anti-
evasion set-up such as transport, communication equipment
etc. have been augmented.
• Computers with appropriate software and data-links have
been put in place to facilitate data analysis to detect cases
warranting investigation.
• Database (dossiers) of past offenders has been updated to
identify such (new) companies which may have been opened
by past offenders.

34
• Increasing use of Bilateral Customs Mutual Administrative
Assistance Agreement and signing of new agreements with
important trading partners such as USA and European
Community (consisting of 25 countries) so as to assist each
other in detection, prevention and investigation of customs
offences.
• Positing of customs officers abroad for the purpose of
effective coordination with other customs administrations
so that evidences could be collected for the purpose of
successful completion of investigation.
•S igning WCO Convention on Mutual Administrative
Assistance (CMAA), which will help us in procuring
evidence from other Customs Administrations, who have
also signed CMAA.
• Increasing computerisation of Customs Clearance Procedures
and use of electronic data interface (EDI) system for data
analysis on a real time basis to identify cases to be
investigated.
• Conducting systematic studies of various export-promotion
schemes with a view to identify loopholes and to take steps
to plug loopholes.
• Increasing use of Non-Intrusive inspection Systems for
inspecting container cargo so as to detect any concealment/
mis-declaration of goods.
• Increasing use of X-ray machines at the airport so as to
detect any concealment in the baggage.
Recommendation Sl.No. 11 (Para No. 173)
The data furnished on instances of misuse of various export
promotion schemes reveals that the amount involved in the show cause
notices (SCNs) issued during 2002-03 to 2004-05 totals to an enormous
figure of Rs. 3,442 crores. The aspect of blatant misuse of various
export promotion schemes resulting in loss of thousands of crores of
revenue to the exchequer is evident from the fact that the Government
have decided to withdraw the Target Plus Scheme following the advice
of a Committee of Secretaries. Further, the Committee also note that
as a follow up of the revelations made by the DRI, some of the schemes
have been revamped. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that
there is an urgent need to review all the existing export promotion
schemes, after obtaining necessary inputs from DGFT, DRI, DGCIS etc.
so as to make them evasion proof.

35
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of the directions received from PMO, a two-Member
Committee consisting of DGFT and Member (Customs/EP), CBEC was
set up to examine the existing export promotion schemes as well as
schemes to reward export performance other than the DEPB Scheme,
to identify such schemes which are not WTO-compatible or which
ought to be discontinued for other reasons.
The two-Member Committee has since submitted its report and
has made a number of recommendations to further tighten up various
export-promotion schemes. The Committee, in its report, has also
recommended that reward schemes like Target Plus, Served from India
Scheme and Vishesh Krishi Upaj Yojana (VKUY) need to be revisited.
The report of the two-member Committee mentioned above was
considered by the Committee of Secretaries in a meeting held on
2.1.2006 and the Committee has given specific recommendations in
respect of EOU Scheme, VKUY and Served from India Scheme.
Besides, on the basis of inputs received from DRI/Customs field
formations, a number of proposals were forwarded to DOC for
implementation in the ensuring Annual Review of the Foreign Trade
Policy (FTP). The proposals of DOR and DOC for annual review of
FTP were discussed by the Committee of Secretaries in its meeting
held on 22.3.2006.
The Annual Supplement to the FTP has since been released on
7.4.2006. As a result of the review of the Target plus Scheme, the
scheme has been deleted from the policy. Likewise, the DFRC scheme
has been abolished on 30.4.2006. Besides, to help prevent misuse of
Export Promotion Schemes, several new provisions have been
incorporated in the FTP and Handbook of Procedures. Also, several
provisions have been deleted to tighten up the schemes. The new
provisions are mentioned below scheme-wise.
Advance Licence Scheme
(i) A new paragraph dealing with revision of Standard Input
Output Norms (SION) by Advance Licence Committee, now
called Norms Committee, has been introduced. It is now
mandatory for the industry/exporters to provide production
and consumption data etc. as may be required by DGFT/
Export Promotion Council for revision of SION. (paragraph
4.10.2 of the Handbook)

36
(ii) A new sub-para has been added in para 4.24A(a) of the
Handbook requiring the exporter to give declaration with
regard to technical characteristics, quality and specifications
in respect of specified inputs (which are of sensitive nature)
in the shipping bills. The objective is to establish a corelation
between the exported products and imported inputs.
(iii) A new provision has been added in para 4.28 of the
Handbook requiring the Regional Authorities of DGFT to
compare the relevant portion of Appendix 23 (consumption
and utilisation register) with that of norms allowed in the
Authorization(s) and the actual quantity imported against
the Authorization(s) and to recover customs duty along with
interest @ 15% when the Authorization holder has consumed
lesser quantity of inputs than imported.
EPCG Scheme
(i) Paragraph 5.11 of Handbook has been amended to provide
that extension of export obligation period beyond 8+2 years
can be considered for a further extension upto 2 years with
a condition that 50% of duty payable in proportion to be
unfulfilled export obligation is paid by the license holder to
the Customs authorities. Last year the Department of
Commerce (DOC) had amended this para to provide for
export obligation extension beyond 8+2 years upto 3 years
with 50% enhanced export obligation and upto 5 years with
100% enhanced export obligation to make it a total period
of 15 years for the purposes of fulfilment of export obligation
under EPCG Scheme. This provisions has now been deleted.
(ii) Paragraph 5.1 of the Policy has been modified to stipulate
that the ‘duty saved’ amount on all EPCG authorizations
issued in a licensing year for import of motor cars, sports
utility vehicles, all-purpose vehicles shall not exceed 50% of
the average foreign exchange earnings from the hotel, travel
and tourism and golf tourism sectors in the preceding 3
licensing years.
Vishesh Krishi Upaj & Gram Udyog Yojana
(i) The entitlement under the scheme has been reduced to 3.5%
(from 5%) for all products in cases where the exporter has
availed the benefits of duty exemption/duty remission
schemes under Chapter 4 of the policy and Duty Drawback.

37
(ii) The EOUs and SEZ units have been excluded from the
purview of Vishesh Krishi Upaj & Gram Udayog Yojana,
meaning thereby that these units will not be eligible for the
benefits of the scheme.
Served from India Scheme
(i) The stand-alone restaurants will be entitled to duty credit
equivalent to 10% of the foreign exchange earned by them
in the preceding financial year as against 20% allowed
earlier. (Para 3.6.4.4. of the Policy)
(ii) The imports against duty credit scrips shall relate to the
service sector business of the applicant. (Para 3.6.4.5 of the
Policy) Earlier, imports were relatable to the main line of
business.
(iii) Utilisation of duty credit earned under the scheme shall
not be permitted for payment of duty in case of import of
vehicles. (Para 3.6.4.5 of the Policy)
Other Miscellaneous Changes
(i) The provision providing for extension in export obligation
period beyond 36 months in respect of advance licence (Para
4.22.1 of Handbook) has been deleted restricting the export
obligation period to 36 months even after 12 months
extension.
(ii) The provision providing for extension in export obligation
period in respect of advance licence for annual requirement
(para 4.24A (e) read with Para 4.22 of FTP) has been deleted
from the Handbook.
(iii) The provision regarding clubbing of EPCG licence under
Para 5.18 of Handbook has been amended to make this
provision stringent.
(iv) In case the recognition for grant of One-Star Export House
or above is claimed based upon the current year’s export
performance, the same shall be considered only in case the
exporter has export performance of Rs. 15 crore or more
during any two years out of the current and preceding three
years. (new note 4 in para 3.5.2 of the Policy).
Recommendation Sl.No. 11 (Para No. 174)
With specific reference to import of luxury cars etc. which is, inter
alia permitted under the EPCG Scheme, the Committee note that of

38
the 499 vehicles imported till date, as many as 61 have been identified
to have been misused by way of ‘Third Party Transfer’ of the vehicles
in violation of the ‘Actual User Condition’. What is particularly
disturbing to note is that import licenses have been reported to have
been issued to non existent or fictitious firms. The Committee’s
examination of the issues relating to instances of misuse of Export
Promotion Schemes inter alia reveal that there is a strong element of
lack of proper co-ordination between the various agencies viz.,
Department of Revenue, DRI and DGFT. The Committee, therefore,
strongly express the need for taking stringent action against the erring
parties and also have a re-look at the mechanisms of co-ordination
between the agencies/departments with a view to curb instances of
misuse of the Schemes.
Reply of the Government
The issue concerning misuse of cars imported under the EPCG
Scheme was considered by the Committee of Secretaries (COS) in its
meeting held on 22.3.2006. The COS has recommended that the Ministry
of Commerce (MOC) would conduct a quick survey of the imports of
motor vehicles made during the last three years. Too check the misuse
of the scheme, the COS has recommended that MOC, Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highway may jointly discuss the issue and take suitable measures.
An inter-ministerial meeting was convened by MOC on 3.5.2006 to
discuss the subject. It was decided in the meeting that:
(a) V ehicles imported under the scheme should be registered
either as tourist vehicles or an appropriate registration
specific to a particular state which enables the vehicle to be
used for tourist purposes.
(b) In selective cases, the import of vehicles under the EPCG
Scheme should be randomly verified by a joint team of
DRI and DGFT.
(c) A mechanism may be institutionalised to inform the DRI
on monthly basis about the licences issued by the field
offices of DGFT for import of vehicles under the EPCG
Scheme.
(d) Regarding confirmation of installation of the imported
vehicles, the licensee should be asked to endorse a copy of
the Registration Certificate issued by the concerned Regional
Transport Authority. This copy may be given to the issuing
licensing authority as a confirmation of the vehicle having
arrived and having been registered appropriately.

39
As per information collected from DGFT, 334 licenses have been
issued in the three years for import of 499 vehicles under the EPCG
Scheme. During the same period, DRI has seized 106 vehicles on
account of misuse of the EPCG scheme for service providers.
In order to check duty evasion by means of fraudulent availment
of concessional rate of duty under the EPCG Scheme, the DGFT has
taken steps to tighten the eligibility and entitlement condition for import
of vehicles under the EPCG Scheme by way of Notification dated
17.1.2006. These steps are:
(i) The number of vehicles which can be imported by a firm
has been restricted in such a manner that the “duty saved
amount” on all such EPCG licenses issued to that firm in
a particular year shall not exceed 50% of the average foreign
exchange earnings from the hotel, travel, tourism and golf
sectors in the preceding three licensing years;
(ii) Only those service providers shall be eligible for importing
a vehicle under the EPCG Scheme which have a minimum
of Rs. 1.5 Crore foreign exchange earnings from the hotel,
travel, tourism and golf sectors only, in the current and
preceding three licensing years.
Recommendation Sl.No. 11 (Para No. 175)
As regards Central Excise duty, the Committee note that while
Pan Masala/Gutka and Iron and Steel are identified as commodities
prone to evasion, certain others, including cigaretters, polyester yarn
etc., which were earlier considered as evasions prone are no longer
perceived to be so. The Committee recommend that the reasons for
the proneness of these commodities to evasion be looked into in detail
and appropriate remedial measures taken.
Reply of the Government
The products like Pan Masala/Gutkha and Iron & Steel continue
to be in the evasion prone list since:
(a) There is very high duty incidence on Pan Masala and being
a consumer item, no CENVAT credit is being availed. Hence
the product is prone to evasion.
(b) For some of the products of Iron & Steel like those used in
construction sector, no CENVAT credit is availed. Hence
these products are prone to evasion.

40
As regards POY, after its duty restructuring, the same is not
considered to be a sensitive commodity . This is also reflected in the
lesser number of cases detected against manufacturers of Polyester
Yarn. Similarly, Cigarettes are under physical control of the Department
as per Rule 6 of Central Excise Rules, 2002. Hence these products are
no longer considered to be sensitive and evasion prone.
Further, following audit and anti-evasion measures are taken to
check and detect duty evasion in central Excise.
(i) Audit: As part of the strategy to improve the effectiveness of
EA 2000 Audit, the following measures were initiated in 2005-06:
• The services of Chartered Accountants/Cost Accountants are
being engaged for Desk review in case of audit of very
large assesses having complicated accounting systems and
voluminous transactions, such as audit of multi-location
units. The guidelines for selection of cases for Desk Review
by CAs/C&Ws have been laid down.
• The provisions of cost audit under Section 14A/14AA is
being invoked in some special cases. Sensitive commodities
such as Sponge Iron, Ingots etc have been identified for
such audit and the field formations have been directed to
carry out audit of such units.
• The filing of ER4 returns (Annual Financial Information
Statement) is closely monitored and the auditors are
encouraged to use the information therein for preparing
Audit Plans. Directorate of Audit has already circulated
guidelines for preliminary scrutiny of ER5 return (Annual
return containing details of description of the principal
inputs used in the manufacture of finished products) and
ER6 returns (monthly return containing details of receipt
and consumption of principal inputs and finished excisable
products). The Directorate is also developing a more detailed
scheme for the scrutiny of ER5 and ER6 returns so that
critical information about Input-Output ratio and its monthly
behaviour can be utilised by audit to check CENVAT
utilisation. A booklet of the SION (Standard Input Output
Norms) of 45 revenue sensitive commodities has been
circulated to all the zones. Efforts are also being made to
ascertain the wastage norms for sensitive goods. These
norms also aid in audit of the unit.

41
•T raining of the departmental personnel in financial literacy
has been organized by NACEN and its regional training
institutes.
• Physical verification of units availing the Area based
exemption has been initiated to check the claim of
substantial expansion in capacity.
(ii) Anti-evasion efforts are being intensified by way of:
•G reater attention on quality cases having large revenue
stakes and/or those having recurring effect.
• Replicating cases having distinctive features and revenue
potential.
• Strengthening the informer network.
• Developing strategic intelligence for specific units, specific
sectors and specific industries.
• Commodity-specific analysis with an anti-evasion perspective
to detect evasion by such units.
• Maximize voluntary payments during investigation.
•G reater interaction with Commissionerates, particularly in
CENVAT cases.
• Dissemination of intelligence by issue of Modus Operandi
circulars.
Recommendation Sl.No. 11 (Para No. 176)
Real estate transactions are believed to be a major area for creation
of black money. The high rate of stamp duty levied by the States is
also perceived to be a reason for resorting to undervaluation of property
transactions. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to impress
upon the State Governments to bring in a rationalized and uniform
rates of Stamp Duty on lines similar to the one that paved the way
for arriving at uniform VAT system in the States.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has emphasized the need for rationalization and
uniformity of rates of stamp duty on real estate transactions in the
manner similar to State VAT. Since it is a State subject, the matter
requires consultation with the States, with a view to evolve a consensus
on this issue. To start the process, it has been decided to place the
matter in the next meeting of the Standing Committee of State

42
Secretaries of Stamps & Registration, likely to be held shortly. Further
plan of action will be decided based on deliberations in the meeting
of the Committee.
Recommendation Sl.No. 12 (Para No. 177)
In their interim report, the Committee had, inter-alia expressed
concern on the manner in which Government cases were represented
at various judicial fora and called for overhauling the processes
involved in appointment of Government counsels. From the information
furnished, the Committee are deeply concerned to note that the success
rate of both the CBDT and CBEC in pursuing cases, particularly at the
higher levels of the judiciary does not speak well of the departments.
For instance, in the case of CBDT, 42.69% of the appeals filed in the
High Court and 77.50% of appeals filed in the Supreme Court are
informed to have been decided against the department. Similarly, the
success rate in representing cases pertaining to customs and excise
duties has only been to the extent of 23% and 28% in the Supreme
Court in the year 2003-04. These figures give credence to the opinion
often expressed that Government cases are represented in a routine
manner in the higher levels of the judiciary. The Revenue Secretary
too admitted before the Committee that there were problems at the
departmental level in enabling effective pursuance of cases, for
overcoming which, appropriate steps are said to have been taken. These,
as informed to the Committee, include, putting in place a system for
ensuring expeditious movement of data to the law officers; and
identification and selection of lawyers with proven expertise in taxation
matters for representing the Government. The Committee expect the
Government to address the problems relating to representing its cases
in various judicial fora expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
The department is taking due care for proper representation of its
cases at various judicial fora and for expeditious flow of information.
At the level of ITAT, Sr. Departmental officers of the rank of
Commissioners and Additional Commissioners are deputed to represent
while before the High Courts, Standing Counsels with proven track
record are being selected for handling the cases. Matters before the
Supreme Court are represented by Law Officers appointed by the
Government of India, including the Solicitor General and the Attorney
General. Compliance with CBDT’s norms for selection of standing
counsels is being ensured. Further, performance of counsels is also
monitored by the Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Income Tax

43
concerned specially at the time of renewal of engagement. Further, in
cases involving complex legal matters, Revenue engages the services
of Ld. Law Officers as special counsels before the High Courts. For
expeditious filling of appeals/SLPs before Supreme Court and regular
monitoring of cases and liaisioning, a Directorate of Legal and Research
has been created which is headed by an officer of the rank of Chief
Commissioner.
CBEC:
CBEC has already created a Directorate of Legal Affairs for
monitoring the Supreme Court cases on day-to-day basis. One of the
major problems relating to monitoring of the cases is the delay in
procurement of certified copies of the order of the High Court by
advocates who are required to apply for the same either on the date
of the order or within reasonable time. The same could not be
successfully reduced in spite of best efforts. As the CBEC is conducting
litigations through the counsels appointed by the Ministry of Law, a
rule to enforce timely supply of certified copies for filing appeals is
not being enforced in true spirit. Law Ministry has been advised to
instruct the counsels for timely delivery of certified copies with the
condition that non-compliance of same shall render deduction of 30%
of free to the advocates, as being enforced by the CBDT in respect of
counsels representing their cases before the High Courts. As regards
other measures such as speeding up of the communications between
both the Ministries and the advocates and also to enhance the quality
of litigations, the decisions taken in the meetings held between the
law officers and the officers of both the Ministries are being
implemented.
Recommendation Sl.No. 12 (Para No. 178)
The Committee also note from the information furnished that
though the field formations of the CBDT have been empowered to
engage special counsels to represent important cases involving complex
legal issues, similar powers have been denied to the CBEC. The
Committee expect the Government to resolve the matter expeditiously,
so as to enable the field formations of CBEC also to engage special
counsels for representing complex cases in the Tribunals, High Courts
and the Supreme Court.
Reply of the Government
The provision for engagement of Special Counsels for representing
complex cases in the Tribunals, High Courts and the Supreme Court

44
is being exercised by the CBEC. The issue which was addressed before
the Committee relates to empanelment and maintenance of a panel of
advocates for conducting the cases through the Office of the Chief
Commissioners akin to the option exercised by the CBDT for
conducting direct tax cases before the High Courts. Though a proposal
for empanelment of advocates to represent before all the High Courts
on similar lines of the panel being maintained by CBDT was addressed
in the year 2001, the Law Ministry did not concur with the proposal.
It is proposed to address the issue afresh in the light of the
recommendation of the Committee.
Recommendation Sl.No. 12 (Para No. 179)
The National Tax Tribunal (NTT) Bill has been passed by the
Parliament. The Committee desire that the Government expedite the
process of setting up of the NTT and frame the related rules.
Reply of the Government
National Tax Tribunal is administered by Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice. The comments received from that
Department in this regard are as under:
“…National Tax tribunal has been established on 06.01.2006. The
National Tax Tribunal (Salary, Allowances and other Conditions of
Service of the Officers and Employees) Rules, 2005 have been
notified on 9th January, 2006. However, it has not been made
functional in view of the court cases pending in various High
Courts. Transfer Petition has already been filed in the Supreme
Court. SLPs filed in the Hon’ble Supreme Court for annulment of
stay granted by various High Courts have been tagged to the
Transfer Petition. The matter will be taken up by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court when the Transfer Petition comes up for hearing.”
Recommendation Sl.No. 13 (Para No. 180)
The Committee, deeply concerned about the continuance of
enormous amounts of tax locked up as arrears of revenue at various
levels of the adjudication process, have been emphasizing upon the
Government to take concerted efforts to reduce such arrears. It is
observed from the data furnished by the Government that though
there has been some reduction in the arrears, there is no perceptible
difference in the total outstanding dues.

45
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
The outstanding arrears of direct taxes, which was Rs. 98,614 crore
at the beginning of 2005-06 has been reduced to Rs. 83,043 crore as on
31.1.2006. In the process of such reduction of arrears, an amount of
Rs. 5,576 crore has been collected in cash by the Government and an
amount of Rs. 11,075 crore has been liquidated on account of appeal
orders, etc. The proportion of cash collection and reduction in 2005-06
compares favourably with the historical trends.
It is mentionable that recovery from arrear of direct taxes is a
continuous process in which old demands are liquidated (by way of
collection or reduction) and new demands are added at the same time.
The amount of arrears outstanding at a particular point of time cannot
be recovered in one go as part of the arrears are contested in appeal
before the Courts and other appellate authorities. Moreover, a part of
the outstanding demand is also difficult to recover for various reasons
including non-traceability of the taxpayer, inadequacy of assets,
liquidation of company, stay granted by Courts, etc.
CBEC:
There are a total arrears of Rs. 21578 crore pending recovery as on
28.02.2006. Out of these, a sizable amount of arrears of Rs. 7533 crore
are stayed by various Courts, hence not recoverable. There are also
substantial unstayed arrears which are reportedly restrained and hence
unrecoverable owing to the following reasons:
• The defaulting units were under BIFR and hence no recovery
proceeding could be initiated.
• The assets of the defaulting units were taken over by official
liquidator.
• Arrears were not recoverable owing to the proceedings
initiated by Debt Recovery Tribunal.
• The sale proceeds of the available assets fell far short of the
arrears.
• Cases pending for COD clearance.
• Cases within appeal period.

46
The strategy action plan and comparative performance of the task
force for arrears recovery during 2004-05 and 2005-06 are as under:
Strategy
The task force has taken the following important steps for
expeditious recovery of arrears:
• Sensitization at the level of Commissioners/Chief
Commissioners by holding meeting at Nodal/Zonal levels;
• Filing applications for getting the stay orders vacated;
• Filing early hearing applications in Courts/CESTAT;
•T argeting defaulters with coercive action; and
• Persuading major units to pay outstanding arrears.
Action Plan
Various review meetings have been held and the following action
plan finalized to effectively pursue the recovery cases.
(A) Filing of applications for stay vacation/early hearing in Courts/
CESTAT.
Total arrear of Rs. 7533 crore (approx.) is locked up in various
Courts/CESTAT as stayed arrears. The field formations have been asked
to file applications for stay vacation/early hearing in all the cases,
particularly in the deserving cases. The Chief Department
Representative, CESTAT has also been requested to take up these matter
on priority basis.
(B) Follow up of cases pending in BIFR/DRT/OL/COD.
The arrears of units ending up in BIFR/DRT proceedings is another
area of concern. Efforts are being made to improve monitoring and
defence of such cases. These cases are being closely monitored, as
substantial amount of revenue is locked up.
(C) Write-off of Irrecoverable Cases of Arrears
As regards irrecoverable arrears which are being carried forward
from year to year without any fruitful realization of arrears, the field
formations have been directed to initiate action towards write-off in
those cases, where they were of the considered view that the arrears
were not recoverable for valid reason.

47
(D) Faster disposal of all adjudication cases pending at the level of
Commissioners
Considering the significant amount of revenue locked up in
adjudication cases at the level of Commissioners, Commissioners have
been directed to expedite disposal of such cases.
(E) Quick implementation of favourable orders of CESTAT/Courts.
The Task Force is closely monitoring all the cases of favourable
orders from CESTAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court. A list of
cases collectively decided in favour of Revenue, received from time to
time from the CDR, CESTAT, New Delhi are forwarded to all the
Nodal officers for effective monitoring and realization of related arrears.
(F) List of Defaulters
The list of defaulters against whom Sec. 143 notices has been issued
and the same which have not been stayed by the court, have already
been displayed on CBEC website. All Commissionerates are not only
required to keep the Directorate of Systems updated in this regard but
also browse the website in connection with recovery action at their
end.
Performance in Collection of Arrears of Revenue vis-à-vis Target
During Last Two Finance Years is as under:
(Rs. in Crore)
Tax components 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Target Realization Target Realization Target Realization
Central Excise 2250 1799.38 1682.4 1657.94 1300 —
Customs 750 843.49 717.6 600.29 650 —
Service Tax — — 300 881.42 500 —
Total 3000 2642.87 2700 3139.65 2450 —
Recommendation Sl.No. 13 (Para No. 181)
The data furnished shows that the amount of arrears of revenue
relating to the CBDT as on 1.4.2005 stands at a whopping Rs. 98,614
crores, amounting to almost three fourths of the total direct tax revenue
realized during the year 2004-05. The Committee are at a loss to find

48
that, out of this amount, only an amount of Rs. 5,486 crore is reported
to be free from any serious difficulty in enabling recovery. The
Committee expect that, at least, this amount be recovered at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
Due to various reasons as listed below, only a small portion of the
outstanding arrears could be collected immediately:—
1. The demand has been stayed by the Courts/Tribunal.
2. Demand pertains to persons notified under section 3 of
Special Court (Torts) Act, 1992 and so no recovery can be
made directly from such persons. (Demand in scam cases)
3. Assessee is not traceable and so cannot be proceeded against
for recovery or has no assets from which recovery can be
made.
4. Case is before B.I.F.R. and so recovery cannot be enforced.
5. Company is under liquidation and the claim of Revenue
would be settled as per the orders of the High Court.
6. Case is before Settlement Commission and so the income-
tax authorities can not proceed with recovery proceedings.
7. The demand is arising from protective assessment or the
Department is in appeal on similar issues in earlier years.
8. The demand has been stayed by the income-tax authorities,
as in earlier years the disputes were decided in favour of
the assessee.
9. The demand is covered by installments for tax-payments
granted by the income-tax authorities.
10. Demand is being processed for write-off as the demand has
become irrecoverable beyond doubt.
Till February 2006, an amount of Rs. 5,576 crore has already been
collected by the Government out of the arrears, a major part of which
has been collected from the net collectible demand outstanding as on
1.4.2005.
Recommendation Sl.No. 13 (Para No. 182)
The Committee also observe from the data furnished by the CBDT
that out of the total arrears pending at various levels, around 50 per cent

49
of the cases are pending at the level of Commissioner (Appeals) and
around 46 per cent at the level of the Tribunal. This, in the opinion
of the Committee, warrants effective, innovative and quick attention.
They feel that the efforts that are being made are not effective enough.
The Committee also recommend that the Government should set up a
departmental committee to study the cases, concerning specific kinds
of offences and other contraventions, that have been regularly decided
against the department by the Tribunals, High Courts and the Supreme
Court, and prevent further filing of cases of similar nature.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
It is to be mentioned that as a result of the steps taken by the
department cases locked in appeal have shown a steady decline. Before
the ITAT, the pendency has been reduced to 1,17,350 cases as on
30.11.05 from 2,42,153 cases as on 31.3.01. At the level of CsIT (Appeal),
as on 31st December 2005, only 67,642 cases were pending which is a
marked reduction from 2,70,531 cases as on 31.3.01. Further, a
Committee headed by Chief Commissioner of Income Tax was set up
to examine and suggest mechanism for further reduction of appeals at
the level of ITAT. The Committee has submitted its recommendations
and its suggestions are being examined.
As regards setting up of a committee as suggested by the Hon’ble
Standing Committee on Finance, real time gathering of information
from all field formation, their processing and analysis presents a
massive project if done manually. That is why initial steps have been
taken for setting up of a Judicial Grid. A beginning will be made with
the four major cities-Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai where CsIT
(Judicial) have been put in place. After the national networking of the
Income-Tax Department gets underway, judicial networking can be
operationalised
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 183)
So far as the CBEC are concerned, the Committee observe that
number of appeals pending at the level of Commissioner (Appeals)
has reduced over a period of time, which should be continued with
more vigour so as to drastically reduce them to reasonable levels.
However, it is noted from the data that the cases pending at the
Tribunal amount to 55 per cent of the total pending cases. The
Committee take serious note of the huge pendancy at the Tribunal
level and reiterate their earlier recommendation that special focus

50
should be given to the task of reducing the pendancy with the Tribunal
along with initiation of immediate efforts to creation of ad-hoc benches
to clear the huge backlog.
Reply of the Government
Steps have been taken to reduce the pendency of cases and
streamline procedures at the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal. The steps are as follows:
• Directions have been issued to all concerned to scrupulously
follow Section 35C of Central Excise Act, 1944 and Section
129B of the Customs Act, 1962.
• The procedure of Weekly Roster has now been replaced
with two months Rosters.
• The cause list of final hearing matters is now prepared
subject-wise in respect of 50 cases in chronological order.
As a result of the above steps, the disposal of cases has increased
from 15,429 during the complete year 2004-05 to 18,364 during
2005-06.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 184)
The Committee, taking note of the fact that ostentatious display of
wealth is done through extravagant spending of money on personal
functions like marriages and high value luxury articles, recommended
that the same has to be followed up effectively to detect concealment
of wealth and evasion of tax. However, from the data furnished by
the Government it is seen that only 75 enquiries into such spending
have been conducted from the year 2001-02 to 2003-04 which resulted
in disclosure of Rs. 43.58 crore. Further, it is also observed from the
data on searches that the number of searches in the years 2003-04 and
2004-05 have gone down by more than half of that conducted in the
year 2002-03 with the value of seizures during the years also going
down by more than fifty per cent. Reduction in the number of searches
has actually resulted in greater reduction in the value of seizures made.
The Committee do not agree with the policy of the Government of
merely reduce the number of searches. Instead, they are of the view
that the number of searches should be enhanced with added emphasis
on the quality of searches. They, therefore, recommend that the number
of searches conducted should be increased which should be of high
quality and based on solid evidences of evasion.

51
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The observations of the Committee have been noted and
communicated to the Directors General of Income Tax (Inv .) for
necessary compliance so as to increase the number of searches as well
as the quality thereof.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 185)
It is further recommended that the data obtained through the
surveys/enquiries conducted by the department on various forms of
luxurious indulgence, should be passed on to the assessing officer
within a prescribed timeframe, so as to make the effort and effective
deterrent on tax evasion.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
It has been reported by the Directors General of Income Tax
(Investigation) that the results of the surveys carried out by them in
respect of high lifestyle items have been conveyed to the jurisdictional
Chief Commissioners of Income Tax for taking appropriate action in
the cases.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 186)
The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Government
that the demands raised and the corresponding realisation have been
increasing by a huge percentage even though the number of scrutiny
of tax returns has been maintained at 2 per cent. Leaving a large
percentage of tax returns left unassessed, may prompt the assesses to
take a calculated risk in concealing their actual income. Hence, a need
arises to ensure a fair percentage of assessment with a view to, on the
one hand, increase the detection of evasion, and on the other hand, to
act as a deterrent to reduce such risk taking by those who file their
tax returns. In view of the above as well as the large scale
computerization of various aspects of tax administration and the
resultant efficient functioning of the department, the Committee
recommend that the percentage of scrutiny should be raised suitably.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
Although the overall percentage of cases selected for scrutiny has
remained below 2%, in absolute terms there has been steady increase

52
in the number of cases selected for scrutiny every year. Figures of
cases scrutinized in the last few years are as under:
Sl. No. Financial Year No. of Cases Scrutinized
1. 2001-02 168010
2. 2002-03 172410
3. 2003-04 197390
4. 2004-05 210866
In view of the recommendation of the Committee, the issue of
increasing the ceiling of 2% will be considered.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 187)
Further, in order to avoid the practice of the assessing officer
making arbitrary additions in the returns filed without having material
evidence, the Committee suggest creation of a mechanism to fix
responsibility and accountability on the assessing officers for making
such false additions.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The existing mechanism for checking arbitrary additions is in the
form of audit (internal and revenue), inspection and provision for
appeal. It does not appear necessary to create additional mechanism
in this regard.

53
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 169-170)
The Committee are concerned about the reported evasion of tax
by persons involved in non-agricultural activities in rural areas. The
representatives of the Government too have agreed during submissions
to the Committee that income from non-agricultural activities like
money lending, trading in agricultural produce etc. was often passed
of as agricultural income. The Committee are of the opinion that
activities like private money lending need to be discouraged by stronger
measures. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government to
look into the matter and have a focused survey to identify such evaders
and take appropriate action. This, the Committee feel, could be done
in coordination with the State Governments.
With specific reference to persons having income from both
agricultural and non-agricultural sources, the Committee are of the
opinion that, perhaps, the time has come for the Government to
seriously consider fixing, in consultation with the State Governments,
a threshold limit beyond which, the income of such persons from
agricultural sources could be brought under the tax net.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
Taxation of agricultural income is within the purview of the State
Governments and outside the purview of the Union Government.
However, agricultural income is included in the total income for rate
purposes. In order to empower the Union Government to impose
income-tax on agriculture, ‘taxes on agricultural income’ will have to
be taken out of the State list through a constitutional amendment.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 188)
The Committee observe that huge amounts are being sanctioned
as interest on refunds every year and the same are not treated by the

54
Government as an expenditure but as reduction in revenue. This
procedure of making adjustments to circumvent the need for approval
of Parliament to expenditure on interest element is neither correct nor
healthy, as it allows for complicity between tax officials and assesses.
The Committee are not in agreement with the Government’s contention
that it is not possible to estimate the refund amount for a year in
advance and obtain budgetary sanctions accordingly. In a related matter,
the Committee note that budgetary provisions are made for
compensation for the loss that may accrue to State Governments in
implementing State level VAT, which is similar in nature. Further, the
Committee feel that provisioning for the interest paid on refunds in
the Demands for Grants will be in the interest of better Parliamentary
scrutiny of the Demands of the Government. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that the Government should take up the matter by keeping
the above concerns of the Committee in view. Further, they desire that
complete details of interest paid on refunds involving interest amount
of Rupees one lakh and above, inter-alia furnishing names of
individual/corporate assesses along with the amount of interest paid
to each one of them, during the preceding three financial years
(year-wise) be furnished to them.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
It is not correct to treat ‘interest on refund’ as other revenue
expenditure items of the Government as interest on refund is
mandatory and compensatory in nature and so cannot be made
conditional upon availability of financial sanctions. It is not an
expenditure in true sense as the excess of tax paid by the taxpayers
is used by the Government and so the interest paid to the taxpayers
by the Government is only a compensation for depriving the taxpayers
of their money for the period of time it was held by the Government
as taxes. It may be appreciated that when the principal amount of
refund is not an expenditure, how is that the interest paid on refunds,
which only compensates the taxpayer for the loss in the real value of
the principal amount can be treated as an expenditure.
As regards the comparison made with the budgetary provisions
made for compensation given to the States, it is submitted that such
provision is a one-time provision made to encourage and assist the
States in implementation of VAT. Such compensation is in the nature
of expenditure as V AT is a State tax and the Centre has no share in
the proceeds of VAT. Moreover, the liability of such compensation for

55
the Centre is only a contingent liability accruing only if there is a loss
of revenue to the States on implementation of VAT. No parallels can
be drawn between such a provision for a contingent and one-time
liability and a provision for interest on refunds, which is an outgo of
firm and regular nature.
The information relating to the consolidated payment of interest in
last three financial years is given below:
Finance Year Amount of Interest on Refund Paid
(in Rs. crore)
2004-05 3,865
2003-04 4,701
2002-03 6,268
Case-wise and slab-wise details of interest paid on refunds are not
feasible to be provided, as the same are not maintained.
CBEC
The information required has been called for from the field
formations and the same will be submitted shortly.

56
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation Sl.No. 6 (Para No. 163)
It is seen from the data furnished by the Government that the
number of electronic TDS returns received from the Corporates has
gone down in the year 2004-05. This is in spite of the increase registered
in the number of transactions that are covered under the scheme over
the years. This being indicative of lower compliance with the provisions
of electronic filing of TDS returns, the Committee want the Government
to probe into the matter and furnish a note on the issue at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
For the tax deducted during F.Y. 2004-2005, 2,86,148 annual e-TDS
returns have been filed by corporate deductors as against 2,38,350 for
the F.Y. 2003-2004. Therefore it is not correct that number of e-TDS
returns has gone down. However, a regular procedure for identifying
non-filers, sending reminders to them, and initiating penalty
proceedings in appropriate cases is being initiated.
Recommendation Sl.No. 6 (Para No. 164)
An issue brought to the notice of the Committee is the duplication
of the work of furnishing of TDS returns, whereby, the assessees, apart
from filing quarterly TDS returns, are also asked to furnish separate
information on TDS amounts and other details. With the extensive
computerisation of the tax departments, the Committee feel that efforts
should be made to do away with such requirements, and the returns
filed electronically should be made available to the tax officials.
Reply of the Government
CBDT:
There is no requirement to file information twice by deductors.
No deductor is required to file any information on TDS amounts or

57
other particulars to TIN other than quarterly TDS returns. The TDS
returns filed with TIN are accessible to TDS Assessing Officers on
network which is presently available in 60 cities and is being expanded
to the remaining 450 cities.
Recommendation Sl.No. 8 (Para No. 167)
The Committee observe that the contribution of the service sector
to the tax revenues is disproportionate to the contribution of this sector
to the country’s GDP . While the service sector contributes to more
than 50% of the GDP , the tax revenue generated from the sector has
ranged between 3.1% and 4.6% of the Gross Tax Revenues from
2003-04. While the service sector has to be encouraged for its
contribution to the economy as well as the society at large, other
sectors of the economy too need to be given an equal amount of
encouragement. The unanimous view expressed before the Committee
is that the time has come to bring all the services barring the basic
and essential ones in the tax net. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation that all the services, barring the essential
or basic ones, should be brought under the tax net in one go. With
the facility of availing CENVAT credit paid on the manufactured input
utilised in a service and vice-versa, the comprehensive extension of tax
on all services, though may be difficult, may not be an impossible tax
to achieve.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
In the budget for 2006-07, considerable widening of service tax
base has been undertaken. 15 services have been specifically included
in the list of taxable services and in respect of 26 services, the scope
has been expanded. With the proposed amendments, total number of
taxable service is 99.
Recommendation Sl.No. 8 (Para No. 168)
The Committee also express the need for coming out with a
separate legislation for service tax, with clear definition of what
constitutes the service component so as to avoid possible disputes
between the Centre and State tax authorities and prevent double
taxation of the same instance under State VAT as well as Service Tax.

58
Reply of the Government
CBEC
Taxable services are specifically defined. Generally goods and
services are mutually exclusive. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid
down clear principles to distinguish between sale of goods and supply
of services. Discussions with the States regarding collection of Service
tax on certain services and sharing of the service tax collection are in
progress.
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are in accordance
with the objectives of widening of tax base and have been duly taken
note of.

59
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
24 November, 2006 Chairman,
3 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

60
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Friday, 27th October, 2006 from 1030 to
1145 hrs. and 1200 to 1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Vijoy Krishan
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Shri A.R. Shaheen
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Shri Mahendra Mohan
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

61
Part I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **
Part II
(1200 to 1230 hrs.)
5. The Committee took up for consideration the draft reports on
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the 33rd Report on “Widening of Tax Base and Evasion of Tax”,
and (ii) Introduction of new Income Tax Return Forms. The Committee
after deliberation, adopted the reports with the modifications/
amendments shown in Annexure-I and Annexure-II  respectively.
6. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the reports
in the light of the amendments/suggestions made by the Members
and also to make consequential verbal changes and present the same
to Hon’ble Speaker/both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

62
ANNEXURE I
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 33RD REPORT
ON ‘WIDENING OF TAX BASE AND EVASION OF TAX’
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 27 OCTOBER, 2006]
Page No. 2
After Para No. 3
Insert New Para ‘The Committee also desire that going by the
thrust and tenor of the recommendations, the
Government gives focused attention on
centering the long term tax policy on
broadening of the tax base and checking
evasion of tax.’
Para No. 6
Para No. 11
Line 8
For the Committee would like to emphasise that
it was only after being convinced of the need
and desirability of transiting from selective
taxation of services to general taxation of all
services, baring the essential ones, that the
Committee had recommended for the same.
Read It was only after being convinced of the need
and desirability of transiting from selective
taxation of services to general taxation of all
services, baring the essential ones, that the
Committee had recommended for the same.
Page No. 6
Para No. 11
Line 3 from below
For “…comprehensive coverage of all services in
the tax net with specific exceptions, which
would be in the interest of the revenue.”

63
Read “…comprehensive coverage of all services in
the tax net by specifically exempting basic or
essential ones, which would be in the interest
of the revenue.”

64
APPENDIX
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-THIRD
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT ‘WIDENING
OF TAX BASE AND EVASION OF TAX’
Total   % of
total
(i) Total number of recommendations 16
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 12 75%
have been accepted by the Government
[Vide Recommendation Nos. 1 (Para
Nos. 148-150), 2. (Para Nos. 151-154),
3. (Para Nos. 155-159), 4. (Para No. 160),
5. (Para Nos. 161-162), 7. (Para Nos.
165-166), 10. (Para No. 171), 11. (Para
Nos. 172-176), 12. (Para Nos. 177-179),
13. (Para Nos. 180-183), 14. (Para Nos.
184-185) & 15. (Para Nos. 186-187)]
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which 2 12.50%
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies
[Vide Recommendation Nos. 9.
(Para Nos. 169-170) & 16. (Para No. 188)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 2 12.50%
of which the replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendation Nos. 6. (Para
Nos. 163-164) & 8. (Para Nos. 167-168)
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect 0 00.00%
of which the final replies of the
Government is still awaited
(Nil)