5 
         
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 (2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
(2004-2005) 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
                                         
                                               
                                                                                                            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20  August, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004. 
August, 2004/Sravana, 1926(Saka)

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
           
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
REPORT 
 
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 
 
COMPANY LAW BOARD       
 
SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE  
 
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
 
INSPECTION OF COMPANIES 
 
FOREIGN TRAVEL EXPENSES 
 
PUBLICATIONS  
   
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON    
   12 August,  2004  
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
   19 August,  2004.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
                              MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.R. Antulay 
3. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
6. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
7. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
8. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
9. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
10. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
11. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
12. Shri Rupchand Pal 
13. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
14. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
15. Shri K.S. Rao 
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
17. Shri Lakshman Seth 
18. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
19. Shri Ajit Singh 
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
21. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri P.D.T. Achary - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. S andhu  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
     4.    Shri R.K.  Kakkar  - Under Secretary  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Repor t on their behalf, present this  Fifth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Company Affairs. 
2.   The Demands for Grants of the Minist ry of Company Affairs were laid on the 
Table of the House on 23 July, 2004. Under Ru le 331E of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the St anding Committee on Finance are required to 
consider the Demands for Grants of the Mini stries/Departments under their jurisdiction 
and make Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
3.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs at their sitting held on 12 August, 2004 in connection with examination 
of the Demands for Grants (2004-2005).  
 4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held 
on 19 August, 2004. 
5.   The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs for the co-operation extended by them in furnishing written replies and 
for placing their considered views and perceptions before the Committee. 
6.  For facility of reference, the ob servations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     MAJ. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                          Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

REPORT 
INTRODUCTORY 
The Ministry of Company Affairs is responsible for administration of the following Acts:- 
i) The Companies Act, 1956 
ii) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, 1969 
iii) The Competition Act, 2002 
iv) The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 
v) The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 
vi) The Company Secretaries Act, 1980 
vii) The Partnership Act, 1932 
viii) The Societies Registration Act, 1860 
ix) The Companies (Donation to National Fund) Act, 1951 
 
The Ministry has a three tier organizatio nal set-up namely the Secretariat at New 
Delhi, the Regional Di rectorates at Mumbai, Kolkata,  Chennai and Kanpur, offices of 
Registrars of Companies in States and Un ion Territories and Official Liquidators, 
attached to the High Courts. 
The Regional Directors in-charge of t he respective Regional Directorates 
supervise the working of the Offices of Registrars of Companies and Official 
Liquidators working in their re spective jurisdiction. They also maintain liaison with the 
respective State Governments and the Central Governments in matters relating to the 
administration of the Companies Act. 
2.  The overall Demands for Grants pertain ing to the Ministry of Company Affairs 
is as follows:- 
Voted 
Demand No. 17 – Ministry of Company Affairs 57.50 crore 
3.  The Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Company Affairs were laid 
in Parliament on 23rd July, 2004 
4.  In the present Report, the Committee have examined following issues:- 
i) Comprehensive Review of the Companies Act, 1956 
ii) Company Law Board – Functioning of Regional Benches 
iii) Serious Fraud Investigation  
iv) Competition Commission of India 
v) Inspection of Companies 
vi) Detailed Demands for Grants – Foreign Travel Expenses 
vii) Detailed Demands for Grants – Publications 
 
 
 

Comprehensive review of the Companies Act, 1956 
 
5. Subsequent to the amendments to  the Companies Act, 1956 brought 
about during the period 1999-2002 and to enable a comprehensive review of the 
Companies Act, 1956, the Companies (Amendm ent) Bill, 2003 was introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha on 7.5.2003. Thereafte r, in order to enable the ch anges in the institutional 
structure for implementation of the Companies Act, 1956 ushered in through the 
amendments viz. the Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002 an d the Competition 
Act, 2002 to be fully reflected in the Companies Act it was decided to take a further 
comprehensive review of the legislati on along with broad based consultations with 
concerned stake holders.  
6. Asked as to whether Comprehensiv e review of the Companies Act, 1956 
would cover the aspects relating to the ov er regulation and overlapping powers of the 
DCA, SEBI and Stock Exc hange in day-to-day affairs of a company and 
recommendations made by Naresh Chandra Committee on independent directors etc., 
the Ministry of Company Affairs in a written reply stated as follows: 
“The Government have taken up an exerci se for developing a Concept Paper for 
comprehensive overhaul of the Companies Act, 1956. The objective is to evolve a 
legislation amenable to easy interpretation and providing flexibility to address the 
evolving requirements of t he corporate sector and the stakeholders. The paper 
would be widely disseminated  soliciting opinions of  various stakeholders, 
professionals, investing public and others.” 
 
7. During the oral evidence, the Secr etary of the Ministry of Company 
Affairs has, elaborated further,:- 
“In 1957, there were only 29, 000 companies with a paid-up capital of Rs. 72 
crores. In fact, the number of non-Go vernment companies continued to 
decline upto 1970 when their numbers stood at 28,000 with a paid-up capital 
of Rs. 2200 crores. In the decade starting from 1980, there has been 14 
percent annual growth of the companies with much more rapid growth in the 
paid-up capital. The position as on 2002 is  that there were nearly 6 lakh 
companies in non-Government sector with a paid-up capital of about Rs. 
400,000 crore and Government companies  standing at 1261 with a paid-up 

capital of Rs. 1.1 thousand crores. In such a scenario, the structures which 
were set up and which did not bring about any meaningful technology inputs 
continue to progressively get strai ned  In such a scenario, scrutiny, 
inspection, investigation, etc, became less than optimal. Piecemeal legislative 
responses to emerging scenarios have been brought in with as many as 24 
amendments with decreasing satisfacti on of implementation and somewhat 
resigning to the state of affairs and an  unhealthy equilibrium of not expecting 
much from the system is visible. The situation urgently calls for complete 
overhaul of almost everything.  A silver-lining is that thanks to the ever-vigilant 
Parliament and its Members, stakeholder s and spread of greater awareness 
steps have been initiated in this direction. Such st eps are revamping of the 
existing law on zero based approach; bringing IT tools in management, 
retraining of the existing man power and providing for structures reducing 
delays in areas where time and speed seems to have lost sense.” 
He has inter-alia added :- 
“…the recent concept paper proposing to  revamp the existing Companies Act 
altogether is another attempt of the Mi nistry with a view to bringing about 
legislations in consultation with all the stakeholders well in advance with a 
view to introducing flexibility, easy interpretation and redefining better 
corporate governance provisions.” 
8.     He went on to add further :- 
“For supporting the endeavour s of the Ministry, the Ministry has not only 
the mechanism of making consultati on with the stakeholders but also has 
the support of three autonomous professional institutions such as Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Company Secretaries of 
India, Institute of Cost and Wor ks Accountants of India who perform 
yeomen service by providing various accounting standards, audit 
standards, cost audit norms and also secretarial audit. Their inputs have 
led to many meaningful amendments in t he past and it is ex pected that we 
would receive not only their comment s on the concept paper but also 
corresponding standards for giving meani ng to the proposed provisions in 
the concept parper.”  

 
9. The Committee take note of the f act that till now the Companies Act 
was being amended in a piecemeal manner and to meet the requirements at a 
given point of time. Since the commencem ent of the Act in 1956, it has been 
amended 24 times. They recall their earlie r recommendation made in their Report 
on Demands for Grants pertaining to Depa rtment of Company Affairs in 2003-04 
wherein the Government was asked to m ake comprehensive overhaul of the 
existing Act. 
10. The Committee do appreciate the endeavour of the Government to 
take up the exercise for developing the concept paper for comprehensive 
overhaul of the Companies Act, 1956. They are given to understand that the said 
concept paper has been circulated to all the interested parties e.g. corporates, 
regulatory bodies, stakeholders and aut onomous professional institutions. They 
want that adequate publicity may also be made through print and electronic 
media so that public at large may also  involve themselves in the exercise and 
make suggestions. The Committee expect th at the exercise would be completed 
in a fixed time and Government will come forward with a new look Companies Bill 
which meets the requirements of all concerned without any delay.  
 

Company Law Board 
 
11. The Company Law Boar d has been functioning as an independent quasi-
judicial body w.e.f. 31.5.1991 set up by the Central Government under Section 10 E of 
the Companies Act, 1956.  The procedure followed for filing the applications /petitions 
before the Company Law Boar d is as prescribed in  the Company Law Board 
Regulations, 1991. The Central Government  has prescribed the fees for making 
applications/petitions befor e the Company Law Board (fees on applications and 
petitions) Rules 1991.   
The  Board has a sanctioned strength of nine members.  The Constitution of 
Company Law Board as on 31st March, 2004 is as follows: 
1. Shri S. Balasubramaniam, Officiating as Chairman 
2. Shri K.K. Balu, Member (Southern Bench) 
3. Shri K.C. Ganjwal, Member (Nothern Bench) 
 
12. The Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002, envisages the 
establishment of NCLT and NCLAT follo wing which the functions of CLB will be 
transferred to the NCLT/NCLAT which is yet to be constiuted. 
Further, the Ministry has informed that petit ions are pending at various stages of 
hearings before the Benches.  It is not feasible  to furnish the details of the same stating 
that the stages keep varying momentarily. As against 9 members  senctioned for CLB, 
including Chairman and Vice Chairman  Mem ber. Presently there are only 3 members 
including the acting Chairman and  no member is in position in Mumbai and Kolkata.  
These Benches are managed by other Members. 
13.    As per information available in t he reply furnished to the Committee, it is 
found that the pendency of petitions/applications as on 31.3.2004 is as follows:- 
Composition of 
Bench and Section 
Opening 
Balance 
Receipts  Total Disposed of Pending 
Single Member 
Bench 
6886 7447 14333 12664 1669 
Double Member 
Bench 
117 101 218 52 166 
Principal Bench 282 479 761 115 346 
Total 7285 8027 15312 12831 2181 

14.    When the Committee desired to know  the reasons of pending cases before 
single, double and principal bench of CLB, the Secretar y of the Ministry of Company 
Affairs has stated as under:- 
“If you see the overall return, the pendency is going down. 
Actually pendency will depend upon the number of cases which are being 
filed.” 
The Secretary also informed :-  
“disposal of cases is more in com parison to the filing of new cases. 
Pendency is gradually going down as rate of disposal is going up and filing 
of new cases is less.” 
When the Committee desired to know what  steps could be taken for a speedy 
disposal of cases, the Secretary informed that the concern of the Committee would be 
conveyed to the CLB. 

15.  The Committee note with  serious concern that  affairs of the Company 
Law Board (CLB) are being managed by  only 3 members as against the 
sanctioned strength of 9 members. They are dismayed at the apathetic attitude of 
the Government with regard to Comp any Law Board othe rwise such a body 
would not have been allowed to functi on with  one third of the sanctioned 
strength. This affects the disposal of petitions substantively. They deplore the 
sorry state of affairs. They are given to understand that functions of Company 
Law Board will be transferred to th e newly created National Company Law 
Tribunal (NCLT) which is not functional at present due to stay granted by High 
Court . Till the stay is vacated and NCLT made fully  operational, the Government 
should take steps to fill the vacant posts in the Company Law Board. 

 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
 
16.   The Government in the backdrop of  major failure of non-banking financial 
institutions, phenomenon of vani shing companies, plantation companies and the recent 
stock market scam had decided to set up Se rious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO), a 
multidisciplinary organization to investigate financial frauds. The Organisation has been 
established and it has started functioning since 1st October, 2003. 
       17.   The SFIO which is a multi- disciplinary organisation comprises of experts 
drawn from different fields. The head of t he organisation is the Director, SFIO. To 
advise and assist him, there are a number of Addl. Directors/Joint Directors coming 
mainly from the following fields of specailisation. 
 
i) Company Law, Chartered account ants/company secretaries with 
experience in corporate management; 
ii) Taxation; 
iii) Investigation/Criminal Investigation/prosecution in  the areas of economic 
offences; 
iv)  Information technology, with ability to conduct IT audits (computer 
forensics); 
v) Forensic auditing; 
vi) Capital markets, with experience in  regulation of capital markets and 
internal financing 
vii) Banking.  
Each Addl. Director/Joint Director will be assisted by a team of Assistant 
Directors, who also have been drawn from different specialisations. 
The investigations by the SFIO will be  conducted by the teams consisting 
of the above experts. 
18.   During the oral evidence, the Secretary of the Ministry of Company Affairs in 
response to the query on the functions of SFIO and justification for allocation in 
Demands for Grants for SFIO informed as under:- 
“This office was set up as a sequel  to the recommendation of the JPC, on 
the lines of Serious Fraud Office of Brit ain. This Institution came into being 

in October 2003. Director, SFIO is heading this institution. He is assisted by 
a multi disciplinary team. It is totally officer-oriented office, in which officers 
of income tax, bank, police, and inve stigative agencies are put together. 
They are referred certain cases where la rger public interest is involved and 
issue of manipulation of money is in volved. Since October 2003, they have 
been referred to six such cases on sele ctive basis. There is section 235 
which gives powers to the Government to order investigations into these 
cases. 
The Secretary of the Ministry of Company Affairs added:- 
“SFIO is a small, compact, multi-discip linary team which has got together to 
do investigation and they are getting powers from the Government under 
the Companies Act. This budget which was given to them was towards 
locating their officers and for salaries and travel costs etc.” 
19.    As regards the status of cases referre d to this organization it was informed 
that five cases were referred by Department  of Company Affairs for investigation.  
Investigation in one case has been completed and the repor t has been submitted in the 
month of February 2004.  In remaining 4 cases, Interim Stay has been granted by the 
respective High Courts.  One more case ha s recently been referred to this office for 
investigation.   
20.  The Committee asked about the e fforts made by the Government for 
vacation of stay orders, the Ministry in their reply stated that they are pursuing the cases 
for vacation of stay granted by the Hon’ble High Courts. 
Asked whether the investigation order to SFIO or action of SFIO has been stayed 
by the Court, the Secretary of  the Ministry of Company Affairs informed the Committee 
as under:- 
“The order of investigation given by the Ministry under Section 235 of the 
Companies Act was challenged in the High Court and the hon. High Court stayed the 
operation of that order.” 
The Secretary has inter-alia stated that “W e have filed out rejoinders to this and 
the cases are under progress in the High Court.” 
       21.   The Committee desired to know  the action taken on the report submitted by 
the SFIO, the Ministry has stat ed in a written reply that  an Expert Committee has been 

constituted for examination of the report s ubmitted by SFIO. The said report is under 
examination of the Committee.   
It has inter alia stated that in the enquiry report submitted by the SFIO, some 
suggestions have been made on improving the system, laws and procedures. These 
recommendations will be processed after report of the Expert Committee is available.  
22.  To a specific query on whether  any time limit has been fixed for 
investigation, the Ministry has replied that in the following five cases no time limit as 
such was prescribed for investigation :- 
 
1. Daewoo Motors India Ltd. 
2. DSQ Software Ltd. 
3. Design Auto Systems  
4. Bonanza Biotech Ltd. 
5. Ispat Industries Ltd. 
 
 However, in the case of M/s Vatsa Corporation Ltd . six months time has been 
given for the investigation.   
Presently, Vatsa Corporation is under investigation. Th is corporation started with 
a very small share capital and ultimately went up to a paid up capital of around Rs. 
5000 crore with an authorized capital of Rs. 50, 000 crore. The magnitude of growth of 
corporation and issues concerning investors’ interests have led to investigation through 
SFIO. 
23.   Supplementing the query during oral evidence regarding follow up action on 
cases referred to SFIO and stayed by Courts, t he Ministry has in a written reply stated 
as under:- 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
company 
Case 
referred to 
SFIO on 
SFIO 
started 
investigation 
on 
Date of 
High Court 
order 
granting 
interim 
stay 
Date of 
Certified 
copy 
served on 
Ministry 
Affidavit in 
opposition 
finalized by 
Ministry 
Last 
hearing 
date 
Next date 
of hearing 
1 DSQ 
Software 
Ltd; 
Chennai 
23.10.2003 30.10.2003 20.11.2003 23.12.2003 In June 
2004. 
Additional 
counter 
affidavit on 
02.04.2004 
19.07.2004 Four weeks 
from  
19.07.2004 
2&3 Design 
Auto 
Systems 
Ltd 
Pithampur 
(M.P.) & 
16.12.2003 19.12.2003 15.01.2004 20.01.2004 20.04.2004 06.08.2004 18.08.2004 

Bonanza 
Biotech 
Ltd; 
Indore 
4 Ispat 
Industries 
Ltd; 
Kolkata 
13.02.2004 1902.2004 27.02.2004 27.02.2004 13.03.2004 
 
28.06.2004 10 weeks 
from 
28.06.2004 
 
 

  
24.  The Committee note that Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) was 
set up recently in October, 2003. So far till date only six case s have been referred 
to the SFIO and it has been able to complete its investigation only in one case, 
while another case is still under investigation and in the case of another four 
cases stay has been granted by the Hon’ ble High Court. The Committee have 
been apprised that in the Enquiry Re port submitted by SFIO some suggestions 
have been made on improving the system , law and procedure etc. and these 
recommendations are being looked into by the Expert Committee and the action 
on the recommendations will be taken after the report is made available by this 
Committee. The Committee desire that Government should take necessary action 
with regard to getting the stay orders vacated and also take expeditious action on 
the report submitted by the Expert Committee. 
 
 

DEMAND NO. 17  
Ministry of Company Affairs 
Major Head: Competition Commission of India 
Head Code : 56 
25.  This head caters to the Compet ition Act which provides for the 
establishment of a Competition Commission of  India. The Competition Commission of 
India has accordingly been established on  14 October, 2003. Subsequent to a writ 
petition challenging certain aspects of the constitution of  the Competition Commission 
of India, the matter is sub judice in the Supreme Court of India. 
                               (In thousand Rs.) 
B.E. R.E. Actual Year 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
2003-2004  45,40  15600   
2004-2005 0 0     
 
26.  When asked during the oral evidence,  about why there is no provision for 
allocation for Competition Commission of India which is envisaged to get 
operationalised in the near future, the repr esentative of the Mi nistry of Company 
Affairs has stated as under:- 
“As far as the Competition Commission of India is concerned, there is a Grant-
in-aid Head in the Demands for Grants. Actually, the Competition Commission of India 
being an autonomous institution, the allo cation may be made as a grant from the 
finance, so Rs. 5 crore is included in as Grant-in-aid.” 
27.  Whereas there are ‘nil’ budgetary provisions for CCI, Rs. 28300 thousands 
has been sought as budgetary allocation 2004-05 for Nati onal Company La w Tribunal 
under non-plan which has not yet been fully operational. 
28.  In reply to a specific query about ti me limit fixed for th e expeditious setting 
up of NCLT, the Ministry in a written reply has stated as under:- 
“The Government had initiated steps to set up the NCLT expeditiously. 
However, in a writ petition filed in the Madras High Court, the Hon’ble Court has 
ruled that certain provisions of Co mpanies (Second Amendment) Act 2002 
should be reviewed, failing which the NC LT shall be unconstitutional.  The 
Government has preferred an SLP in the Supreme Court which has been 
admitted and the matter is sub-judice.  The establishment and constitution of 

NCLT is, therefore, subject to the outcome of the ca se pending before Hon’ble 
Supreme Court.” 

 
29.   The Committee are surprised to note that ‘nil’ budgetary allocation has 
been sought in favour of  the Comp etition Commission of India. Whereas the 
Government has sought Rs. 28300 thousands for National Company Law 
Tribunal, the operation of both these orga nizations has been stayed by the 
Courts.  
30. They are not convinced  by the Government’s reply in regard to 
allocations for Competition Commission of India. They are of the opinion that ‘nil’ 
allocation gives an impression as if the government does not intend to make the 
organization functional in the near future. They, therefore, want that in order to 
ward off such an impression the Gover nment should make at least notional 
provision in such cases. 
 

INSPECTION OF COMPANIES 
 
31.   Section 209A of the Companies Ac t empowers the Registrar of Companies 
and other Officers of the Central Governm ent to inspect the books of accounts and 
other records of the Companies. 
During the last four years,  inspection of books of a ccounts and other records of 
companies under Section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956 was conducted as under:- 
 
             Year No. of Inspections conducted 
2000-2001 221 
2001-2002 244 
2002-2003 150 
2003-2004 109 
 
32.  Asked to furnish the total number of existing companies, the representative 
of the Ministry of Company Affairs has stat ed that there are about  6,52,000 companies 
as on June, 2004.  
33.  Asked about the adequacy of the exis ting staff strength in the inspection 
wing of the Ministry and the steps taken in this regard, the Ministry has stated 
“At present a few posts are vacant in  the inspection wing,  steps are being 
taken to fill up these vacancies and further to augm ent the overall 
sanctioned strength in the Indian Company Law Service, the Ministry has 
constituted an internal committee for the Cadre Review of the Indian 
Company Law Service. 
34.  As regards outsourcing of routi ne inspection under Section 209A of the 
Companies Act, 1956 the Government has set up an Expert Group under the 
convenorship of Shri Shardul Shroff to ex amine, inter-alia, making inspections under 
Section 209A of the Compani es Act, 1956 more effective, including the possibility of 
inducting professionals.  The final report of the Group is yet to be received by the 
Government. 
35.  Supplementing the query raised during the oral evid ence, the Ministry in a 
written reply has stated as under:- 

“The expert group has finalized its draft repor t after a series of meetings. Shri 
Shardul Shroff has been requested to give the final report urgently and the same 
is expected to be received in about one months time. 
In addition, the following is the strategy for augmenting the inspection wing: 
(i) When in about 15 months time, the computerization programme is 
completed, it is anticipated that some surplus officers would join 
inspection wing, which would increase its activities significantly as the 
inspection would become the primary programme of the Ministry’s field 
organization. 
(ii) An internal committee on cadre re view has already been constituted. 
Action has been taken for ascertaining the views of cadre officers and 
2 meetings have already been held by  the committee. The internal 
committee would finalise their repor t soon and thereafter the Ministry 
will be able to undertake inter-Mini sterial consultations with an 
endeavour to complete the process of cadre review within the current 
financial year. 
(iii) Officers have been put on training in  batches with prem ier institutions 
with twin objectives of improving the quality of the inspection and 
expectation of better prosecution results. 
(iv) Legislative mechanism is proposed to be brought in through revamping 
present Companies Act for facilitati ng speedier inspection. Action in 
this regard is already initiated by placing Concept Paper in the 
Ministry’s website for eliciting stakeholders’ opinion.” 
36.  Asked as to whether all the inspec tions were done which were supposed to 
be done as a result of Stock Market Scam 2001, and the capacity of existing 
mechanism to undertake more inspections, t he Secretary of the Mi nistry of Company 
Affairs during oral evidence stated as under:- 
“I would just address the concern expressed by hon. Me mber that the 
number of inspections have come down.  It is a fact that 96 inspections 
were ordered by the MOCA on the basis of inspection report of SEBI on the 
scam enquired into by JPC and they hav e been completed. After doing the 
supplementary inspection during 2003-04  as we were in a hurry to 

complete all those 96 cases in whic h more time than  normal inspection 
takes.  We had to respond to the JPC and complete that task.” 
37.  Asked to furnish the major deficiencies noticed during these inspections and 
the follow up action taken by Ministry of  Company Affairs against the defaulting 
companies, the Ministry in their written reply has stated as under:- 
“During the course of inspection, violation of various provisions of the 
Companies Act were detected such as 211 read with Sch VI, 58A, 205/207, 
383A, 370/372/372A, 269, 295, 297, 62 8 etc for which necessary 
prosecutions have been ordered/launched against the companies and their 
directors/officers in default.” 

38.  The Committee note with serious concern that the number of 
inspections are coming down year afte r year.  The Government has accounted 
for less inspections during 2003-04 which is  miniscule when compared to the 
number of Companies as on date. At present, there are 6,52,000 companies 
operating in the country. As such not even 1% of the companies are being 
inspected. They are of the view that su ch a casual approach of the Government 
towards inspections has made the mockery of the system. The earlier 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard have not been taken seriously 
by the Government. They are given to understand that the Government does not 
have adequate staff to carry on such a stupendous task and a cadre review 
exercise is being carried out in the Mi nistry which will, on implementation 
augment the staff of inspection wing. Th ey also express their satisfaction that 
the expert Committee (Shardul Shroff Committee) on outsourcing the routine 
inspections under Section 209A has finalized its report which is yet to be 
submitted to the Government. They exp ect that both the reports viz. Cadre 
Review and Shardul Shroff Committee will be expedited and implemented by the 
Government as early as possible.  
 

Demand No. 17 
Ministry of Company Affairs 
Major Head : Foreign Travel Expenses 
Head Code : 05.03.12 
 
39.  This head covers all expenses on a ccount of travel on duty outside India 
including deputation of Scientists abroad.  This also include the expenditure on TA/DA to 
non-official members going on t our abroad.  The Budgetary Estimates, Revised Estimates 
and Actuals are given below: 
 
(In thousands of Rs.) 
B.E. RE Actual Year 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
2001-2002 - 8,00 - 8,00 - 4,73 
2002-2003 - 8,00 - 28,00 - 22,30 
2003-2004 - 8,00 - 24,00  2202 
2004-2005 - 29,00     
 
 
40.   While responding to the observati ons of the Committee from the above 
given data  to explain the r easons for steep rise in alloca tions at RE stage during 2002-
2003 and 2003-2004 of the Ministry in their written replies has stated that :- 
“Important developments are taking place at the International level in areas 
such as Corporate Governance, Insolvency Law, Accounting Standards, 
Competition Policy & Law and Computer isation of Company Registries.  
Various meetings, workshops, symposiums, etc are held in regard to matters 
such as these.  It is important for the Ministry of Company Affairs to 
participate in and be aware of these im portant developments.  Accordingly, 
decision is taken from time to time to depute officers at various levels for the 
above mentioned meetings, workshops, symposiums, etc.  for this reasons 
increase in the provision in 2002-2003 was considered necessary.”   
 
41.   The Ministry has also stated that in the beginning of t he financial year 2003-
2004, the number of persons going on fore ign tour could not be anticipated and 
accordingly lower BE was fixed.  The actuals during 2002-2003 was high due to 
deputation of officers at various levels for the International meetings, Workshops, 
Symposiums etc. 

42.  In response to a query about DFPR (D elegation of Financial Powers Rules), 
the Secretary of the Ministry of Company Affairs, during the oral evidence stated as 
under:- 
“…the foreign travel expens es are in relation to the jobs of this Ministry. 
Normally, the officers of the Ministry or  even if we take some professionals 
outside for the purposes of the job of this Ministry, the foreign travel 
expenditure is deb ited at that stage through a process as described under 
the delegated financial powers. 
There is a mechanism of approvals by the competent auth ority to approve 
the foreign travel. So, the total budget is Rs. 29 lakh. This statement has 
been quoted as a general provision from  DFPR where the word ‘scientist’ 
somehow appears.” 

 
43.  The Committee do not approve the casual manner in which the 
Government is apparently content with fu rnishing its replies in regard to higher 
expenses in foreign travel expenses.  The Committee are not inclined to accept 
the explanation advanced by the Government.  None of the reasons adduced by 
the Ministry which necessitated unforeseen expenditure are such which could not 
have been foreseen in advance.  The Government has furnished a trivial pretext 
that the higher actuals during 2002-03 were  due to deputation of officers at 
various levels for the international meet ings, workshops, symposiums etc. The 
Committee are deeply concerned to note that actual expenditure under this head 
is higher than the budgetary estimates. They note that the austerity and economy 
instructions have been recommended from time to time but continuously ignored 
which has resulted in variations betwee n BE and Actuals. The entire budgetary 
exercise thus goes haywire. In view of the foregoing,  the Committee are of the 
view that no serious efforts are being made by the Government either in 
anticipating and projecting realistic demand or in making a judicious and 
economical use of funds allocated under the foreign travel expenses.  

Demand No. 17 
Ministry of Company Affairs 
Major Head : Publications 
                      Head Code : 05.03.16 
44.   The head deals with publication of Annual Statutory/Administrative Reports 
i.e. Annual Report on Working and Administ ration of Companies Act, Annual Report of 
the Ministry and Annual Report of the MRTP Act and also publication of notifications, 
forms etc.  
45.   While examining the Demands for Grants under the head ”Publications”, the 
Committee cited the following figures year-wise from the detailed Demands for Grants: 
                                                                        
                             (In thousand Rs.) 
B.E. R.E. Actual Year 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
2001-2002 - 5,00 - 4,50 - 1,24 
2002-2003 - 5,00 - 4,50 - 1,81 
2003-2004 - 5,00 - 5,00  3,82 
2004-2005 - 5,00     
 
46.   The Committee asked to explain the reasons for the BE during 2002-03 and 
2003-04 as compared to actuals in previous years and the reasons for under utilization 
of funds during 2001-02 and 2002-03. 
In their reply the Ministry of Company  Affairs has written that the Budget 
Estimates (BE) during 2002-03 and 2003-04 were more than the actuals as provisions 
were kept to make payment for printing of publications and under  utilization is on 
account of the fact that the actual bills for publications re ceived during the years were 
less than expected amount of expenditure. 

47.  The Committee are not satisfied  with the explanation of the 
Government accounting for the under utili sation of the expected amount of 
expenditure.  The Government has not pr ovided a convincing explanation for 
under utilisation of the amount.  The Committee are concerned that the 
Government is not making realistic antici pation in respect of its demands.  They 
strongly disapprove the explanation advanced  by the Ministry and opine that 
while preparing budget estimates, actual requirement should be kept in view.  The 
Committee feel that realistic demands would make the funds available for other 
significant areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             MAJ. GEN (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI 
19  August, 2004                                                            Chairman, 
28  Sravana,1926(Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance 

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THE FIFTH REPORT (2004-05) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para No. Ministry/Department 
concerned 
Conclusions/Recommendations 
1. 9, 10 Ministry of Company Affairs The Commi ttee take note of the fact that till n o
Companies Act was being amended in a piecemeal mann
to meet the requirements at  a given point of time. Si n
commencement of the Act in 1956, it has been amen d
times. They recall their earlier recommendation made i n
Report on Demands for Gran ts pertaining to Depart m
Company Affairs in 2003-04 wherein the Governme n
asked to make comprehensive overhaul of the existing Ac
The Committee do appreciate the endeavour o
Government to take up the exercise for developing the c o
paper for comprehensive overhaul of the Companie s
1956. They are given to understa nd that the said concept
has been circulated to all th e interested parties e.g. corp o
regulatory bodies, stakeholders and autonomous profe s
institutions. They want th at adequate publicity may a
made through print and electronic media so that public a
may also involve themselves in the exercise and 
suggestions. The Committee ex pect that the exercise w
o
completed in a fixed time and Government will come f o
with a new look Companies Bill which meets the require
of all concerned without any delay.  
 
 
2. 15 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note with  serious concern that  af f
the Company Law Board (CLB) are being managed by 
members as against the sanctioned strength of 9 me
m
They are dismayed at the apathetic attitude of the Gove r
with regard to Company Law Board otherwise such a
would not have been allowed to function with  one third 
sanctioned strength. This affects the disposal of p
e
substantively. They deplore the sorry state of affairs. T h
given to understand that functions of Company Law 
will be transferred to the newly created National Co m
Law Tribunal (NCLT) which is not functional at present 
stay granted by High Court . Till the stay is vacated and N
made fully operational, the Government should take s t
fill the vacant posts in the Company Law Board. 
 
3. 24 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note that Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO) was set up recently in 
October, 2003. So far till date only six cases have been 
referred to the SFIO and it has been able to complete 
its investigation only in one case, while another case is 
still under investigation and in  the case of another four 
cases stay has been granted by the Hon’ble High Court. 

The Committee have been appr ised that in the Enquiry 
Report submitted by SFIO some suggestions have been 
made on improving the system , law and procedure etc. 
and these recommendations are being looked into by 
the Expert Committee and the action on the 
recommendations will be taken after the report is made 
available by this Committee. The Committee desire 
that Government should take necessary action with 
regard to getting the stay orders vacated and also take 
expeditious action on the report submitted by the 
Expert Committee. 
 
4. 29, 30 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee are surprised to note that ‘nil’ 
budgetary allocation has been sought in favour of  the 
Competition Commission of India. Whereas the 
Government has sought Rs. 28300 thousands for 
National Company Law Tribunal, the operation of both 
these organizations has been stayed by the Courts.  
They are not convinced by the Government’s 
reply in regard to allocations for Competition 
Commission of India. They ar e of the opinion that ‘nil’ 
allocation gives an impression as if the government 
does not intend to make the organization functional in 
the near future. They, therefor e, want that in order to 
ward off such an impression the Government should 
make at least notional provision in such cases. 
 
5. 38 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee note with serious concern that the 
number of inspections ar e coming down year after 
year.  The Government has accounted for less 
inspections during 2003-04 which is miniscule when 
compared to the number of Companies as on date. At 
present, there are 6,52,000 companies operating in the 
country. As such not even 1% of the companies are 
being inspected. They are of the view that such a casual 
approach of the Government towards inspections has 
made the mockery of the system. The earlier 
recommendations of the Committee in this regard have 
not been taken seriously by the Government. They are 
given to understand that the Government does not have 
adequate staff to carry on such a stupendous task and a 
cadre review exercise is being carried out in the 
Ministry which will, on implementation augment the 
staff of inspection wing. Th ey also express their 
satisfaction that the expert Committee (Shardul Shroff 
Committee) on outsourcing the routine inspections 
under Section 209A has finalized its report which is yet 
to be submitted to the Government. They expect that 
both the reports viz. Cadre Review and Shardul Shroff 
Committee will be ex
pedited and im plemented b y the 

Government as early as possible.  
 
6. 43 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee do not approve the casual manner 
in which the Government is apparently content with 
furnishing its replies in rega rd to higher expenses in 
foreign travel expenses.  The Committee are not 
inclined to accept the explanation advanced by the 
Government.  None of the reasons adduced by the 
Ministry which necessitated unforeseen expenditure are 
such which could not have be en foreseen in advance.  
The Government has furnished a trivial pretext that the 
higher actuals during 2002-03 were due to deputation 
of officers at various leve ls for the international 
meetings, workshops, symposiums etc. The Committee 
are deeply concerned to not e that actual expenditure 
under this head is higher than the budgetary estimates. 
They note that the austerity and economy instructions 
have been recommended from time to time but 
continuously ignored which has resulted in variations 
between BE and Actuals. The entire budgetary exercise 
thus goes haywire. In vi ew of the foregoing, the 
Committee are of the view that no serious efforts are 
being made by the Government either in anticipating 
and projecting realistic demand or in making a 
judicious and economical use of funds allocated under 
the foreign travel expenses.  
 
7. 47 Ministry of Company Affairs The Committee are not satisfied with the 
explanation of the Government accounting for the 
under utilisation of the expected amount of 
expenditure.  The Government has not provided a 
convincing explanation for under utilisation of the 
amount.  The Committee are concerned that the 
Government is not making realistic anticipation in 
respect of its demands.  They strongly disapprove the 
explanation advanced by the Ministry and opine that 
while preparing budget estimates, actual requirement 
should be kept in view.  The Committee feel that 
realistic demands would make  the funds available for 
other significant areas. 

Minutes of the Third sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 12 August, 2004 from 1100 to 1300 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
2. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
6. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
7. Shri K. S. Rao 
8. Shri Ajit Singh 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Murli Deora 
12. Shri R.P. Goenka 
13. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
14. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Company Affairs 
1. Shri MMK Sardana,  Secretary, MCA 
2. Sh. M. Deendyalan, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser 
3. Dr. (Mrs.) Sheela Bhide, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri O.P. Arya, Director, SFIO 
6. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Adviser 
7. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Advisor, Cost 
8. Shri R.D. Joshi, DGI&R 
9. Smt. Usha Nigam, Secret ary, MRTP Commission 

10. Shri Vyas Ji, Secretary, CCI 
11. Shri V.S. Rao, Director,  Inspection & Investigation 
12. Shri R.Vasudevan, Director,  Inspection & Investigation 
13. Smt. Vibha Pandey, Chief Controller of Accounts 
14. Shri Neerabh Kumar Prasad, Director 
15. Shri Aditya Prakash, Director 
16. Shri R.S. Kanade, Director, CR&S 
17. Shri Pawan K Kumar, Director 
18. Shri Syed Nasir Ali, Director 
19. Smt. Mukta Nidhi Sam notra, Deputy Secretary 
20. Shri K.K. Sabharwal, Director (Finance) 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs to the sitting of the Co mmittee and invited their attention to the 
provisions contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of  representatives of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs on Demands for Grants (2004-05)  of the Ministry of Company Affairs 
and other related matters. 
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry of 
Company Affairs to furnish notes on certai n points raised by the Members to which 
replies were not readily available with them during the discussion. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
                               (The Committee then adjourned) 

Minutes of the Fourth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
          The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19 August, 2004 from 1500 to 1630 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri K. S. Rao 
6. Shri Lakshman Seth 
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Murli Deora 
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
3. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. XX  XX  XX  XX 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX 
6. XX  XX  XX  XX 
7. The Committee then considered t he draft report on the Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Com pany Affairs and adopted the same without 
any changes.  
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to  finalise the Reports in the light 
of modifications as also to make verbal and other consequential changes arising out of 
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 