44
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
COMPETITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 ( Saka)

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
COMPETITION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 44
Price : Rs. 151.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
DISSENT N OTE ........................................................................................... 45
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Sittings held on 31 May, 26 July, 3 August, 18 &
28 September, 16 November and 7 December 2006 .................... 47
ANNEXURE .................................................................................................. 62
THE C OMPETITION (AMENDMENT) B ILL, 2006 ......................................... 68
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2006-2007)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
*12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized to submit the Report on their behalf, present this
Forty-fourth Report on the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
2. The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006 introduced in
Lok Sabha on 9th March, 2006 was referred to the Committee on
17th April, 2006 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Company
Affairs who also briefed them at their sitting held on 31st May, 2006.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from: (i) Reserve Bank
of India; (ii) Securities and Exchange Board of India, Mumbai;
(iii) Insurance  Regulatory and Development Authority; (iv) Competition
Commission of India; (v) Chambers of Commerce viz. PHD Chambers
of Commerce & Industry, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry and Confederation of Indian Industry; (vi) Law firms viz
Amarchand Mangaldas, Kesar Dass B. & Co. and Luthra & Luthra;
(vii) Central Electricity Regulatory Commission; (viii) The Institute of
Costs and Works Accountants of India & the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India; (ix) Experts viz. Dr. Vijay Kelkar, Chairman,
Infrastructure, Development  and Finance Corporation Private Equity
Company Ltd., Dr. S. Chakravarthy, IAS (R) & Former Member,
MRTPC, Dr. Pronab Sen, Principal Advisor, Planning Commission, Dr.
Aditya Bhattacharjee, Delhi School of Economics and Shri M.R. Umarji,
Chief Advisor (Legal), Indian Banks Association, Mumbai; (x) Consumer
Fora viz. Consumer Unity and Trust Society and Voluntary Organisation
on Interest of Consumer Education; (xi) National Manufacturing
Competitiveness Council; (xii) The Energy and Resource Institute;
(xiii) All India Association of Industries; and (xiv) the Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion.
5. On 26th July, 2006, the representative of Competition Commission
of India gave a power point presentation on the overall functioning of
the Commission and further briefed the Committee on the provisions
contained in the Bill. The representatives of Ministry of Commerce
and Industry briefed the Committee and, thereafter representatives of
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion gave a power point
presentation on various provisions of the Bill at their sitting held on

27th July, 2006. Dr. Pronab Sen, Principal Advisor, Planning Commission
also briefed the Committee on the provisions of the Bill.
6. The Committee at their sitting held on 3rd August, 2006 heard
the views of PHD Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Confederation
of Indian Industry, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
Industry and Dr. S. Chakravarthy, IAS (R), Former Member, MRTPC
and Expert.
7. The Committee at their sitting held on 18th September, 2006
took oral evidence of the representatives of Amarchand Mangaldas
(Law Firm) and Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS). At their
sitting held on 28th September, 2006, the Committee took oral evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
8. On 16th November, 2006, the Committee took oral evidence of
the representatives of Ministry of Company Affairs and Ministry of
Law and Justice.
9. The Committee, at their sitting held on 7th December, 2006
considered the draft report. The Committee made certain modifications
in the draft report. In addition, the Committee strongly felt that there
was a need to bring about certain changes in the Principal Act also,
which have been included from paragraph 94 onwards in the report.
The Committee then approved and adopted the draft report.
10. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Company Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry, representatives of the CII, FICCI, PHD,
Chamber of Commerce, Competition Commission of India, Amarchand
Mangaldas & Co., Consumer Unity and Trust (CUTS), Dr. Vijay Kelkar,
Dr. S. Chakravarthy, IAS (R) and Dr. Pronab Sen Experts for their
cooperation in placing before them their considered views and
perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection
with the examination of the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
11. For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
 7 December, 2006 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
BACKGROUND
A dynamic competitive environment supported by effective
competition policy and law is an essential element of a successful
market economy. Many developing countries that have undertaken
market-based reforms have recognized the need to have a law to
safeguard competition. The benefits that flow from competition are
increased economic efficiency, innovation, and consumer welfare.
However, competition law is a relatively new area for most developing
countries including India. It is a complex economic law and its
enforcement requires a highly professional competition commission.
2. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 which
came into effect on 1st June, 1970, was the first enactment to deal
with competition issues. In the wake of economic reforms since 1991,
it was felt that this Act has become obsolete in the light of international
economic developments which relate more particularly to competition
laws and thus there was a need to shift the focus from curbing
monopolies to promoting competition. Therefore, a High Level
Committee on Competition Policy and Law was constituted by the
Central Government which submitted its Report on 23 May, 2002. In
accordance with the recommendations of this Committee, the
Competition Act 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) was passed
by both Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session of 2002 and
received the assent of President in January 2003. It provided for setting
up of a quasi-judicial body to be called the Competition Commission
of India (CCI), comprising of a Chairperson and two to ten other
Members, to prevent practices having adverse effect on competition,
to promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interests
of consumers and to ensure freedom of trade carried on by other
participants in markets in India and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
3. In accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Competition
Commission of India (Selection of Chairperson and Members of the
Commission) Rules, 2003 were notified on 4th April, 2003 and a
Selection Committee was constituted as per these rules. On the basis
of the recommendation of the Selection Committee, the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet approved appointments of the Chairperson

2
of CCI and a Member, CCI, Notifications for their appointments were
issued on 14th October, 2003.
4. However, two writ petitions were filed in the Madras High
Court, first by Shri R. Gandhi challenging certain provisions of the
Competition Act and the Selection Rules and another by Shri Brahm
Dutt in the Supreme Court. The essential challenge in the writs was
that the Competition Commission envisaged by the Act was more of
a judicial body having adjudicatory powers and that in the background
of the doctrine of separation of powers recognized by the Constitution
of India, the Chairman of the Commission had necessarily to be a
retired Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India or by a Committee
presided over by the Chief Justice of India and further the right to
appoint the Judicial Members of the Commission should also rest with
the Chief Justice of India or his nominee. The Supreme Court in its
interim order dated 31.10.2003 stayed the judicial functioning of the
Commission and the operation of Rule 3 of the Competition
Commission of India (Selection of Chairperson and other Members of
the Commission) Rules, 2003.
5. The Government then submitted before the Supreme Court that
it intended to bring about certain changes in the Competition Act, in
the light of the issues raised in the Writ Petition. The Supreme Court
delivered its judgment in the matter on 20.1.2005. It closed the writ
petition leaving open all questions regarding the validity of the
enactment, including the validity of the Rules 3 of the Rules to be
decided after the amendment of the Act and declined to pronounce
on the matters argued before it in a theoretical context and based only
on general pleadings.
6. Accordingly, taking into account the orders of the Supreme Court,
the submissions made by the Government before the Court, and
consultations with various Ministries, the Competition (Amendment)
Bill 2006 was drafted and introduced in the Parliament in 9th March
2006. The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance on
17th April, 2006 by the Hon’ble Speaker of Lok Sabha for detailed
examination and report thereon.
7. The Statement of ‘Objects and Reasons’ of the Competition
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 stipulated as under:
“(a) to provide that CCI would be an expert body which will
function as a market regulator for preventing anti-
competitive practices in the country and it would also have
advisory and advocacy functions in its role as a regulator;

3
(b) to omit the provisions relating to adjudication of disputes
between two or more parties by the CCI and to provide for
investigation through the Director General in case there exist
a prima facie  case relating to anti competitive agreements or
abuse of dominant position under the Competition Act, 2002
and conferring power upon the CCI to pass orders on
completion of an inquiry and impose monetary penalties
and in doing so the CCI would work as collegium and its
decisions would be based on simple majority;
(c) to provide for establishment of the Competition Appellate
Tribunal (CAT), which shall be a three-member quasi-judicial
body headed by a person, who is or has been a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of High
Court and selection of the Chairperson and other Members
of CAT to be made by a Selection Committee headed by
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India or his
nominee, and having Secretaries of Ministries of Company
Affairs and Law as its members;
(d) to provide for hearing and disposing of appeals by the CAT
against any direction issued or decision made or order
passed by the CCI;
(e) to provide for adjudication by CAT of claims on
compensation and passing of orders for the recovery of
compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage
suffered as a result of any contravention of the provisions
of the Competition Act, 2002;
(f) to provide for implementation of the orders of the CAT as
a decree of a Civil Court;
(g) to provide for filing of appeal against the orders of the
CAT to the Supreme Court;
(h) to confer powers to sectoral regulators to make suo motu
reference to CCI on competition issues, in addition to the
present provision of making reference, when such request
is made by any party in a dispute before it.
The Bill also aims at continuation of the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission (MRTPC) till two years after
constitution of CCI, for trying pending cases under the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 after which it would stand
dissolved. The Bill also provides that MRTPC would not entertain
any new cases after the CCI is duly constituted. Cases still

4
remaining pending after this two year period, would be transferred
to CAT or the National Commission under the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 depending on the nature of cases.”
8. To meet these objectives, the Bill seeks to carry out certain
amendments in the Competition Act, 2002, which are the following:
1. Substitution of Section 9 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to selection of chairperson and other Members of
the Competition Commission of India. The New clause
provides that the Chairperson and Members of the CCI shall
be appointed by the Central Government from a Panel of
names recommended by Selection Committee consisting of
Chief Justice of India or his nominee, the Secretary, in the
Ministry of Company Affairs and the Secretary in the
Ministry of Law and Justice.
2. Amendment of Section 12 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to restriction on re-employment of Chairperson and
other Members of the CCI by increasing the said restriction
from one year to two years.
3. Substitution of Section 13 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to financial and administrative powers of Member
Administration by a new section providing that the
Chairperson shall have the powers of general
superintendence, direction, and control in respect of all
administrative matters of the Commission.
4. Substitution of Section 17 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Registrar and officers and other employees by a
new section conferring power upon the Commission to
appoint a Secretary instead of Registrar and such experts
and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability who
have special knowledge and experience in economics, law,
business and other disciplines to competition.
5. Amendment of Section 19 of Competition Act, 2002 relating
to inquiry into certain agreements and dominant position
of enterprise by substituting the word “complaint” by
“information”.
6. Amendment of Section 21 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to reference by statutory authority so as to provide
that any statutory authority may make a reference in respect
of an issue to the Commission on its own and on receipt
of opinion of the Commission the statutory authority shall
pass orders recording reasons thereon.

5
7. Substitution of Section 22 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to Benches of the Commission by providing that all
questions that come up before the Commission shall be
decided by a majority of the Members present and voting
and in the event of an equality of votes the Chairperson
shall have a casting vote. Thus, instead of benches, the
Commission shall function as a collegium.
8. Substitution of Section 26 of the Act relating to procedure
for inquiry on complaints under section 19 which inter alia
proposes to provide that on receipt of a reference from the
Central Government or State Government or a Statutory
Authority or its own knowledge or information received
under section 19, the Commission direct the Director-General
to cause an investigation to be made in the matter.
9. Amendment of Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to orders by the Commission wherein the power to
award compensation is proposed to be conferred upon the
Appellate Tribunal by a new Section 53 N proposed to be
inserted by Clause 34 of the Bill.
10. Amendment of Section 28 of the Act so as to confer power
of division of enterprise enjoying dominant position to the
Commission instead of the Central Government.
11. Amendment of Section 29 of the Act relating to procedure
for investigation of combination by way of inserting a new
sub-section (1A) to provide that the Commission may call
for a report from the Director-General within 60 days and
based on sufficient reason, upto 60 days more.
12. Substitution of Section 30 of the Act relating to inquiry into
disclosures under sub-section (2) of Section 6 so as to
provide that where any person or enterprise has given a
notice under the above sub-section, the Commission shall
examine such notice and form its prima facie  opinion and
proceed in accordance with the provisions of Section 29.
13. Amendment (Clarificatory) of Section 32 of the Act relating
to acts taking place outside India but having an effect on
competition in India.
14. Substitution of Section 39 of the Act relating to execution of
orders of the Commission which provided that if a person
fails to pay any monetary penalty imposed on him under
this Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such a
penalty in the manner as may be specified by regulations.

6
15. Substitution of Section 42 of the Competition Act, 2002
relating to contravention of orders of Commission so as to
provide that a Civil Court having jurisdiction shall order
for civil prison and additional penalty on a complaint made
by the Commission.
16. Insertion of a new Chapter VIII A of the Competition Act,
2002 relating to establishment of Competition Appellate
Tribunal, its composition, procedure for appeal, awarding
compensation, execution of orders, contravention of orders,
appeal to Supreme Court, power to punish for contempt
etc.
9. With a view to have expert opinion on the various provisions
of the Bill, the Committee received written views/suggestions from
(i) experts i.e. Dr. Pronab Sen and Dr. K. Chakravarthy (ii) Law firms
i.e. Amarchand Mangaldas & Co., Kesar Das and Associates, Luthra &
Luthra, (iii) MRTPC, (iv) RBI, (v) SEBI, (vi) IRDA, (vii) CERC,
(viii) National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council, (ix) Indian
banks Association, (x) All India Association of Industries, (xi) Consumer
Fora, i.e. CUTS and VOICE, (xii) Chambers of Commerce i.e. FICCI,
ASSOCHAM, CII, PHDCCI, (xiii) ICSI and (xiv) IDFC. The Committee
also had personal hearings of the views of some of these experts/
organizations i.e. Competition Commission of India, PHDCCI, FICCI,
Adviser, Planning Commission, Dr. K. Chakravarthy, Smt. Pallavi Shroff
from Amarchand Mangaldas & Co. and Shri Pradeep Mehta from
CUTS.
In order to seek clarification with regard to the provisions contained
in the Bill, the Committee also took evidence of the representatives of
the Ministries of Company Affairs, Law & Justice and Commerce and
Industry (Deptt. of Industrial Policy and Promotion) to further enlighten
themselves on the various aspects of the proposed legislation.
10. After having considered the views of the representatives of
the Ministries of Company Affairs, Law & Justice, Commerce &
Industry (Deptt. of Industrial Policy and Promotion), Competition
Commission of India, PHDCCI, CCI, FICCI, Amarchand Mangaldas
Law Firm, CUTS and VOICE and the experts Dr. Pronab Sen &
Dr. K. Chakravarthy, for and against the various proposals contained
in the Bill; the Committee felt that certain provisions of the Bill could
be recast to serve the intended objectives better. Such provisions
and the recommendations and observations of the Committee thereon
are dealt with in the subsequent paragraphs of this Report.

7
Clause 4: Substitution of new section for Section 8—(Composition
of Competition Commission—Selection and appointment of members)
11. Clause 4 reads as under:
“For Section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:
“(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and not less
than two and not more than six other Members to be
appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be a person
of ability, integrity and standing and who has special
knowledge of, and professional experience of not less than
fifteen years in, international trade, economics, business,
commerce, law, finance, accountancy, management, industry,
public affairs, which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, may be useful to the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time
Members”.”
Clause 34: Insertion of new Chapter VIII A (New Sections: 53A to
53U) (Composition of Appellate Tribunal)
Clause 34, inter-alia, reads as follows:
53C. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not
more than two other members to be appointed by the Central
Government.
Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and members of
Appellate Tribunal
53D. (1)  The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a
person, who is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the
Chief Justice of a High Court.
(2) A member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person of ability,
integrity and standing having special knowledge of, and professional
experience of not less than twenty-five years in, competition,
international trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance,
accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, administration or in
any other matter which in the opinion of the Central Government,
may be useful to the Appellate Tribunal.

8
12. The amendments/additions proposed in the above clauses of
the Competition (Amendment) Bill inter alia seek to specify, among
other things, the eligible fields for selection as Chairpersons and
Members of the CCI and CAT. In this connection, many of the experts
that had deposed before the Committee, were of the opinion that it
would be desirable to specify the field of ‘competition’ in the
qualifications prescribed for the Chairperson and Members of CCI and
‘competition law and policy’ in qualifications prescribed for the
Chairpersons and Members of CAT. Some of the comments are as
under:—
13. Dr. Vijay Kelkar, IDFC:
“…The eligibility for membership of the Competition Commission
of India (CCI) and the Competition Appellate Tribunal (CAT)
should be more or less identical. This would mean adding the
field “competition” as one of the qualifications for becoming a
member of CCI…”
14. Shri Vinod  Dhall, CCI:
“Section 8 of the Act prescribes that the Chairperson and every
other member shall be a person who has special knowledge of,
and professional experience of not less than 15 years in the fields
specified therein. Similarly Clause 34 proposes to insert section
53D (2) prescribing therein qualification and experience which a
person is required to have to become member of the Competition
Appellate Tribunal and these inter-alia include the field of
“Competition.”
(i) There is need perhaps to harmonise the qualifications for
the membership of the Commission as well as the Appellate
Tribunal.
(ii) Also, it may be more appropriate to incorporate the words
“competition law & policy” in place of the word
“competition” as the latter does not convey the appropriate
meaning for the purpose of this section.”
15. When asked, the Ministry of Company Affairs stated as follows:
“The field of ‘competition’ is being proposed to be included in the
list of eligible fields of experience for eligibility to become a
Member of Appellate Tribunal under Clause 34 (proposed section
53D) of Amendment Bill so as to enable the Appellate Tribunal to
carry out its adjudicatory functions with inputs relating to subjects

9
of competition and its regulation. However, CCI has a provision
of having a Chairperson and six members who may be experts in
economics, international trade, law or business, and who could
also be specialists in competition matters. In addition under Clause
17, CCI would be able to engage experts and professionals in
disciplines related to competition who would help it in discharging
its functions. Hence it was not felt necessary to change the existing
eligible fields of experience and add the qualification of
‘competition’ also as an eligible condition.”
16. Further, the Committee received suggestions from experts on
the need to specify the rank and status of Chairpersons and Members
of CCI & CAT clearly in the Bill.
17. When, the Committee questioned as to why the Bill doesn’t
specify the rank and status of the Chairpersons or the Members of the
CCI and the CAT, since in such a situation, officials of the lower rank
and status of the Government may intervene in the functioning of the
Commission as well as CAT, the Ministry responded as follows:
“…due care would be taken, while framing the rules fixing their
salary and terms and conditions of service to ensure that the rank
and status of the Chairpersons and Members of the CCI and CAT
are of the level appropriate to their position and requirements for
effectiveness.”
18. In this connection the Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy
& Promotion suggested as under during the oral evidence:
“Hon’ble Chairman mentioned about the rank. I would be inclined
to go along with your suggestion that since the Chairman of the
Commission is somebody who could be of the rank of CAT or
Supreme Court Judge—here, it is a person eligible to be a High
Court Judge etc.—the status of Minister of State for him would be
desirable and members could have a lower status that of a
Secretary”.
19. With regard to Clause 4 that prescribes qualifications for
Chairperson and Members of CCI and Clause 34 that prescribes
qualifications for Chairperson and Members of CAT, the Committee
take note of the views expressed by various experts, wherein there
has been an almost unanimous opinion that the fields of
“Competition’ and ‘Competition Law’ need to be included in the
eligibility criteria for chairperson and Members of the Commission
and the CAT, respectively so that the two bodies remain relevant in

10
the ever changing economic scenario in the future as well. The
Committee are not convinced by the justification advanced that under
Clause 17, CCI would be able to engage experts and professionals
in discipline relating to Competition, which is not at all sufficient.
Instead, they are of the opinion that it would definitely be in the
interest of both CCI and CAT if their Chairpersons and Members
are experienced in the fields of Competition and competition law
and policy respectively. Further, the Committee also note that the
Bill does not specify the rank and status of the Chairperson and
Members of the CCI as well as CAT. This is necessary, as it can go
a long way in preventing pressures which can expectedly be brought
to bear on them. In this connection, they observe that the
Government have agreed to take due care, while framing the rules
for fixing the salary and terms and conditions of service of the
Chairpersons and Members of CCI and CAT, to ensure that their
rank and status are at a level appropriate to their position and
requirements for effectiveness. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Government should bring in such changes in the proposed
provisions to clearly indicate the field of ‘Competition’ in Clause 4
and the field of ‘Competition Law and Policy’ in Clause 34 as well
as prescribe an appropriate and well-defined rank for the Chairperson
and Members of both CCI and CAT in the rules.
Clause 5: Substitution of new section for section 9—Selection
Committee for Chairperson and Members of Commission
20. For section 9 of the Principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted, which reads as follows:
“(1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall
be appointed by the Central Government from a panel of names
recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) The Chief Justice of India or his nominee Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Company Affairs Member;
(c) The Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice Member.
(2) The term of the  Selection Committee and the manner of
selection of panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.
21. Questioned about the rationale for suggesting the proposed
composition of the Selection Committee with the Chief Justice of India
or his nominee as the Chairperson of this Committee to select the
Chairperson and Members of the CCI as well as whether this was

11
being done on the directive of the Supreme Court in their Judgment,
the Ministry stated as under:
“Chief Justice of India or his nominee is being suggested as the
Chairperson of the Selection Committee for the CCI under
clause 5 of the Amendment Bill as it is felt that this would enable
the selection of the members of the CCI to be seen as more
transparent and fair. This however, is not based on any direction
of the Supreme Court.……”
“…the Apex Court did not give any directions about any specific
amendments to be carried out. The Government, while making its
submissions to the Apex Court had made it clear that legislation
was the domain of the Parliament and that the Government was
only in a position to propose the amendments and set the process
in motion for this purpose. It was, however, felt by the
Government, in light of its examination of the issues raised during
the process associated with the legal challenge as also the
experience gained through practice in the case of other existing
regulators, that certain changes in the Competition Act, 2002, would
enable the regulatory structure under the Act to function better.
The Government has examined the issues raised in the legal
challenge, and has proposed some changes where felt appropriate,
to enable a better functioning of the competition regime. The
concern of the Government is to provide a structure that is
constitutionally unsustainable and functionally effective.”
22. In this connection, the Committee had observed as  under:
“…why does the Government including such amendments which
give the perception to common people that we are trying to bend
backwards and give authority to courts which need not be given…”
23. Further, it was observed:
“…one can understand that the courts may have some say in the
selection of members. But why should they have a say in the
selection of the whole CCI?”
24. While responding to a similar point, the Ministry, in their post-
evidence reply, informed inter-alia as follows:
“The Supreme Court also acknowledged in its judgment that the
Central Government has pointed out “that the question of
amendment had ultimately to rest with the Parliament and the

12
Government was only in a position to propose the amendments as
indicated in the additional affidavits.”
25. However, when the Committee desired to know as to whether
the proposed amendments, if enacted, will be subjected to judicial
review again, the Ministry submitted as under:
“The powers of judicial review are available with the Supreme
Court under the Constitution, under which it can always scrutinize
and legislation including the Competition Act, with or without
amendments, and pronounce a  judgement on its constitutionality.
As stated above, while the existing writ petition filed in the
Supreme Court has been closed, the Hon’ble Court has left open
all relevant questions to be decided after the amendment of the
Act as held out is made or attempted. It has also clarified in the
judgement of the Apex  court dated 20.1.2005, that this was
“without prejudice to the rights of the petitioner to approach this
Court again with specific averments in support of the challenge
with reference to various sections of the Act on the basis of the
arguments that were raised before us at the time of hearing.”
26. When the Committee desired to know as to whether
representation to relevant disciplines can be given in the Selection
Committee, the Ministry stated:
“Selection Committee is required to ensure that the persons being
considered for appointment as Chairperson/Members of the
Commission are subjected to a fair scrutiny with regard to their
capacity to discharge their statutory duties. Besides, it needs to be
compact to enable speedy decision making. Giving representation
to each relevant discipline could result in a large and unwidely
Selection Committee…”
27. When further questioned, the Ministry, in their post evidence
reply stated as under:
“…It is felt that the combination of domain knowledge on
competition and law with judicial experience as proposed in the
Selection Committee would ensure that the persons being
considered for appointment as Chairperson/Members of the
Commission are subjected to an appropriate level of scrutiny.”
28. Dr. Pronab Sen, Adviser, Planning Commission, had submitted
before the Committee that instead of a “Selection Committee” a “Search-
cum-Selection Committee” be constituted. He had deposed as under:

13
“Instead of a “Selection Committee”, I would suggest a “Search-cum-
Selection Committee”. Typically, a “Selection Committee” is constrained
to select from formal applicants for the post; whereas a “Search
Committee” can consider candidates who may not have formally
applied, but who are eminently suitable for the post. This distinction
is important since the positions in the CCI and the CAT are of such
eminence that the most suitable candidates may not even be aware of
such vacancies or be interested without further persuasion.
Consequently, a pure selection process may lead to the appointment
of sub-optimal candidates.”
29. Further, it was also suggested by him that the “Search and
Selection Committee” for the CAT should consist of only of the
principals and not the nominees since the Tribunal is vested with the
powers of and is deemed to be a civil court.
30. When asked by the Committee to respond to the above-
mentioned suggestions, the Ministry stated as under:
“(a) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee
for selection of a panel of names for recommendation to
Government would be provided for in the Rules to be made
under the Act. The method of identifying candidates suitable
for the job would thus be based on the Rules to be framed
for the purpose. As such the process is expected to enable
an objective and transparent mode of selection.
(b) The Secretaries of Ministry of Company Affairs and Law
Ministry have been included as Members of the Selection
Committee of the CAT in their principal capacity only, and
cannot be represented by their nominees. However, the
Chairperson of the  Committee can be the Chief Justice of
India or anyone else nominated by him. It is proposed to
retain this provision, as the Chief Justice of India being the
highest judicial authority in the country may not be always
available for heading the Selection Committee and it is felt
that it would be best left to him to decide whether he
would himself head the Selection Committee or nominate
some other suitable person for the task.”
31. In so far as the composition of the Selection Committee under
Clause 5 is concerned, the Committee observe that the Government
proposes to include Chief Justice of India or his nominee as heard
of the Selection Committee selecting the Chairperson and Members
of CCI, which they do not find to be tenable. In their justification

14
advanced, the Ministry have taken the stand that this would enable
the selection to be seen as more fair and transparent. The Committee
do not agree with this view as bringing transparency and fairness in
selection of suitable candidates is definitely possible otherwise too.
They are of the opinion, that CCI is intended to be an expert body
in the field of Competition, which apart from law, also involves
expert knowledge in the domain of economics, commerce, business,
finance, management, industry, international markets, companies,
accounts, consumer welfare and so on. Bearing in mind the
significance of the role that would be played by the CCI and the
economic and financial stakes involved, it is absolutely critical to
have a broad based Selection Committee of high stature and
experience who are well aware of the trends in economics, commerce,
trade and business etc. In this regard, the Committee note that
Selection Committees for Chairpersons and Members of other
statutory regulatory bodies like IRDA, SEBI, CERC etc. are also
headed by experts, and not Chief Justice or his nominees. The
Committee, therefore, feel that in the same manner, the Chairperson
and members of the CCI can be selected by a broad based Selection
Committee that can better appreciate the candidate’s knowledge in
the requisite areas. moreover, the Committee are of the opinion that
the basic objection, raised in the Writ Petitition, which suggested
that CCI being a quasi-judicial body, requires to be headed by a
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court, has been
adequately met by the very fact that the adjudicatory powers of the
CCI have now been proposed through this Amendment Bill, to be
conferred on a quasi-judicial body, i.e. CAT, which will be headed
by a person, who is or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or
the Chief Justice of a High Court. They therefore, desire that the
Ministry may review Clause 5 in this light and suitably amend it in
a way so that the Selection Committee for Chairperson and Members
of the Commission is broad based and headed by an expert of proven
track record in the chosen fields.
32. With regard to the nomenclature of the Selection Committee,
the Committee are in agreement with the views expressed by the
experts that it would be more appropriate to call it a ‘Search-cum-
Selection Committee’ so as to enable this Committee to consider
such candidates, who may not have formally applied to be a
Chairperson/Member yet are suitable for the same. They, therefore,
desire the Government to suitably amend Clause 5 of the Bill.
Moreover, the Committee also expect the Government to ensure while
framing the rules relating to Selection Committee under Section 9
of the Act that the vacancy, that arises, other than that of unforeseen

15
nature, is filled up well in advance so that there is no vacuum
created in the functioning of the Commission.
Clause 7: Amendment of section 12 (Restriction on re-employment)
33. Clause 7 reads as under:
In Section 12 of the principal Act, for the words “one year”, the
words “two years” shall be substituted.
In this connection, on being asked to elaborate further, the Ministry
informed as follows:
“Section 12 of the Act, providing for Chairperson and Members of
the Commission not being eligible to take employment for one
year after ceasing to hold office, was introduced in the Act to
ensure independence of the Chairperson and Members. The Section
does not provide for a blanket ban on re-employment but only on
re-employment with the management or administration of any
enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before the
Commission. This clause is essential to ensure that proceedings of
the Commission itself do not become suspect in the eyes of public
at large by the Chairperson or Members taking up employment
with demitting office.
It is now being proposed to increase this period to two years to
further strengthen the provision for maintaining the impartiality
and independence of the Chairperson and Members of the
Commission. Regulation on employment upto two years after
ceasing to hold office is also provided in the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority Act, 1999 (section 8) and the Electricity
Act, 2003, [section 89 (5)], while it is five years in the case of
MRTP Act, 1969 [section 6 (8)]”.
34. The Committee is broadly in agreement with the proposed
amendment of Section 12, which proposes to prohibit the Chairperson
and Members of the Commission to take employment in any
enterprise that had been a party to a proceeding before the
Commission, for two years after ceasing to hold office. However,
they feel that the restriction of 2 years on re-employment should
also be made applicable for the Director-General, who has a very
significant position in conducting inquiries and other investigative
functions of the Commission, if he is borne permanently on the
cadre of Competition Commission. In this connection, the Committee
understand that at present the Director-General is a Joint Secretary

16
level officer on deputation to the Commission. In such a situation,
the suggestion for 2 year restriction on his re-employment will not
be applicable. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that while
framing the rules, Government should see that the Director-General
is an officer who is an expert borne permanently on the cadre of
Competition Commission and not a deputationist on whom such a
restriction could be imposed. The Committee recommend that the
Government may examine the matter and carry out necessary changes
in Clause 7 to that effect.
Clause 11: Amendment of section 19 (Replacement of the word
‘Complaint’ with ‘Information’)
35. The Clause reads as under:
In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a),f
or the words “receipt of a complaint,”, the words “receipt of any
information, in such manner and” shall be substituted.
36. As per the Ministry, the replacement of the word ‘complaint’
with ‘information’ has been sought as:
“The term information is wider and has an inclusive meaning.
Even a complaint may be treated as information and action taken.
Also, this change would enable the Commission to inquire into
any information received on controvention of provisions of the
Act, instead of only on receipt of a complaint. In fact, the ability
to act on information gives CCI a better articulated regulatory
role.”
37. In this regard, Smt. Pallavi Shroff, representative of the law
firm Amarchand Mangaldas, stated as under:
“The next aspect is power to make interim orders. The Act as it
stands today requires that these be filed on an affidavit so that the
authenticity of the facts stated are guaranteed before the
Commission. The question that arises is that if there cannot be a
complaint and it is only an information or if somebody is in
informant who is going to make an application for injunction?
Originally the complainant of course would have the right; but
would informant have the right?”
“…Even if the person, furnishing the information, doesn’t have a
‘claim’ or doesn’t seek any ‘relief’ he or she shall be entitled to
approach the CCI. This may open the floodgates for frivolous
litigation which the companies may have to defend at great
expense.”

17
“Section 20 of the Competition Act does not provide the parties
an opportunity to be heard with regards to proceedings under the
same. This incongruity has surfaced because of the proposed
deletion of the term ‘complainant’ by the Bill.”
38. In a written memorandum, she further submitted as under:—
“The substitution has also resulted in diluting the position of an
aggrieved party, as can be seen from the amendments of proposed
to Section 26 of the Act in the Amendment Bill. Under the proposed
amendments to Section 26 of the Act, the CCI is not required to
mandatorily give a copy of the inquiry report to the informant;
the CCI will invite objections to the report from concerned ‘parties’
but there is no provision for hearing the affected party. The
provisions of Section 26 of the Act which provided for furnishing
a copy of the report to the complainant before taking final decision
are proposed to be deleted. In complex economic matters orders
cannot and ought not to be passed without hearing the affected
parties particularly the “complainant.
The proposed amendments to Section 26 of the Act also dilute the
right of the complainant to be in charge of the proceedings as
Section 26(7) of the Act is proposed to be deleted.”
38A. The Ministry in a subsequent reply stated as under:—
“Clause 24 of the Bill provides that under section 36 (1), the
Commission shall be guided by the principles of natural justice
which shall ensure that in the process of an inquiry by the
Commission, the concerned parties would be given opportunity of
being heard before any final order is made.”
39. Further, proviso 1(a) of Section 19 of the Principal Act reads as
under:—
“receipt of a complaint, accompanied by such fee as may be
determined by regulations, from any person, consumer or their
association or trade association.”
40. In this regard, the Ministry, in one of their post evidence replies,
had inter-alia stated that:—
“Since information is to be accompanied by prescribed fees, it is
expected that frivolous information may be minimized.”

18
41. However, when further probed by the Committee on whether
an informant would be required to pay fee, the Ministry later stated
as under:—
“This would be kept in consideration while framing the rules under
section 19. However, it has to be ensured that access to CCI is not
used for vexatious or frivolous purposes.”
42. The Committee note that the Government has sought to
replace the word ‘complaint’ with ‘information’ in Section 19 of the
Act that deals with inquiry into certain agreements and dominant
position of enterprise by the Commission. They have been given to
understand that the word ‘information’ has a much wider meaning
in the context of laws on competition as compared to ‘complaint’
and use of ‘Information’ in the proposed Amendments would
ultimately give CCI a better regulatory role. However legal experts
have questioned the authenticity of facts stated in an ‘Information’
as well as about the right of the parties to be heard in inquiries
initiated as a result of an ‘information’ which is not so in the case
of a ‘complaint’. Therefore, the Committee are of the view that
adequate prior consultation with experts in different fields be
undertaken by the Government on this point. The Committee
recommend that appropriate changes be made in the provision
accordingly thereafter and then only any such amendment be given
effect to.
Clause 18: Amendment of section 29 (Period for conducting of
Investigation by DG)
43. Clause 18 reads as under:—
In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “where the commission is of
the”, the words “ prima facie ” shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1A) After receipt of the response of the parties to the combination
under sub-section (1), the Commission may call for a report from the
Director General and such report shall be submitted by the Director
General within sixty days:
Provided that the Commission may , if it is satisfied that the Director
General was prevented by sufficient cause from submitting the report

19
within the said period, allow the Director General to submit the report
within a further period not exceeding sixty days.”
(c) In sub-section (2), after the words “parties to the combination”,
the words, brackets, figure and letter “or the receipt of the report
from Director General called under sub-section (1A), whichever is later”
shall be inserted.
44. The suggestion received by the Committee from the
representative of one of the law firms in this regard is stated below:—
“As far as the merger is concerned, the Act calls it investigating
combinations under section 6, a new tier has been introduced after
prima facie  receiving all the evidence from the parties, of an
investigation by the Director General, which could take 60 days to
120 days. My first submission is that there are going to be a
number of tiers of investigation that is taking place, and I think
there is a scope for substantial amount of delay. When the Bill
was introduced, there were discussions among the chambers of
commerce and industry across the country; one of the
apprehensions that business and industry had expressed was the
time taken in these investigations because it could be open-ended,
if you are doing a merger. On the one hand, you have agreements
to merge which could take two years to complete. So, what
happens to the businesses during this period? That is why, the
Act had contemplated a certain time limit of 90 days. While I
personally feel that the time limit is rather short to complete the
investigation and a more realistic time period should be looked at,
but putting in another lawyer may only delay the matters without
serving much purpose.”
45. Questioned on the additional 60 days proposed to be given to
the DG for investigation, the Ministry in their written reply submitted
as under:—
“The existing section 29 of the competition Act does not have any
provision for the Competition Commission of India (CCI) to call
for a report of the Director General (DG) in course of enquiry into
any combination. This legal loophole is sought to be plugged
through Clause 18 of the Amendment Bill by providing for CCI
calling for DG’s report and same to be furnished by the latter
within 60 days. It is only if the DG is prevented by sufficient
cause from submitting the report within 60 days, and if the
Commission is satisfied with the reasons for delay, the powers
would be with the Commission to give further time of 60 days to
DG. Thus, the provision of additional 60 days for DG to submit
his report is not automatic.”

20
46. The Committee find that under Clause 18 of the Bill, the
time frame proposed for the Director-General to submit his
investigation report on a combination is 60 days at the first instance
which can be extended to another 60 days. In the course of their
interaction with the representatives of law firms, the Committee learnt
that every additional layer of review of facts only increases the
delays. At the same time, the Committee, while agreeing to the fact
that investigating a combination can prove to be a very complex
task requiring sufficient time, also feel that time lines prescribed in
the provision are rather tight and a more realistic time frame needs
to be provided enabling an all-compassing investigation by the DG.
The Committee, therefore, expect the Government to give
consideration to this issue and bring forth suitable changes in
Clause 18.
Clause 21: Substitution of new section for section 33
47. Clause 21 reads as under:—
For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
Power to issue interim orders
“33. Where during an inquiry, the Commission is satisfied that an
act in contravention of sub-section (1) of section 3 or sub-section
(1) of section 4 or section 6 has been committed and continues to
be committed or that such act is about to be committed, the
Commission may, by order, grant a temporary injunction restraining
any party from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such
inquiry or until further orders, without giving notice to the opposite
party, where it deems necessary.”
48. The Bill inter alia seeks to omit sub section (3) of section 33
which provides for the applicability of the relevant provisions of Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 to a temporary injunction issued by the
Commission under the Act.
49. Suggestion given by law firm Kesardass and Co. in this regard
is as follows:—
“It is proposed to omit sub section (3) of section 33 which provides
for the applicability of the relevant provisions of Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 to a temporary injunction issued by the
Commission under the Act. It is proposed that the word
“injunction” be substituted with the words “order or direction”.
50. In this connection, when the Committee enquired from the
Ministry as to whether it will be appropriate to replace the word

21
“injunction” with the words “order or direction”, the Ministry stated
as follows:—
“Suggestion noted for examination in consultation with the
Legislative Department for suitable drafting consistent with the
intent under the proposed section.”
51. The Committee opine that ‘injunction’ is a word used in
legal parlance for a court order that prohibits or compels a party
from continuing a particular activity. As the Committee have been
given to understand that the Commission would be an expert body
with regulatory, advisory and advocacy functions and the adjudicatory
functions will be carried out by the Appellate Tribunal—an
essentially judicial body, they are of the opinion that it would be
appropriate to replace the word ‘injunction’ in the Clause 21 dealing
with the functioning of the Commission with either the word ‘order’
or ‘direction’ for the sake of clarity. As the Ministry have already
agreed to the suggestion for consultation with the Legislative
Department, the Committee desire that an appropriate change may
be made in the Clause under question.
Clause 26: Substitution of new section for section 39 (Execution of
orders of Commission imposing monetary penalty)
52. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) If a person fails to pay any monetary penalty imposed on
him under this Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover
such penalty, in such manner as may be specified by the
regulations.
(2) In a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it
would be expedient to recover the penalty imposed under
this Act in accordance with the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this effect to the
concerned income-tax authority under that Act for recovery
of the penalty as tax due under the said Act.
(3) Where a reference has been made by the Commission under
sub-section (2) for recovery of penalty, the person upon
whom the penalty has been imposed shall be deemed to be
the assessee in default under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and
the provisions contained in sections 221 to 227, 228A, 229,
231 and 232 of the said Act and, the Second Schedule to
that At and any rules made thereunder shall in so far as
may be, apply as if the said provisions were the provisions

22
of this Act and referred to sums by way of penalty imposed
under this Act instead of to income-tax and sums imposed
by way of penalty, fine and interest under the Income-tax
Act, 1961 and to the Commission instead of the Income-tax
officer and Commissioner of Income-tax.
Explanation 1.— Any reference to sub-section (2) or sub-section (6)
of section 220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, in the said provisions
of that Act or the rules made thereunder shall be construed as
references to sections 43 to 45 of this Act.
Explanation 2.— The Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax
Recovery Officer referred to in the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be
deemed to be the Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax
Recovery Officer for the purposes of recovery of sums imposed by
way of penalty, under this Act.”
53. During their deliberations with the experts, the Committee had
noted the apprehensions being expressed by them that provision to
make a reference to concerned Income tax authorities for recovery of
penalty as tax due under the Income Tax Act, is likely to delay recovery.
Responding to this point, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“It has been proposed in Clause 26 of the Bill that under the new
section 39 (1), the Commission shall proceed to recover monetary
penalties in such manner as specified in the regulations. The
provision to recover the penalty as arrears of Income tax is an
additional procedure being made available to the Commission to
use an existing machinery to recover the penalty, which would
ordinarily be used only when the Commission is unable to recover
the same under section 39(1)# using its own procedures.”
#This section deals with execution of orders of Commission, which states as
follows:—
39. Every order passed by the Commission under this Act shall be enforced by the
Commission in the same manner as if it were a decree or order made by a High Court
or the principal civil court in a suit pending therein and it shall be lawful for the
Commission to send, in the event of its inability to execute it, such order to the High
Court or the principal civil court, as the case may be, within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a person referred to in sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause
(vi) or sub clause (vii) of clause (1) of section 2, the registered office or the sole or
principal place of business of the person in India or where the person has also a
subordinate office, that subordinate office, is situated;
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the place, where the person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, is
situated, and thereupon the court to which the order is so sent shall execute the order
as if it were a decree or order sent to it for execution.

23
54. The Committee while noting that in sub Section (3) of Section
39, the words “Income Tax Officer” and “Commissioner of Income
Tax” have been used, observed that these designations do not find
place in any of the recovery provisions mentioned in the Income Tax
Act as the term ‘Income tax officer’ has been substituted with the
word ‘assessing officer’ therein by the Direct Tax Laws (amendment)
Act, 1987. Therefore, when asked about replacing the words that find
mention in the clause by the words “Assessing Officer”, the Ministry
responded as under:—
“Suggestion noted. Appropriate terminology would be provided in
consultation with the Legislative Department.”
55. Further the Committee had received a suggestion that it would
be appropriate to incorporate in Clause 26 that any reference to ‘appeal’
in Chapter XVIID and Schedule II of IT Act 1961 will mean ‘appeal
before the Competition Appellate Tribunal’ under Section 53B of the
Competition Act.
56. When asked to comment thereupon, the Ministry stated:—
“Suggestion noted. The intention is to provide that the appeals
arising out of recovery proceedings of demand relating to the
Commission are filed with the Competition Appellate Tribunal.
Necessary corrections would be made, as appropriate, in
consultation with the Legislative Department.”
57. Further, it was also suggested to the Committee that it needs
to be incorporated in the explanation part of Section 39 that “Intimation
to Tax  Recovery Officer by Competition Commission would amount
to drawing of a Certificate by the Tax Recovery Officer as far as
demand relating to penalty under Competition Act 2002 is concerned”.
When asked to furnish their opinion on the suggestion, the Ministry
stated:
“Suggestion noted. Necessary corrections would be made, as
appropriate, in consultation with the Legislative Department”.
58. The Committee note that while Clause 26 seeks to substitute
Section 39 of the Principal Act with a new Section, there are certain
flaws in the wording of the same. For instance, the words ‘Income
Tax Officer’ and ‘Commissioner of Income Tax’ need to be replaced
with the words ‘assessing officer’ as those words do not find any
place in the recovery provisions in the Income Tax Act, 1961. The
Committee also feel that there is a need to incorporate in the

24
explanation part of Section 39 that ‘intimation to Tax Recovery Officer
by the commission would amount to drawing of a certificate by the
Tax Recovery Officer as far as demand relating to penalty under
Competition Act, 2002 is concerned’. Further, the Committee feel that
it would be more appropriate to incorporate in this Clause that any
reference to ‘appeal’ in Chapter XVIID and Schedule II of IT Act,
1961 will mean ‘appeal before the Competition Appellate T ribunal
under Section 53B of the Competition Act’ to ensure that the appeals
arising out of recovery proceedings of demands relating to the
Commission are filed with the Tribunal. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that necessary changes may be carried out accordingly
in the Clause 26 of the Amendment Bill.
Clause 30: Amendment of section 46 (Provisional for Lesser Penalty)
59. Clause 30 reads as under:—
In section 46 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the
Commission in cases where the report of investigation directed
under section 26 has been received before making such disclosure”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word “first”, the word “has”
shall be substituted.
60. The representative of CII submitted the following before the
Committee in this regard:
“…the proposed amendment could lead to collusion and the
leniency provision may be misused for securing lower penalty.”
The submission of FICCI was as follows:—
“…The underlying idea of the Competition Law is to avoid
cartelisation and Government must ensure that this should not
happen and the law should be implemented in letter and spirit.”
61. The Committee observed that the amendment provides that all
parties who wish to divulge information may do so until the time the
report of the Director General is submitted. When the Ministry was
asked to elaborate on whether the proposed amendment will not lead

25
to collusion and the leniency provision being misused for securing
lower penalty, it was stated as under:
“This is being done to enable leniency to ‘whistle blowers’. As per
existing section 46 of the Competition Act, 2002, a party to a cartel
who makes full and true disclosure to the violations, and if the
disclosure is vital, then the Commission may levy a lesser penalty
to the party, provided he satisfies the following two conditions,
amongst others:
(a) the proceedings should not have been instituted and
investigations should not have been directed to be made
before such a disclosure.
(b) The party must have been the first one to make the full,
true and vital disclosure.
In the Amendment Bill, the above two conditions are being further
relaxed, through Clause 30, as follows:
(a) Lesser penalty may be given till the stage of submission of
investigation report directed by the Commission, instead of
the present provision of till the ordering of investigation
report.
(b) Parties subsequent to the first party making disclosure shall
also be eligible for lesser penalty, instead of the present
provision of only the first party being eligible.
Cartels, internationally, are difficult to break, without one of the
parties to the cartel coming forward with vital information relating
to cartel. The provision of lesser penalty is essential to induce
such parties to volunteer information. Since lesser penalty is to be
given only in case of true, full and vital disclosure, and the full
Commission would have to decide on the issue of awarding lesser
penalty, instead of any individual, chances of misuse of this
provision is remote. Further, with appeals lying to CAT, any
decision of the CCI would be scrutinized by the appellate body,
ensuring that lesser penalties are given only in genuine cases.”
62. On the issue regarding the deciding authority to consider a
piece of information as ‘vital’, the Ministry responded as follows:
“It would be for the Commission to decide, sitting as a collegium,
on whether any information, furnished by any person involved in
a cartel, is vital or not. The Commission would apply the ‘Rule of

26
Reason’ in arriving at such a conclusion, and the same would be
appealable before the Appellate Tribunal”.
63. When questioned on the quantum of reduction in punishment
which can be given, the Ministry informed as under as follows:
“The quantum of reduction would be left to the Commission sitting
as a collegium, and is expected to be based on the relevance of
the information furnished, and the time of disclosure. It would be
open for the Commission to frame guidelines on the nature and
extent of reduction for various situations, instead of deciding the
same on a case to case basis. It would also be open to the
Commission to give total amnesty, since the Act does not prescribe
any limit on the extent of reduction of punishment”.
64. The Committee note that under Section 46, the Commission
may, if it is satisfied that any producer, seller, distributor, trader or
service provider included in any cartel, which is alleged to have
violated Section 3, has made a full and true disclosure in respect of
alleged violations and such disclosure is vital, impose upon such
producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider a lesser penalty
as it may deem fit, than leviable under this Act or the rules or the
regulations. The proposed amendment under Clause 30 of the Bill
applicable to this Section replaces the first proviso with a new
proviso which states that “provided that lesser penalty shall not be
imposed by the Commission in cases where the report of
investigation directed under section 26 has been received before
making such disclosure”. The Committee feel that cartels are difficult
to break. they, further feel that Section 46 of the Act does not lay
down the extent of reduction or what kind of information will be
considered to be vital, nor does it require the firm’s continued
cooperation in prosecuting other cartel members. In this connection,
the Committee have been given to understand that it would be for
the Commission to decide, based on the ‘Rule of Reason’, on whether
any information is vital or not. The Committee feel that the provision
needs to be more specific on this point. Further, the Committee are
of the opinion that such incentives should be structured in a way so
that each cartelist remains in a hurry to come forward with the
necessary evidence before do so, thus destabilizing the cartel.
Therefore, the Committee feel that this Section should be amended
in such a way so as to guarantee complete amnesty to the first firm
that gives enough evidence to commence an investigation by the
Commission, and reduced penalties for those giving useful evidence
subsequently, provided they continue to collaborate in investigations

27
against the remaining cartelists. This, in the Committee’s view, will
lead to a  substantial increase in the number of firms willing to
provide information. Since the CCI has not been given powers of
search and seizure, this arrangement would go a long way in
discouraging cartels. The Committee desire the Government to give
serious thought to the matter and come forth with an appropriate
amendment in clause 30 of the Bill.
Clause 31 of the Bill: Amendment of section 49 (Competition
Advocacy—Reference by Central and State Governments on Policy
matters relating to Competition)
65. Clause 31 reads as under:
In Section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words
and brackets “In formulating a policy on competition (including review
of laws related to competition), the Central Government may make a
reference”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“The Central Government may, in formulating a policy on
competition (including review of laws related to competition) and
a State Government may, in formulating a policy on competition,
make a reference”.
66. The Committee observed that proviso (2) of the Section 49 of
the Act reads as under:
“The opinion given by the Commission under Sub-section (1) shall
not be binding upon the Central Government in formulating such
policy.”
67. With respect to this Section, the following suggestions have
been received by the Committee:
PHDCCI:
“It is suggested that the CCI may also be enabled to study the
impact of various legal provisions and regulatory framework on
its own (not only when a reference is made to it), and participate
in policy formulation. The CCI should also be able to suggest
policy alternatives to ensure that competition is not stifled.”
Luthra & Luthra Law Firm:
“It is suggested that the scope of Section 49 (1) be amplified and
it be made unambiguously clear that an opinion of CCI be sought

28
on all policies/laws and procedures of the Central and State
Governments in so far as impact on competition is concerned.
There is a need to incorporate in enabling provision permitting
the Competition Commission to give its opinion on its own
knowledge or information on policies/laws of Central/State
Governments which are inconsistent with principles of competition.
The opinion being advisory does not in any way affect the
prerogative of the State to enact laws and to formulate policies as
it desires.”
Dr. Kelkar, IDFC:
“Reference should be permitted on any policy which impacts
competition substantially rather than only on policy of competition,
as it stands now. However, the Government should retain its power
to accept or not to accept recommendations of the CCI.
A competition authority should be able to advise or send its
opinion to the government on a policy issue on its own though
the advice/opinion may not be binding on Government. The
Competition Act should be amended to confer such powers on the
CCI.”
68. When questioned that reference should be permitted on any
policy which impacts competition substantially rather than only on
policy of Competition, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as under:
“The role of  CCI is to regulate competition in accordance with
the statutory provisions. The Act clearly places policy within the
domain of the Government which operates in a democratic
framework prescribed by the Constitution, responsive to public
interest. Section 49(1) of the Competition Act provides that Central
Government may consult CCI while formulating a ‘policy on
competition’, and not on any ‘policy impacting competition’. Policy,
due to its broader implications, is proposed to be retained in the
domain of the Government. It is not proposed that all government
policies be brought under the scanner of CCI and pre-audited
before they are finalized. It may be noted that ‘policy on
competition’ as may be formulated by the Government, is expected
to be prepared taking into account a wider range of issues,
impacting public interest. A reference to ‘policy impacting
competition’ however, would have the effect of subjecting all
policies of the Government to a pre-audit. Therefore, scope of 49(1)
had been restricted only to policies on competition at the time of
enactment of the Competition Act in 2002 and no change is required
in this formulation.”

29
69. The Committee further desired to know whether the CCI may
also be enabled to suo motu study the impact of various legal provisions
and regulatory framework on its own, and also suo motu participate in
the policy formulation and suggest policy alternatives. The Ministry
stated as under:
“The Commission could undertake such studies as a part of its
advocacy work. It is envisaged that in this manner, CCI would be
able to use its expertise to examine an issue in-depth and provide
various aspects and options that could then be considered in policy
formulation. The law on matters affecting competition is laid down
in the Competition Act, and CCI has full powers on inquiring on
such matters relating to competition. However, its jurisdiction does
not extend to policy-making powers of the Government, which is
a sovereign function of the Government. However, an exception
has been made in case of policy on competition, in which the
“Act provides, through section 49, that the Central Government
may refer the matter to CCI for opinion.
Since the final accountability on policy issues lies with the
Government, it is felt that it is best to leave it to Government’s
discretion to refer any matter of policy on competition to the
Commission for its opinion, and not expand these powers any
further.”
70. The Ministry further informed as under:
“Competition angle is one of the many factors considered by the
Government in policy formulation.
Further the CCI is not intended to be a body charged with pre-
audit of policy which is a sovereign function discharged by the
Government within the framework of the Constitution.
Besides Competition Commission is empowered to carry out
competition advocacy to convince policy makers of the force of its
arguments on the basis of its capacity to focus expertise on the
issue.”
71. In view of the importance of giving the CCI to function
effectively, the Committee felt that apart from the Central Government
the State Governments may be required to make reference to CCI not
only in respect of formulation of policy on competition, but in

30
formulation of other policies affecting competition. The Ministry
responded to this point as under:
“State Governments exist and operate in a constitutional framework
that recognizes federal nature of the Indian constitutional system
and as in the case of Central Government, need to exercise their
policy making role on issues over which they have jurisdiction.”
72. Section 49 allows Central Government and the State
Governments to seek the opinion of CCI on formulating the policy
on Competition. In this connection, several suggestions received by
the Committee   had hinted  upon the need to further amplify the
scope of this Section so that an opinion of CCI could be sought on
all policies of Central and State Governments that can impact
competition. However, the Committee take note of the response
furnished by the Government wherein it has been, inter-alia ,
informed that policy, in its wider implications, is proposed to be
retained in the domain of the Government and the CCI  is not
intended to be a body charged with pre-audit of policy. Nevertheless
the Committee expect that the CCI would make sincere efforts to
utilize its expertise to pinpoint such policies of the Government
which are inconsistent with the principles of Competition. Further,
the Committee observe that while under this Section the opinion of
CCI is not binding on the Central Government, this provision has
not been extended to the State Governments, which in all probability,
is due to drafting oversight. Therefore, the Committee desire that in
Section 49 (2) of the principal Act, the words “or State Governments”
should be inserted after the words “Central Government”.
Clause 34: Insertion of new Chapter VIII A (New Sections: 53A to
53U) (Competition Appellate Tribunal)
73. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, a new Chapter namely
VIIIA, Competition Appellate Tribunal has been proposed to be inserted
through clause 34. The clause inter-alia includes as follows:
53K (Removal from office)
(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India, remove from office the Chairperson or any other
member of the Appellate Tribunal, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any
paid employment; or

31
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of
the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as
such Chairperson or other member of the Appellate
Tribunal; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudically his functions as such Chairperson or
member of the Appellate Tribunal; or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in
office prejudicial to the public interest.
74. 53N (Awarding compensation)
(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this
Act, the Central Government or a State Government or a
local authority or any enterprise or any person may make
an application to the Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate on
claim for compensation that may arise from the findings of
the Commission and to pass an order for the recovery of
compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage
shown to have been suffered, by such person as a result of
any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II, having
been committed by enterprise.
(2) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied by the findings of the Commission, if any,
and also  be accompanied with such fees as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may , after an inquiry made into the
allegations mentioned in the application made under sub-
section (1), pass an order directing the enterprise to make
payment to the applicant, of the amount determined by it
as realizable from the enterprise as compensation for the
loss or damage caused to the applicant as a result of any
contravention of the provisions of Chapter II having been
committed by such enterprises:
Provided that in a case no decision or order has been made
or direction issued on the contravention alleged on the
application by the Commission, the Appellate Tribunal may
obtain the recommendations of the Commission before
passing an order of compensation.

32
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub-section (1) is
caused to numerous persons having the same interest, one
or more of such persons may, with the permission of the
Appellate Tribunal, make an application under that sub-
section for and on behalf of, or for the benefit of, the persons
so interested, and thereupon, the provisions of rule 8 of
Order I of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall apply subject to the modification that every
reference therein to a  suit or decree shall be construed as
a reference to the application before the Appellate Tribunal
and the order of the Appellate Tribunal thereon.
75. During evidence, the Committee desired to know as to why
the power of awarding compensation was being taken away from CCI.
To this, the Ministry responded as follows:
“In light of the issues raised in the legal challenges against certain
provisions of the Act, Government has decided to amend all
provisions which give a judicial character to the Commission. Since
awarding of compensation involves a process of adjudication, it
has been proposed to give the powers of awarding compensation
to the Appellate Tribunal, which has a judicial character, being
headed by a member of the judiciary.”
76. Comments received from two experts in this regard are as
under:
Luthra & Luthra Law Firm:
“It needs to be unambiguously provided in the newly proposed
Section 53 N of the Act that the application for the award of
compensation shall be entertained by the Competition Appellate
Tribunal only after an enterprise has been found to have violated
the provisions of the Act after an inquiry by the Competition
Commission of India.”
Dr. Vijay Kelkar from IDFC:
“The language of the proposed section 53N needs to be carefully
worded so as to prevent any possibility of parallel proceedings in
CCI & CAT since this could lead to forum shopping.”
77. When asked whether in the absence of a provision to enable
the Competition Commission to give its recommendations to the
Appellate Tribunal, a need arises to suitably amend the provision to

33
enable the Commission to do the same, the Ministry stated as
under:
“Proposed section 53N provides for procedure to be adopted by
the CAT while adjudicating on claims for compensation. The
provisions make it necessary for the CAT to consider the order
passed by the Commission and where necessary, to obtain the
recommendations of the Commission before passing any order of
compensation. This would ensure that the views of the Commission
are firmly taken into account by the CAT before pronouncing in
the matter. Thus, the possibility of a compensation order being
made in absence of views/recommendations of the Commission
would not be there. In view of the proposed provisions of clause
53N (3) under clause 34 of the Amendment Bill, such provision, as
suggested, does not appear to be necessary.”
78. Further questioned on the use of the words “if any” in sub-
clause (2) of the Section 53N that gives rise to the possibility of
compensation claims being filed with the Appellate Tribunal without
any findings of the Commission, the Ministry stated:
“This is being examined in consultation with Ministry of Law”.
79. It was apprehended that the use of the words “after an inquiry
made into the allegations” in sub-clause (3) of the Section 53N could
be interpreted as allowing a parallel inquiry into the substantive
allegations which, perhaps was not intended as the Appellate Tribunal
is an appellate body without an investigating agency. When asked to
comment, the Ministry submitted:
“The provision of enquiry here is included to determine the
quantum of compensation to be provided. However, the matter is
being examined in consultation with Ministry of Law so as to
remove chances of wrongful interpretation.”
80. In view of the apprehensions that the CCI will become
powerless due to the proposed amendments relating to transfer of its
powers to enforce its orders to the civil courts, and its powers to
award compensation to the Appellate Tribunal, the Committee desired
to know the position of the Government on the matter. In their post-
evidence reply, the Ministry submitted:
“while transferring the powers to the Appellate Tribunal, it has
been provided that the Tribunal shall adjudicate on claims of
compensation that may arise from findings of the Commission,

34
and its enquiry shall relate only to the admissibility and quantum
of compensation and not to the findings of the Commission as
such, unless the findings of the Commission are themselves
appealed against before the Tribunal.”
81. Clause 34 of the Bill inter-alia proposes Section 53Q, which
reads as under:
53Q (Contravention of orders of Appellate Tribunal)
Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, if any person
contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate
Tribunal, he shall be liable to be detained in civil prison for a term
which may extend to one year, unless in the meantime the civil court
directs his release and he shall also be liable to a penalty not exceeding
rupees ten lakhs.
82. The Clause 34 (section 53Q) does not explicitly specify the
authority competent to pass the order. In this connection, when asked
as to which authority shall be passing such an order, the reply of the
Ministry was as under:
“The intention in the provision was to provide powers to the courts
to order detention of a person or impose a fine for a contravention
of an order of the CAT without any reasonable ground. Necessary
changes would be made in clause 53Q in consultation with the
Legislative Department to make this exercise of power by CAT
unambiguous.”
Section 53T (Appeal to Supreme Court)
83. A new section 53T, proposed under clause 34 reads as
under:
“Any person aggrieved by any decision on order of the appellate
Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty
days from the date of communication of the decision or order of
the Appellate Tribunal to him.
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
within the said period, allow it to be filed after the expiry of the
said period of sixty days.

35
84. In this connection, the representative of the law firm Luthra &
Luthra submitted as under:
“Since the inquiry can be initiated on a reference from the Central
or State Government, it needs to be provided in Section 53T of the
Act that the Central as well as State Government shall have liberty
to file an appeal against the order passed by the Competition
Appellate Tribunal and further appeal should lie only on a question
of law as enshrined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.”
85. The Committee note that Sub-section 53K, which forms part
of the new Chapter VIII A concerning Competition Appellate
Tribunal inserted vide Clause 34 of the Amendment Bill, deals with
removal of the Chairperson or any other Member of the Tribunal on
certain conditions. The Committee are surprised to note that this
Sub-section provides the Central Government with the power to
remove the Chairperson or any other Member on the grounds of
insolvency, conviction to an offence, physical/mental disability etc.
in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. They fail to
understand the logic behind such an arrangement as the proviso (2)
of the proposed Section 53K provides that the Chairperson or a
member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be removed after an inquiry
made in this behalf by a Judge of the Supreme Court. The Committee
are of the opinion that since the removal is preceded by an inquiry
by Supreme Court Judge, there is no need to again consult the Chief
Justice of India for the same. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the words “in consultation with the Chief Justice of India” may be
deleted from Clause 53K of the Bill.
86. The Committee observe that through Clause 34, it is being
proposed to create a Competition Appellate Tribunal, having
adjudicatory powers. However, in their view, it is of utmost
importance that CAT, being a quasi-judicial body and not an expert
body, should not become parallel to the CCI. Therefore, the
Committee desire that suitable amendments need to be made in this
Clause to ensure that a party is able to approach the CAT only after
the CCI has determined in a proceeding before it, that a violation
of the Act has taken place. Therefore, they feel that the language of
the proposed section 53N needs to be worded in such a fashion so
that the application for award of compensation is entertained by the
CAT only after CCI has conducted an enquiry and given its findings.
The Committee also observe that the use of the words ‘if any’ in
sub-clause (2) and the words ‘after an enquiry made into the
allegations’ in sub clause (3) of section 53N give rise to certain

36
ambiguities. As the Ministry have already agreed in principle to
examine the matter so as to remove any chances of wrongful
interpretation, the Committee recommend that suitable amendments
may be made in the said sections to prevent ambiguity.
87. In so far as the power to award compensation is concerned,
the Committee note from the information furnished to them that
this power is now proposed to be vested in CAT and not in CCI as
this power has a judicial character which can be exercised only by
a quasi-judicial body like CAT. The Committee further note that
this proposal has taken shape in view of the issues raised in the
writ petition filed against certain provisions of the principal Act.
Most of the experts that had deposed before the Committee were of
the opinion that the power to award compensation should vest with
the Commission.
Clause 41: Amendment of section 66
88. Clause 41 reads as under:
In section 66 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(a) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 is
hereby repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said
Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved.
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-
section, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the repealed Act, may
continue to exercise jurisdiction and powers under the repealed Act
for a period of two years from the date of the commencement of this
Act in respect of all cases or proceedings (including complaints received
by it or references or applications made to it) filed before the
commencement of this Act as if the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 had not been repealed and all the provisions of the
said Act so repealed shall mutatis mutandis  apply to such cases or
proceedings or complaints or references or applications and to all other
matters.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
nothing in this proviso shall confer any jurisdiction or power upon

37
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to decide
or adjudicate any case or proceeding arising under the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 on or after the commencement
of this Act.
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969 shall, however, not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly
done or suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or
incurred under the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of
any contravention under the Act so repealed; or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, confiscation or punishment as
aforesaid,
and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty confiscation or punishment may be
imposed or made as if that Act had not been repealed.”
(b) In sub-section (2),—
(i) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided further that the Director-General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or Investigation and Registration or any officer or other
employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, employed
on regular basis by the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission, shall become, on and from such dissolution, the officer
and employee, respectively, of the Competition Commission of India
or the Appellate Tribunal, in such manner as may be specified by
the Central Government, with the same rights and privileges as to
pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have been
admissible to him if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had not been transferred

38
to, and vested in, the Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and shall continue to do
so unless and until his employment in the Competition Commission
of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, is duly
terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of
employment are duly altered by the Competition Commission of
India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.”;
(ii) in the third proviso, for the words “the Central Government”,
the words “the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(iii) in the fourth proviso,—
(a) for the words “the Central Government shall, out of the monies
standing”, the words “the Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall, out of the monies
standing” shall be substituted;
(b) for the portion beginning with the words “the Central
Government and such monies” and ending with the words “as may
be prescribed” the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal,
as the case may be, and such monies which stand so transferred
shall be dealt with by the said Commission or the Tribunal, as the
case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed”;
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive
trade practices pending (including such cases, in which any unfair
trade practice has also been alleged), before the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission and on or after the expiry
of two years referred to in the proviso to sub-section (1) shall,
stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be adjudicated
by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the
repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.”;
(d) in sub-section (4) for the words “on or before the
commencement of this Act shall, on such commencement”, the words,
brackets and figure “on or before the expiry of two years referred to
in the proviso to sub-section (1), shall” shall be substituted:

39
(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in
clause (x) of sub-section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and pending before the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on or after
the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub-section
(1), shall, stand transferred to the Competition Commission of India,
and the Competition Commission of India shall dispose of such
cases as if they were cases filed under that Act.”
89. This proposed section deals with transitional arrangements for
dealing with cases pending before MRTPC as well as officers and
employees of MRTPC to CCI. While the MRTPC has been allowed,
under Clause 41, a two year’s period to dispose of the pending cases
after the commencement of the Act, it provides for the transfer to
pending cases after two years to either the Competition Act. In this
regard the Committee desired to know as to whether any corresponding
amendment has been introduced in the Consumer Protection Act to
facilitate such transfer of cases to avoid any inconvenience to the
affected parties. The Ministry stated that the Department of Consumer
Affairs has separately taken up an exercise for revision of said Act.
90. As regards transfer of MRTPC staff to CCI, several experts
expressed their apprehensions on such an arrangement on the basis of
the argument that this will not be very helpful because the Members
and the staff of the present MRTP Commission are not trained or
qualified to deal with the complex economic analysis dealing with
competition, trade, finance, business or accounting. They were of the
view that it would be desirable if these personnel are given training
on these different fields before they are brought to the Commission.
91. When questioned by the Committee in this regard, the Ministry
submitted as follows:
“The meaning of Commission being an expert body is that the
Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall be experts.
The officers and staff of the Commission would be there only to
assist the Commission and would act under the control, guidance
and supervision of the Commission.
The Staffing pattern of the Commission as well as the manner in
which the services of such staff would be made available to the
Commission would be so devised so that the Commission can
carry out its functions effectively.

40
Under the proposed Amendment, CCI can also take recourse to
utilization of services of experts and professionals, which may
include experts to assist in capacity building of the staff.”
92. With regard to the transitional arrangements proposed under
Clause 41 of the Bill for dealing with cases pending before MRTPC
as well as with the officers and the staff of MRTPC following the
dissolution of this commission after two years of the commencement
of the Competition Act, the Committee feel that corresponding
amendments must be introduced in the Consumer Protection Act
1986 to facilitate smooth transfer of pending cases. The Committee
note from the information furnished by the Ministry that this
requirement has already been indicated to the Department of
Consumer Affairs. The Committee desire that the matter may be
pursued so that necessary amendments in the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 are carried out well in time.
93. With regard to transfer of MRTPC staff to CCI, the Committee
are of the opinion that some sort of a voluntary retirement scheme
may first be offered to them. For the staff who do not opt for
retirement under VRS, appropriate training must be imparted to them
before their transfer to CCI so that they could prove equally useful
to the Commission. Moreover, the Committee feel that as the CCI
would be largely manned by personnel who will be deputationists,
it would be in the fitness of things if a permanent cadre of officers
can be put into place in view of the very specific, complex and
serious nature of job involved as well as the fact that expertise in
the field of Competition is scarce in India.
94. Apart from certain provisions in the Bill, which required
recasting, the Committee strongly felt that there was a need to bring
about certain changes in the Principal Act also. The following
paragraphs deal with the same:
(1) Section 2(b), 2(b) (i) and 2(b)(ii)—Definitions
95. The Section reads as under:
(b) “agreement” includes any arrangement or understanding or
action in concert,—
(i) whether or not, such arrangement, understanding or action
is formal or in writing; or
(ii) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action
is intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings;

41
96. As the Committee felt that the words ‘between enterprises’
need to be inserted after the word ‘understanding’, the Ministry was
asked to examine the same. In their reply , the Ministry stated as under:
“The existing provisions are wider in scope since they relate to
“any arrangement or undertaking”, and not only to those between
enterprises. Besides the words “in concert” qualifies the act under
Section 2(b). Therefore, no change is felt necessary.”
97. Though the Ministry have taken the stand that the existing
provisions under Section 2(b), 2(b)(i) and 2(b)(ii) are wider in scope,
the Committee still feel that the words ‘between enterprises’ are
required so that the interpretation of the word could be made in the
right perspective as it was noticed that the MRTPC had wrongly
interpreted the word ‘understanding’ in several cases and applied it
to a single enterprise. Hence, they desire that Government may
consider carrying out the necessary changes in Section 2(b), 2(b) (i)
and 2(b) (ii) of the principal Act while bringing in the revised
amendment Bill.
(2) Section 3, 4 & 5—Anti-Competitive Agreements, abuse of
domination position and Regulation of Combinations
98. These Sections deal with the anti-competitive agreements, abuse
of domination position by enterprise or association of enterprises,
person or association of persons and combination by way of merger
and amalgamation of enterprises. In this connection, there is no
reference of inter-connected undertakings in these sections, which may
have wide impact on the competition. The term ‘interconnected
undertakings’ has been defined under Section 2 (g) of the MRTP Act
as under:
“‘inter-connected undertakings’ means two or more undertakings
which are interconnected with each other in any of the following
manner, namely, if one owns or control the others, if the
undertakings are owned or controlled by the same person, where
the undertakings are owned by firms, if such firms have one or
more common partners etc.”*
99. Questioned by the Committee on the same, the Ministry
submitted as under:
“The phrase ‘inter connected undertakings’ as defined under Section
2 (g) of the MRTP Act seeks to describe various kinds of
combinations which may be possible between two entities.
*For details refer to MRTPC Act, PP 6 to 9.

42
In the Competition Act, 2002, this issue is addressed through the
concept of action “in concert” in case of agreements [Section 3
read with Section 2(b)] and the concept of “control” in relation to
combinations.
Section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002, defines various kinds of
combinations, which are under the purview of the provisions of
the Competition Act. This includes acquisition of shares acquisition
of control, acquisition of assets and acquisition of voting rights.
For the purpose of the Act, “control” includes controlling the affairs
or management by one or more enterprises, either jointly or singly,
over another enterprise or group or one or more groups,  either
jointly or singly, over another group or enterprise. Further “group”
has been defined as two or more enterprises which, directly or
indirectly, are in a position to exercise twenty-six per cent or more
of the voting rights in the other enterprises; or appoint more than
fifty percent, of the members of the board of directions in the
enterprise; or control the management or affairs of the other
enterprises.
The above provisions are considered to be broad enough to address
different kinds of possible combinations and agreements. Such
agreements and combinations can take place numerous forms. It
would be restrictive to list the known forms in such cases in the
Act.”
100. The Committee find that Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the
Competition Act, that deal with the anti competitive agreements
between enterprises, abuse of dominant position by enterprise or
associations of enterprises, persons or associations of persons and
combination by way of merger and amalgamation of enterprises,
have no reference to inter-connected undertakings. In this connection,
the Committee note that Section 2 (g) of the MRTPC Act very clearly
defines the concept of inter-connected undertakings which have
substantial impact on competition in markets. The Ministry in their
explanation have taken the stand that this particular aspect is
addressed through the concept of action ‘in concert’ in case of
agreements [Section 3 read with Section 2 (b)] and the concept of
‘control’ in relation to combinations. The Ministry have also referred
to Section 5, which defines various kinds of combinations and stated
that these provisions are broad enough to address different kinds of
possible combinations and agreements. While agreeing to the
argument advanced by the Ministry, the Committee still feel that it
would be worthwhile to include the concept of ‘inter-connected

43
undertakings’ in line with the MRTPC Act for the sake of better
clarity as well as to empower the Competition Commission to act
effectively in case an adverse impact on competition is noticed due
to certain undesirable actions on the part of inter-connected
undertakings. Therefore, the Committee urge the Government to
suitably amend Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act to that effect.
Section 6—Regulation of combinations
101. Section 6 (2) reads as under:
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), any person
or enterprise, who or which proposes to enter into a combination,
may, at his or its option, give notice to the Commission, in the form
as may be specified, and the fee which may be determined, by
regulations, disclosing the details of the proposed combination, within
seven days of—
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or amalgamation,
referred to in clause (c) of section 5, by the board of directors of the
enterprises concerned with such merger or amalgamation, as the case
may be;
(b) execution of any agreement or other document for acquisition
referred to in clause (a) of section 5 or acquiring of control referred to
in clause (h) of that section.
102. In this regard, the Committee observed that since the
notification of combination is optional it means the act envisages a
voluntary pre-notification requirement for combinations/mergers above
a certain threshold limit. However, if the merging companies decide
not to notify, they would be at risk if subsequently the Commission
feels that the merger is going to have an adverse effect on the
competition. When asked to respond to this observation, the Ministry
stated in a written reply as under:
“Section 6(2) of the Competition Act provides for a voluntary pre-
notification of combinations above a threshold limit. This has been
provided so as to enable parties to a combination to take approval
of the Commission before going ahead with the Combination. This
would avoid high costs involved, if a post merger unscrambling is
ordered by the Commission. However, this provision has not been
made mandatory, since prior approval of all cases may lead to
delays and unjustified interventions. Where parties are reasonably
confident that any combination is not likely to be violative of the

44
law, they may proceed with the combination. However, where
parties anticipate or have reasonable apprehensions that a proposed
combination may be violative of provisions of the Act, they may
utilize the pre-notification route. Since a one year time limit has
been provided under Section 20 (1) of the Act for the Commission
to take up any inquiry into a combination, no unmerging of
combination can take place after one year.”
102. The Committee note that the Section 6 (2) of the principal
Act states that the notice by the concerned person or enterprise
entering into a combination is optional. In this connection, the
Committee are surprised to note the Ministry’s contention that the
provision has not been made mandatory since prior approval of all
cases may lead to delays and ‘unjustified interventions’. They are
unable to understand as to why a high ranking expert body like the
CCI cannot address problems like delay and unjustified interventions,
if the clause is made mandatory on the enterprises entering into
mergers/combinations. Moreover, the Committee feel that in the
current economic scenario, combinations are very likely to cause
appreciable adverse effect on competition within the relevant market
in India. However, leaving the option of giving notice of entering
into combination to the Commission at the discretion of the
enterprise would mean that the Commission may miss out on certain
important developments, which can ultimately hamper its functioning
as a regulatory body. Thus the Committee recommend that the Clause
6(2) may be amended suitably to provide for mandatory pre-
notification of combinations/mergers.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
08 December, 2006 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

45
NOTE OF DISSENT
Government has replaced the Monopoly & Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 which was the first enactment to deal with
competition issues, by the Competition Act 2002. Though, according to
Government’s viewpoint that MRTP Act has become obsolete in view
of rapid changing economic developments but there were some specific
provisions, which are still relevant in the present context. Since,
Government is going on amend the Competition Act 2002, the following
points, which neither been taken care of in the Competition Act 2002
nor in the amendment Bill, in my opinion, should be taken into
consideration:
One of the most objectionable points is “predatory pricing”.
Predatory pricing is a type of anti-competitive event in which
companies price their products below market values in an attempt to
drive out competition. The predatory firm first lowers its price until
it is below the average cost of its competitors. The competitors must
then lower their prices below average cost, thereby losing money on
each unit sold. If they fail to cut their prices, they will lose virtually
their entire market share; if they do cut their prices, they will eventually
go bankrupt. After the competition has been forced out of the market,
the predatory firm raises its price, compensating itself for the money
it lost while it was engaged in predatory pricing, and earns monopoly
profits forever after. This may lead to conditions where one company
has a monopoly in a certain product or industry. Competition laws
forbid predatory dumping in many countries such as the U.S. and the
European Union. In the explanation part of the Section 4 (2) of the
Competition Act 2002, where the words “including predatory pricing”
occur, should be deleted. Otherwise it will enable large firms with the
financial ability to sustain losses to drive out more efficient rivals.
It is most important to note that most of the statutes of the land
related to commercial and economic activities empower the authority
for search and seizure. The MRTP Act also under section 12(5) gave
the MRTP Commission the power of search and seizure. Though this
is of vital importance since the documents, records and evidences may
often be tampered, falsified and/or destroyed by the interested parties,
the Competition Act 2002 has neither made any provision for search
and seizure by the Competition Commission nor the Amendment Bill
proposed for the same.

46
One of the major shortcomings is there in the Competition Act,
which is also not mentioned in the draft report. No provision is there
for the employees, who are the major stakeholders of any company, to
present their views before the Commission during the merger
proceedings. In the Competition Act of South Africa, a special provision
allows trade unions to participate in the merger proceedings. Since,
Labour and Capital form an industry, not the Capital alone, it is the
just demand of the employees to take part in the merger proceedings.
The Government should consider this aspect to allow the trade unions
to present their views before the Competition Commission.
Sd/-
Chittabrata Majumdar

47
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 31st May, 2006 from 1030 to
1220 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
3. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
5. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
6. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
7. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary (A)
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary (B)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs and invited their attention to the
provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.

48
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Company Affairs
briefed the Committee on the various provisions contained in the
Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives that the information with regard to
queries of the Members which was not readily available with them
might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The briefing was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

49
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 26th July, 2006 from 9.30  to
10.45 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Rupchand Pal
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
6. Shri Lakshman Seth
7. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
11. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary (B)
WITNESSES
The Competition Commission of India
1. Shri Vinod Dhall, Member
2. Shri Amitabh Kumar, Director General

50
3. Shri Augustine Peter, Economic Advisor
4. Shri G.R. Bhatia, Additional Director General
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Competition Commission of India to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. Then, the representatives of the Competition Commission of
India gave a power point presentation on the overall functioning of
the Commission and further briefed the Committee on the various
provisions contained in the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The
Members asked clarificatory questions, which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that
the information with regard to queries of the Members, which was
not readily available with them, might be furnished to the Committee
in a week’s time.
4. The briefing was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

51
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIFTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 3 August, 2006 from 1500 to
1610 hours and 1620 to 1735 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
PART-I
(1500 to 1610 hours)
WITNESSES
A. PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(i) Smt. Sushma Berlia, President, PHDCCI
(ii) Shri Sali Bhandari, Member, Managing Committee &
Chairman, Corporate Affairs Committee, PHDCCI

52
(iii) Shri G.L. Agarwal, Member, Managing Committee & Co-
Chairman, Corporate Affairs Committee, PHDCCI
(iv) Shri Harish Vaid, Member, PHDCCI
(v) Prof. Bibek Debroy, Secretary General, PHDCCI
(vi) Ms. Shalini Mathur, Joint Secretary , PHDCCI
B. Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
(i) Shri Dipankar Chatterjee, Past Chairman, CII (Eastern
Region) & Senior Partner, L.B. Jha & Co.
(ii) Shri M.S. Rathore, General Manager (Legal) and Company
Secretary, Chambal Fertilisers
(iii) Shri Munish Saraogi, Senior Manager, Pricewaterhouse
Coopers
(iv) Shri C. Banerjee, Senior Director, CII
(v) Shri Vikram Badshah, Head—CII Public Policy
C. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
(i) Shri Lalit Bhasin, Co-Chairman, FICCI’s Committee on
Corporate Laws & Legal Affairs and Mg. Partner, Bhasin &
Co.
(ii) Shri Vivek Bharati, Advisor, FICCI
(iii) Shri Suhaan Mukherji, Sr. Associate, Amarchand &
Mangaldas
(iv) Ms. Anuradha, R.V . Partner, Amarchand & Mangaldas
(v) Shri S.B. Gupta, Consultant
(vi) Ms. Jyoti Vij, Additional Director
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
PHDCCI, CII and FICCI to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. Then, the representatives of PHDCCI, FICCI and CII briefed the
Committee on certain aspects of the provisions contained in the Bill.
The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by
the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives
that the information with regard to queries of the Members, which
was not readily available with them, might be furnished to the
Committee in a week’s time.

53
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART II
(1620 to 1735 Hours)
Witness
Dr. S. Chakravarthy, IAS (R), Former Member, MRTPC and Expert
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Dr. S. Chakravarthy to
the sitting of the Committee and invited his attention to the provisions
contained in Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.
3. Then, Dr. Chakravarthy gave a powerpoint presentation on the
various provisions contained in the Competition (Amendment) Bill,
2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied
to by Dr. Chakravarthy. The Chairman, then, directed that a
consolidated written statement, including oral replies to Members’
queries given by him during the meeting as well as the queries which
were not replied to, might be furnished to the Committee in a week’s
time.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

54
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 18th September, 2006 from 1030 to
1215 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
15. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
16. Shri Yashwant Sinha
17. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

55
WITNESSES
Amarchand Mangaldas (Law Firm)
1. Ms. Pallavi Shroff, Partner (Member of the High Powered
S.V .S. Raghvan Committee and Member of the Sub Group
that prepared the first draft of the Concept Bill of the
Competition Act.)
2. Ms. R.V . Anuradha, Partner
3. Shri Suhaan Mukherji, Senior Associate
Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS)
1. Shri Pradeep S. Mehta, Secretary General
2. Mrs. Mani Lamba, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Amarchand Mangaldas (Law Firm) and Consumer Unity and Trust
Society (CUTS) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Competition (Amendment) Bill,
2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions, which were replied
to by the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the
representatives that the information with regard to queries of the
Members, which was not readily available with them, might be
furnished to the Committee in a week’s time.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

56
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 28th September, 2006 from
1100 to 1245 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gutpa
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri K.S. Rao
11. Shri A.R. Shaheen
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Yashwant Sinha
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

57
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Ajay Nath, Director General (Investigation & Research,
MRTPC)
5. Shri Amitabh Kumar, Director General (Competition
Commission of India)
6. Shri Praveen Kumar, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Competition (Amendment) Bill,
2006. The Chairman then asked the representatives to furnish written
notes, on certain points raised by Members, in respect of which replies
were not readily available with them during the discussion, to the
Committee in three weeks’ time.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

58
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16th November, 2006 from
1100 to 1310 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Raashid Alvi
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint  Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary (B)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Shri Anurag Goel, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ajay Nath, Director, General (I&R)

59
4. Shri Amitabh Kumar, Director General (CCI)
5. Shri Praveen Kumar, Director
Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs)
Shri M.A. Khan Yusufi, Joint Secretary
(Legislative Department)
Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Ministry of Company Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
both the Ministries on the provisions of the Competition (Amendment)
Bill, 2006. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were
replied to by the representatives of the Ministries. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 7 December, 2006 from 1500 to
1610 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Lakshman Seth
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

61
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee first took up for consideration the draft report
on the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Committee after
deliberation adopted the draft Report with the modifications/
amendments shown in Annexure I.
4. ** ** **
5. ** ** **
6. ** ** **
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of suggestions received from the Members and also make
consequential verbal changes and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned to meet
again on 11 December, 2006.

62
ANNEXURE
[Modifications/Amendments made by Standing Committee on Finance in
their Draft Report on the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006 at
Their sitting held on 7 December, 2006]
Page 11
Para No. 19
Line 5
For
“Competition Law and Policy”
Substitute
“Competition Law”
Page 19
Para 34
Line 14
For
“Director-General is an officer borne permanently
on the Cadre of the Competition Commission”.
Substitute
“Director-General is an officer who is an expert
borne permanently on the Cadre of the
Competition Commission”.
Page 22
Para 42
Line 12
For
“…adequate prior consultation with legal experts
be undertaken…”
Substitute
“…adequate prior consultation with experts in
different fields be undertaken…”

63
Page 46
Para 87
Line 7
Delete
“Although”
Page 46
Para 87
Line 9-10
Delete
“…however the Committee would like to refrain
from making any further comments on the
matter”.
Page 56
After para 93
Add
Paragraphs 94 to paragraphs 103 which read as
under:
“94. Apart from certain provisions in the Bill, which required
recasting, the Committee strongly felt that there was a need to bring
about certain changes in the Principal Act also. The following
paragraphs deal with the same:
(1) Section 2(b), 2(b)(i) and 2(b)(ii)-Definitions
95. The Section reads as under:
(b) “agreement” includes any arrangement or understanding or
action in concert,—
(i) whether or not, such arrangement, understanding or action
is formal or in writing; or
(ii) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action
is intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings;
96. As the Committee felt that the words ‘between enterprises’
need to be inserted after the word ‘understanding’, the Ministry was
asked to examine the same. In their reply , the Ministry stated as under:
“The existing provisions are wider in scope since they relate to
“any arrangement or undertaking”, and not only to those between

64
enterprises. Besides the words “in concert” qualifies the act under
Section 2(b). Therefore, no change is felt necessary.”
97. Though the Ministry have taken the stand that the existing
provisions under Section 2 (b), 2(b)(i) and 2(b)(ii) are wider in scope,
the Committee still feel that the words ‘between enterprises’ are
required so that the interpretation of the word could be made in the
right perspective as it was noticed that the MRTPC had wrongly
interpreted the word ‘understanding’ in several cases and applied it to
a single enterprise. Hence, they desire that Government may consider
carrying out the necessary changes in Section 2(b), 2(b)(i) and 2(b) (ii)
of the principal Act while bringing in the revised amendment Bill.
(2) Section 3, 4 & 5—Anti-Competitive Agreements, Abuse of
domination position and Regulation of Combinations
98. These Sections deal with the anti-competitive agreements, abuse
of domination position by enterprise or association of enterprises,
person or association of persons and combination by way of merger
and amalgamation of enterprises. In this connection, there is no
reference of inter-connected undertakings in these sections, which may
have wide impact on the competition. The term ‘interconnected
undertakings’ has been defined under Section 2(g) of the MRTP Act as
under:
“inter-connected undertakings’ means two or more undertakings
which are interconnected with each other in any of the following
manner, namely, if one owns or control the others, if the
undertakings are owned or controlled by the same person, where
the undertakings are owned by firms, if such firms have one or
more common partners etc.”*
99. Questioned by the Committee on the same, the Ministry
submitted as under:
“The phrase ‘inter connected undertakings’ as defined under Section
2 (g) of the MRTP Act seeks to describe various kinds of
combinations which may be possible between two entities.
In the Competition Act, 2002, this issue is addressed through the
concept of action “in concert” in case of agreements [Section 3
read with Section 2(b)] and the concept of “control” in relation to
combinations.
Section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002, defines various kinds of
combinations, which are under the purview of the provisions of
*For details refer to MRTPC Act, pp 6 to 9.

65
the Competition Act. This includes acquisition of shares acquisition
of control, acquisition of assets and acquisition of voting rights.
For the purpose of the Act, “control” includes controlling the affairs
or management by one or more enterprises, either jointly or singly,
over another enterprise or group or one or more groups, either
jointly or singly, over another group or enterprise. Further “group”
has been defined as two or more enterprises which, directly or
indirectly, are in a position to exercise twenty-six per cent or more
of the voting rights in the other enterprise; or appoint more than
fifty percent, of the members of the board of directions in the
enterprise; or control the management or affairs of the other
enterprise.
The above provisions are considered to be broad enough to address
different kinds of possible combinations and agreements. Such
agreements and combinations can take place numerous forms. It
would be restrictive to list the known forms in such cases in the
Act.”
100. The Committee find that Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the
Competition  Act, that deal with the anti-competitive agreements
between enterprises, abuse of dominant position by enterprise or
associations of enterprises, persons or associations of persons and
combination by way of merger and amalgamation of enterprises,
have no reference to inter-connected undertakings. In this connection,
the Committee note that Section 2(g) of the MRTPC Act very clearly
defines the concept of inter-connected undertakings which have
substantial impact on competition in markets. The Ministry in their
explanation have taken the stand that this particular aspect is
addressed through the concept of action ‘in concert’ in case of
agreements [Section 3 read with Section 2 (b)] and the concept of
‘control’ in relation to combinations. The Ministry have also referred
to Section 5, which defines various kinds of combinations and stated
that these provisions are broad enough to address different kinds of
possible combinations and agreements. While agreeing to the
argument advanced by the Ministry, the Committee still feel that it
would be worthwhile to include the concept of ‘inter-connected
undertakings’ in line with the MRTPC Act for the sake of better
clarity as well as to empower the Competition Commission to act
effectively in case an adverse impact on competition is noticed due
to certain undesirable actions on the part of inter-connected
undertakings. Therefore, the Committee urge the Government to
suitably amend Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act to that effect.

66
Section 6—Regulation of Combinations
101. Section 6(2) reads as under:
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), any person
or enterprise, who or which proposes to enter into a combination,
may, at his or its option, give notice to the Commission, in the form
as may be specified, and the fee which may be determined, by
regulations, disclosing the details of the proposed combination, within
seven days of—
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or amalgamation,
referred to in clause (c) of section 5, by the board of directors
of the enterprises concerned with such merger or
amalgamation, as the case may be;
(b) execution of any agreement or other document for
acquisition referred to in clause (a) of section 5 or acquiring
of control referred to in clause (h) of that section.
102. In this regard, the Committee observed that since the
notification of combination is optional it means the act envisages a
voluntary pre-notification requirement for combinations/mergers above
a certain threshold limit. However, if the merging companies decide
not to notify, they would be at risk if subsequently the Commission
feels that the merger is going to have an adverse effect on the
competition. When asked to respond to this observation, the Ministry
stated in a written reply as under:
“Section 6(2) of the Competition Act provides for a voluntary pre-
notification of combinations above a threshold limit. This has been
provided so as to enable parties to a combination to take approval
of the Commission before going ahead with the Combination. This
would avoid high costs involved, if a post merger unscrambling is
ordered by the Commission. However, this provision has not been
made mandatory, since prior approval of all cases may lead to
delays and unjustified interventions. Where parties are reasonably
confident that any combination is not likely to be violative of the
law, they may proceed with the combination, However, where
parties anticipate or have reasonable apprehensions that a proposed
combination may be violative of provisions of the Act, they may
utilize the pre-notification route. Since a one year time limit has
been provided under Section 20 (1) of the Act for the Commission
to take up any inquiry into a combination, no unmerging of
combination can take place after one year.”

67
103. The Committee note that the Section 6(2) of the principal
Act states that the notice by the concerned person or enterprise
entering into a combination is optional. In this connection, the
Committee are surprised to note the Ministry’s contention that the
provision has not been made mandatory since prior approval of all
cases may lead to delays and ‘unjustified interventions’. They are
unable to understand as to why a high ranking expert body like the
CCI cannot address problems like delay and unjustified interventions,
if the clause is made mandatory on the enterprises entering into
mergers/combinations. Moreover, the Committee feel that in the
current economic scenario, combinations are very likely to cause
appreciable adverse effect on competition within the relevant market
in India. However, leaving the option of giving notice of entering
into combination to the Commission at the discretion of the
enterprise would mean that the Commission may miss out on certain
important developments, which can ultimately hamper its functioning
as a regulatory body.  Thus the Committee recommend that the
Clause 6(2) may be amended suitably to provide for mandatory pre-
notification of combinations/mergers.

68
Bill No. 18 of 2006
THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the
Competition (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
2. In section 2 of the Competition Act, 2002
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
after clause (b), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(ba)’ “Appellate Tribunal” means the
Competition Appellate Tribunal established
under sub-section (1) of section 53A.’.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), in clause (c), after the word “access”,
the words “in any manner” shall be inserted.
4. For section 8 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 4.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 8.
12 of 2003.

69
“8. (1) The Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson and not less than two and not
more than six other Members to be appointed
by the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson and every other
Member shall be a person of ability, integrity
and standing and who has special knowledge
of, and professional experience of not less than
fifteen years in, international trade, economics,
business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy,
management, industry, public affairs, which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, may
be useful to the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members
shall be whole-time Members.”.
5. For section 9 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“9. (1) The Chairperson and other
Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Central Government from
a panel of names recommended by a
Section Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his
nominee..............Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of
Company Affairs...........Member;
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law
and Justice........Member.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee
and the manner of selection of panel of names
shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), for the proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the Chairperson or other
Member shall not hold office as such after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.”.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 9.
Selection
Committee
for
Chairperson
and
Members of
Commission.
Amendment
of section 10.
Composition
of
Commission.

70
7. In section 12 of the principal Act, for
the words “one year”, the words “two years”
shall be substituted.
8. For section 13 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“13. The Chairperson shall have the powers
of general superintendence, direction and
control in respect of all administrative matters
of the Commission:
Provided that the Chairperson may delegate
such of his powers relating to administrative
matters of the Commission, as he may think
fit, to any other Member or officer of the
Commission.”.
9. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government may, by
notification, appoint a Director General for
the purposes of assisting the Commission
in conducting inquiry into contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act and for
performing such other functions as are, or
may be, provided by or under this Act.
(1A) The number of other Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General
or such officers or other employees in the
office of Director General and the manner
of appointment of such Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General or
such officers or other employees shall be
such as may be prescribed.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words
“such other advisers, consultants and
officers,”, the words “such officers or other
employees,” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the
words “such other advisers, consultants, or
Amendment
of section 12.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 13.
Administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Amendment
of section 16.

71
officers,”, the words “such officers or other
employees,” shall be substituted.
10. For section 17 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“17. (1) The Commission may appoint a
Secretary and such officers and other employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to
and other terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary and officers and other employees
of the Commission and the number of such
officers and other employees shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission may engage, in
accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations such number of experts and
professionals of integrity and outstanding
ability, who have special knowledge of, and
experience in, economics, law, business or such
other disciplines related to competition, as it
deems necessary to assist the Commission in
the discharge of its functions under this Act.”.
11. In section 19 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words
“receipt of a complaint,”, the words “receipt of
any information, in such manner and” shall be
substituted.
12. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that any statutory authority,
may, suo motu,  make such a reference to
the Commission.”;
(b) for sub-section (2) and the proviso
thereto, the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 19.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 17.
Appointment
of Secretary,
experts,
professionals
and officers
and other
employees
of
Commission.
Amendment
of section 21.

72
“(2) On receipt of a reference under
sub-section (1), the Commission shall, give
its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of
such reference, to such statutory authority
which shall consider the opinion of the
Commission and thereafter, give its finding
recording reasons therefor on the issues
referred to in the said opinion.”
13. For section 22 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“22. (1) The Commission shall meet at
such times and places, and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings as
may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reason,
is unable to attend a meeting of the
Commission, the senior-most Member
present at the meeting, shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before
any meeting of the Commission shall be
decided by a majority of the Members
present and voting, and in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his
absence, the Member presiding, shall have
a second or/casting vote:
Provided that the quorum for such
meeting shall be three Members.”.
14. Sections 23, 24 and 25 of the principal
Act shall be omitted.
15. For section 26 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“26. (1) On receipt of a reference from
the Central Government or a State
Government or a statutory authority or on
its own knowledge or information received
under section 19, if the Commission is of
Substitution
of new
section for
section 22.
Meetings of
Commission.
Omission of
sections 23,
24 and 25.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 26.
Procedure
for inquiry
under
section 19.

73
the opinion that there exists a prima facie
case, it shall direct the Director General to
cause an investigation to be made into the
matter.
(2) Where on receipt of a reference from
the Central Government or a State Government
or a statutory authority or information received
under section 19, the Commission is of the
opinion that there exists no prima facie  case, it
shall close the matter forthwith and pass such
orders as it deems fit and send a copy of its
order to the Central Government or the State
Government or the statutory authority or the
parties concerned, as the case may be.
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt
of direction under sub-section (1), submit a
report on his findings within such period as
may be specified by the Commission.
(4) The Commission may forward a copy
of the report referred to in sub-section (3) to
the parties concerned:
Provided that in case the investigation is
caused to be made based on reference received
from the Central Government or the State
Government or the statutory authority, the
Commission shall forward a copy of the report
referred to in sub-section (3) to the Central
Government or the State Government or the
statutory authority, as the case may be.
(5) If the report of the Director General
referred to in sub-section (3) recommends that
there is no contravention of the provisions of
this Act, the Commission shall invite objections
or suggestions from the Central Government
or the State Government or the statutory
authority or the parties concerned, as the case
may be, on such report of the Director General.
(6) If, after consideration of the objections
and suggestions referred to in sub-section (5),
if any, the Commission agrees with the

74
recommendation of the Director General, it shall
close the matter forthwith and pass such orders
as it deems fit and communicate its order to
the Central Government or the State
Government or the statutory authority or the
parties concerned, as the case may be.
(7) If, after consideration of the objections
or suggestions referred to in sub-section (5), if
any, the Commission is of the opinion that
further investigations are called for, it may
direct further investigations in the matter by
the Director General or cause further inquiries
to be made by in the matter or itself proceed
with further inquiry in the matter in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
(8) If the report of the Director General
referred to in sub-section (3) recommends that
there is contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act, and the Commission is of the
opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall
inquire into such contravention in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.”.
16. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) clauses (c) and (f) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (g), for the word “order“,
the words “order or issue such direction”
shall be substituted.
17. In section 28 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words,
brackets, letter and figures “Central
Government on recommendation under
clause (f) of section 27,”, the word
“Commission” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), clause (d) shall
be omitted.
18. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words
“Where the commission is of the”, the
words “ prima facie ” shall be inserted;
Amendment
of section 27.
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 29.

75
(b) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) After receipt of the response of
the parties to the combination under sub-
section (1), the Commission may call for a
report from the Director General and such
report shall be submitted by the Director
General within sixty days:
Provided that the Commission may, if
it is satisfied that the Director General was
prevented by sufficient cause from
submitting the report within the said
period, allow the Director General to submit
the report within a further period not
exceeding sixty days.”.
(c) in sub-section (2), after the words
“parties to the combination”, the words,
brackets, figure and letter “or the receipt
of the report from Director General called
under sub-section (1A), whichever is later”
shall be inserted.
19. For section 30 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“30. Where any person or enterprise has
given a notice under sub-section (2) of section
6, the Commission shall examine such notice
and form its prima facie  opinion as provided in
sub-section (1) of section 29 and proceed as
per provisions contained in that section.”.
20. In section 32 of the principal Act, after
clause (f)—
(a) after the words “have power to
inquire”, the words and figures “in
accordance with the provisions contained
in sections 19, 20, 26, 29 and 30 of the Act”
shall be inserted;
(b) after the words “relevant market in
India”, occurring at the end, the words
Substitution
of new
section for
section 30.
Procedure in
case of
notice under
sub-section
(2) of
section 6.
Amendment
of section 32.

76
“and pass such orders as it may deem fit
in accordance with the provisions of this
Act” shall be inserted.
21. For section 33 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“33. Where during an inquiry, the
Commission is satisfied that an act in
contravention of sub-section (1) of section
3 of sub-section (1) of section 4 or section
6 has been committed and continues to be
committed or that such act is about to be
committed, the Commission may, by order,
grant a temporary injunction restraining any
party from carrying on such act until the
conclusion of such inquiry or until further
orders, without giving notice to the
opposite party, where it deems it
necessary.”.
22. Section 34 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
23. In section 35 of the principal Act, for
the words “complainant or defendant”, the
words “person or an enterprise” shall be
substituted.
24. For section 36 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“36. (1) In the discharge of its functions,
the Commission shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice and, subject to
the other provisions of this Act and of any
rules made by the Central Government, the
Commission shall have the powers to
regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Commission shall have, for the
purposes of discharging its functions under
the Act, the same powers as are vested in
a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Substitution
of new
section for
section 33.
Power to
issue interim
orders.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 36.
Power of
Commission
to regulate
its own
procedure.
Amendment
of section 35.
Omission of
section 34.

77
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) requisitioning, subject to the
provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, any public
record or document or copy of such record
or document from any office.
(3) The Commission may call upon such
experts, from the field of economics, commerce,
accountancy, international trade or from any
other discipline as it deems necessary, to assist
the Commission in the conduct of any inquiry
by it.
(4) The Commission may direct any
person—
(a) to produce before the Director
General or the Secretary or an officer
authorised by it, such books, or other
documents in the custody or under the
control of such person so directed as may
be specified or described in the direction,
being documents relating to any trade, the
examination of which may be required for
the purposes of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General
or the Secretary or any other officer
authorised by it, as respects the trade or
such other information as may be in his
possession in relation to the trade carried
on by such person, as may be required for
the purposes of this Act.”.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.

78
25. Section 37 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
26. For section 39 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“39. (1) If a person fails to pay any
monetary penalty imposed on him under this
Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover
such penalty, in such manner as may be
specified by the regulations.
(2) In a case where the Commission is of
the opinion that it would be expedient to
recover the penalty imposed under this Act in
accordance with the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this
effect to the concerned income-tax authority
under that Act for recovery of the penalty as
tax due under the said Act.
(3) Where a reference has been made by
the Commission under sub-section (2) for
recovery of penalty, the person upon whom the
penalty has been imposed shall be deemed to
be assessee in default under the Income-tax Act,
1961 and the provisions contained in sections
221 to 227, 228A, 229, 231 and 232 of the said
Act and the Second Schedule to that Act any
rules made thereunder shall in so far as may
be, apply as if the said provisions were the
provisions of this Act and referred to sums by
way of penalty imposed under this Act instead
of to income-tax and sums imposed by way of
penalty, fine and interest under the Income-tax
Act, 1961 and to the Commission  instead of
the Income-tax officer and Commissioner of
Income-tax.
Explanation 1.—Any reference to sub-section
(2) or sub-section (6) of section 220 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, in the said provisions of
that Act or the rules made thereunder shall be
construed as references to sections 43 to 45 of
this Act.
Omission of
section 37.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 39.
Execution of
orders of
Commission
imposing
monetary
penalty.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

79
Explanation 2. —The Tax Recovery
Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer
referred to in the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall
be deemed to be the Tax Recovery
Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer
for the purposes of recovery of sums
imposed by way of penalty, under this
Act.”.
27. Section 40 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
28. For section 42 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“42. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions
of this Act, if any person violates and direction
issued or contravenes, without any reasonable
ground, any decision or order of the
Commission issued under section 27, 28, 31, 32
and 33 or any condition or restriction subject
to which any approval, sanction, direction or
exemption in relation to any matter has been
accorded, given, made or granted under this
Act or fails to pay the penalty imposed under
this Act, then he shall, without prejudice to
any proceeding under section 39, be liable for
imposition of an additional penalty not
exceeding rupees ten lakhs or imprisonment for
a term up to one year or both as the Civil
Court having jurisdiction in the matter may
deem fit.
(2) The Commission may cause an
investigation to be made into compliance of its
orders and, based on the results of the
investigation or otherwise, file a complaint
before the Civil Court having jurisdiction in
the matter, which shall pass such order under
this section as it may deem fit:
Provided that the Civil Court shall not take
cognizance of any offence punishable under this
section, save on a complaint filed by the
Commission or any of its officers authorised
by it.”.
Omission of
section 40.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 42.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.
43 of 1961.

80
29. In section 43 of the principal Act, in
clause (a), for the words, brackets and figure
“under sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets and
figures “under sub-section (2) and (4)” shall be
substituted.
30. In section 46 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the first proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that lesser penalty shall not
be imposed by the Commission in cases
where the report of investigation directed
under section 26 has been received before
making such disclosure;”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word
“first”, the word “has” shall be substituted.
31. In section 49 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words and brackets “In
formulating a policy on competition (including
review of laws related to competition), the
Central Government may make a reference”,
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“The Central Government may, in
formulating a policy on competition (including
review of the laws related to competition) and
a State Government may, in formulating a
policy on competition, make a reference”.
32. In section 51 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (d), for the words, brackets
and letters “clauses (a) to (c)”, the words,
brackets and letters “clause (a) and (c)”
shall be substituted.
33. In section 52 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), in the Explanation,  for the
words “Supreme Court”, the words “Appellate
Tribunal or the Supreme Court” shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 43.
Amendment
of section 46.
Amendment
of section
49.
Amendment
of section 51.
Amendment
of section 52.

81
34. After Chapter VIII of the principal Act,
the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER VIIIA
COMPETITION A PPELLATE T RIBUNAL
53A. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish an Appellate Tribunal to
be known as Competition Appellate Tribunal—
(a) to hear and dispose of appeals
against any direction issued or decision
made or order passed by the Commission
under sub-sections (2) and (6) of section
26, section 27, section 28, section 31, section
32, section 33, section 38, section 39, section
43, section 44, section 45 or section 46 of
the Act;
(b) to adjudicate on claim for
compensation that may arise from the
findings of the Commission and pass orders
for the recovery of compensation under
section 53N.
(2) The Headquarter of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be at such place as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify.
53B. (1) The Central Government or the
State Government or a local authority or
enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any
direction, decision or order referred to in clause
(a) of section 53A may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall
be filed within a period of sixty days from the
date on which a copy of the direction or
decision or order made by the Commission is
received by the Central Government or the
State Government or a local authority or
enterprise or any person referred to in that sub-
section and it shall be in such form and be
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may
entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
Insertion of
new Chapter
VIIIA.
Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Appeal to
Appellate
Tribunal.

82
period of sixty days if it is satisfied that there
was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-
section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after
giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity
of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it
thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting
aside the direction, decision or order appealed
against.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy
of every order made it to the Commission and
the parties to the appeal.
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate
Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be dealt
with by it as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of
the appeal within six months from the date of
receipt of the appeal.
53C. The Appellate Tribunal shall consist
of a Chairperson and not more than two other
members to be appointed by the Central
Government.
53D. (1) The Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be a person, who is, or has been,
a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief
Justice of a High Court.
(2) A member of the Appellate Tribunal
shall be a person of ability, integrity and
standing having special knowledge of, and
professional experience of not less than twenty-
five years in, competition, international trade,
economics, business, commerce, law, finance,
accountancy, management, industry, public
affairs, administration or in any other matter
which in the opinion that Central Government,
may be useful to the Appellate Tribunal.
53E. (1) The Chairperson and members of
the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by
Composition
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and
members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Selection
Committee.

83
the Central Government from a panel of names
recommended by the Selection Committee
composition of which has been specified in
section 9.
(2) The term of the Selection Committee
and the manner of selection of panel of names
shall be such as may be prescribed.
53F. The Chairperson or a member of the
Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such for
a term of five years from the date on which he
entres upon his office, and shall be eligible for
re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other
member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold
office as such after he has attained,—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age
of sixty-eight years;
(b) in the case of any other member of
the Appellate Tribunal, the age of sixty-five
years.
53G. (1) The salaries and allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and other members of the
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(2) The salaries, allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and other members of the Appellate Tribunal
shall not be varied to their disadvantage after
their appointment.
53H. If, for any reason other than
temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the
office of the Chairperson or a member of the
Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government
shall appoint another person in accordance with
the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy
and the proceedings may be continued before
the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which
the vacancy is filled.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and
members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Cahirperson
and
members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Vacancies.

84
53-I. The Chairperson or a member of the
Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central
Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member
of the Appellate Tribunal shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
53J. (1) In the event of the occurrence of
any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of
the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death,
resignation, the senior-most member of the
Appellate Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson
of the Appellate Tribunal until the date on
which a new Chairperson appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act to
fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the senior-most member or, as the case may
be, such one of the member of the Appellate
Tribunal, as the Central Government may, by
notification, authorise in this behalf, shall
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until
the date on which the Chairperson resumes his
duties.
53K. (1) The Central Government may, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
remove from office the Chairperson or any
other member of the Appellate Tribunal, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his
term of office, in any paid employment;
or
Resignation
of
Chairperson
and
members of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Memmber of
Appellate
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson
in certain
cases.
Removal
and
suspension
of
Chairperson
and
members of
Appellate
Tribunal.

85
(c) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as such Chairperson or
other member of the Appellate Tribunal; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as such Chairperson or
member of the Appellate Tribunal; or
(f) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), no Chairperson or a member
of the Appellate Tribunal shall be removed from
his office on the ground specified in clause (e)
or clause (f) of sub-section (1) except by an
order made by the Central Government after
an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of
the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson
or member had been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard in respect of those charges.
53L. The Chairperson and other members
of the Appellate Tribunal shall not, for a period
of two years from the date on which they cease
to hold office, accept any employment in, or
connected with the management or
administration of, any enterprise which has
been a party to a proceeding before the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to any employment under
the Central Government or a State Government
or a local authority or in any statutory authority
or in any corporation established by or under
any Central, State or Provincial Act or a
Government company as defined in section 617
of the Companies Act, 1956.
Restriction
on
employment
of
Chairperson
and other
members of
Appellate
Tribunal in
certain cases.
1 of 1956.

86
53M. (1) The Central Government shall
provide the Appellate Tribunal with such
officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the
Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence
and control of the Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other
conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be
such as may be prescribed.
53N. (1) Without prejudice to any other
provisions contained in this Act, the Central
Government or a State Government or a local
authority or any enterprise or any person may
make an application to the Appellate Tribunal
to adjudicate on claim for compensation that
may arise from the findings of the Commission
and to pass an order for the recovery of
compensation from any enterprise for any loss
or damage shown to have been suffered, by
such person as a result of any contravention of
the provisions of Chapter II, having been
committed by enterprise.
(2) Every application made under sub-
section (1) shall be accompanied by the findings
of the Commission, if any, and also be
accompanied with such fees as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, after an
inquiry made into the allegations mentioned in
the application made under sub-section (1), pass
an order directing the enterprise to make
payment to the applicant, of the amount
determined by it as realisable from the
enterprise as compensation for the loss or
damage caused to the applicant as a result of
any contravention of the provisions of Chapter
II having been committed by such enterprise:
Staff of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Awarding
compensation.

87
Provided that in a case no decision or order
has been made or direction issued on the
contravention alleged on the application by the
Commission, the Appellate Tribunal may obtain
the recommendations of the Commission before
passing an order of compensation.
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to
in sub-section (1) is caused to numerous
persons having the same interest, one or more
of such persons may, with the permission of
the Appellate Tribunal, make an application
under that sub-section for and on behalf of, or
for the benefit of, the persons so interested,
and thereupon, the provisions of rule 8 of
Order 1 of the First Schedule to the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, shall apply subject to the
modification that every reference therein to a
suit or decree shall be construed as a reference
to the application before the Appellate Tribunal
and the order of the Appellate Tribunal thereon.
53-O. (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not
be bound by the procedure laid down in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice and,
subject to the other provisions of this Act and
of any rules made by the Central Government,
the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to
regulate its own procedure including the places
at which they shall have their sittings.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for
the purposes of discharging its functions under
this Act, the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
Procedure
and powers
of Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

88
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing a representation for
default or deciding it ex parte ;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal
of any representation for default or any
order passed by it ex parte;
(i) any other matter which may be
prescribed.
(3) Every proceedings before the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193
and 228, and for the purposes of section 196,
of the Indian Penal Code and the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court
for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
53P . (1) Every order made by the Appellate
Tribunal shall be enforced by it in the same
manner as if it were a decree made by a court
in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful
for the Appellate Tribunal to send, in case of
its inability to execute such order, to the court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a
company, the registered office of the
company is situate; or
(b) in the case of an order against any
other person, place where the person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on
Execution of
orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

89
business or personally works for gain, is
situated.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Appellate Tribunal may
transmit any order made by it to a civil court
having local jurisdiction and such civil court
shall execute the order as if it were a decree
made by that court.
53Q. Without prejudice to the provisions
of this Act, if any person contravenes, without
any reasonable ground, any order of the
Appellate Tribunal, he shall be liable to be
detained in civil prison for a term which may
extend to one year, unless in the meantime the
civil court directs his release and he shall also
be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten
lakhs.
53R. No act or proceeding of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be questioned or shall be invalid
merely on the ground of existence of any
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
Appellate Tribunal.
53S. (1) A person preferring an appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal may either appear in
person or authorise one or more chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its
officers to present his or its case before the
Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The Central Government or a State
Government or a local authority or any
enterprise preferring an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal may authorise one or more chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its
officers to act as presenting officers and every
person so authorised may present the case with
respect to any appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal.
Contravention
of orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Vacancy or
Appellate
Tribunal not
to invalidate
acts or
proceedings.
Right to
legal
representation.

90
Explanation. —The expressions “chartered
accountant” or “company secretary” or “cost
accountant” or “legal practitioner” shall have
the meanings respectively assigned to them in
the Explanation to section 35.
53T. Any person aggrieved by any decision
or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an
appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days
from the date of communication of the decision
or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it
is satisfied that the applicant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within
the said period, allow it to be filed after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days.
53U. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and
exercise, the same jurisdiction, powers and
authority in respect of contempt of itself as a
High Court has and may exercise and, for this
purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of
Courts Act, 1971 shall have effect subject to
modifications that,—
(a) the reference therein to a
High Court shall be construed as including
a reference to the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) the references to the Advocate-
General in section 15 of the said Act shall
be construed as a reference to such Law
Officer as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf.
35. In section 57 of the principal Act, for
the words “the Commission”, the words “the
Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall
be substituted.
36. For section 58 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“58. The Chairperson and other Members
and the Director General, Additional, Joint,
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Power to
punish for
contempt.
Amendment
of section
57.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 58.
Members,
Director
General,
Secretary,
70 of 1971.

91
Deputy or Assistant Directors General and
Secretary and officers and other employees of
the Commission and the Chairperson, members,
officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed, while acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.”.
37. In section 59 of the principal Act, for
the words “the Registrar or officers or other
employees of the Commission”, the words “the
Secretary or officers or other employees of the
Commission or the Chairperson, members,
officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal” shall be substituted.
38. In section 61 of the principal Act, for
the word “Commission”, the words
“Commission or the Appellate Tribunal” shall
be substituted.
39. In section 63 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the term of the Selection
Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section (2) of
Section 9;”;
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted;
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(da) the number of Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General or
such officers or other employees in the
office of Director General and the manner
in which such Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Directors General or such officers
or other employees may be appointed
under sub-section (1A) of section 16;”;
officers
and other
employees,
etc.
Amendment
of section 59.
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section 63.
45 of 1860.

92
(iv) in clauses (e) and (f), for the words
“such other advisers, consultants or
officers” the words “such officers or other
employees” shall be substituted;
(v) in clause (g), for the word
“Registrar”, the word “Secretary” shall be
substituted;
(vi) clauses (h) and (i) shall be omitted;
(vii) after clause (m), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) the form in which an appeal may
be filed before the Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (2) of section 53B and the fees
payable in respect of such appeal;
(mb) the term of the Selection
Committee and the manner of selection of
panel of names under sub-section (2) of
section 53E;
(mc) the salaries and allowances and
other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members of the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) of
section 53G;
(md) the salaries and allowances and
other conditions of service of the officers
and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section
53M;
(me) the fee which shall be
accompanied with every application made
under sub-section (2) of section 53N;
(mf) the other matters under clause (i)
of sub-section (2) of section 53-O in respect
of which the Appellate Tribunal shall have
powers under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit;”;
5 of 1908.

93
(viii) for clause (n), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(n) the manner in which the monies
transferred to the Competition Commission
of India or the Appellate Tribunal shall be
dealt with by the Commission or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be,
under the fourth proviso to sub-section (2)
of section 66.
40. In section 64 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), for clauses (d) and (e), the
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) the procedures to be followed for
engaging the experts and professionals
under sub-section (3) of section 17;
(e) the fee which may be determined
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section
19;
(f) the rules of procedure in regard to
the transaction of business at the meetings
of the Commission under sub-section (1)
of section 22;
(g) the manner in which penalty shall
be recovered under sub-section (1) of
section 39;
(h) any other matter in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by
regulations.”.
41. In section 66 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Act, 1969 is hereby repealed
and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission established under
sub-section (1) of section 5 of the said Act
(hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act)
shall stand dissolved:
Amendment
of section 64.
Amendment
of section 66.
54 of 1969.

94
Provided that, notwithstanding anything
contained in this sub-section, the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
established under sub-section (1) of section 5
of the repealed Act, may continue to exercise
jurisdiction and powers under the repealed Act
for a period of two years from the date of the
commencement of this Act in respect of all
cases or proceedings (including complaints
received by it or references or applications
made to it) filed before the commencement of
this Act as if the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Act, 1969 had not been repealed
and all the provisions of the said Act so
repealed shall mutatis mutandis  apply to such
cases or proceedings or complaints or references
or applications and to all other matters.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that nothing in this proviso
shall confer any jurisdiction or power upon the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission to decide or adjudicate any case
or proceeding arising under the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 on or
after the commencement of this Act.
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 shall,
however, not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the Act
so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or
liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, confiscation or
punishment incurred in respect of any
contravention under the Act so repealed;
or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect
of any such right, privilege, obligation,
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.
54 of 1969.

95
liability, penalty, confiscation or punishment
as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or
remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation
or punishment may be imposed or made
as if that Act had not been repealed.”.
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the second proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided further that the Director-
General of Investigation and Registration,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General of Investigation and
Registration or any officer or other
employee who has been, immediately
before the dissolution of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission,
employed on regular basis by the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission, shall become, on and from
such dissolution, the officer and employee,
respectively, of the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, in such manner as may be
specified by the Central Government, with
the same rights and privileges as to
pension, gratuity and other like matters as
would have been admissible to him if the
rights in relation to such Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had
not been transferred to, and vested in the
Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and
shall continue to do so unless and until
his employment in the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be, is duly
terminated or until his remuneration, terms
and conditions of employment are duly
altered by the Competition Commission of
India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be;”;

96
(ii) in the third proviso, for the words
“the Central Government”, the words “the
Competition Commission of India or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be”,
shall be substituted;
(iii) in the fourth proviso,—
(A) for the words “the Central
Government shall, out of the monies
standing”, the words “the Competition
Commission of India or the Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be, shall, out of
the monies standing” shall be substituted;
(B) for the portion beginning with the
words “the Central Government and such
monies” and ending with the words “as
may be prescribed” the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“the Competition Commission of India
or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may
be, and such monies which stand so
transferred shall be dealt with by the said
Commission or the Tribunal, as the case
may be, in such manner as may be
prescribed”;
(c) for sub-section (3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic
trade practices or restrictive trade practices
pending (including such cases, in which
any unfair trade practice has also been
alleged), before the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission and
on or after the expiry of two years referred
to in the proviso to sub-section (1) shall,
stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal
and shall be adjudicated by the Appellate
Tribunal in accordance with the provisions
of the repealed Act as if that Act had not
been repealed.”;

97
(d) in sub-section (4), for the words “on
or before the commencement of this Act
shall, on such commencement”, the words,
brackets and figure “on or before the expiry
of two years referred to in the proviso to
sub-section (1), shall” shall be substituted;
(e) for sub-section (5), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade
practices referred to in clause (x) of sub-
section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969
and pending before the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission on
or after the expiry of two years referred to
in the proviso to sub-section (1), shall, stand
transferred to the Competition Commission
of India, and the Competition Commission
of India shall dispose of such cases as if
they were cases filed under that Act.”.
54 of 1969.

98
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Competition Act was enacted in 2002 keeping in view the
economic developments that have resulted in opening up of the Indian
economy, removal of controls and consequent economic liberalisation
which required that the Indian market be geared to face competition
from within the county and outside. The Competition Act, 2002
provided for the establishment of a Commission to prevent practices
having adverse effect on competition to promote and sustain
competition in markets, to protect the interests of consumers and to
ensure freedom of trade carried on by other participants in markets,
in India, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established on
the 14th October, 2003 but could not be made functional due to filing
of a writ petition before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court delivered its judgment on the 20th January, 2005. While
disposing of the Writ Petition, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed
that “if an expert body is to be created as submitted on behalf of the
Union of India consistent with what is said to be the international
practice, it might be appropriate for the respondents to consider the
creation of two separate bodies, one with expertise that is advisory
and regulatory and the other adjudicatory. This followed up by an
appellate body as contemplated by the proposed amendment, can go
a long way, in meeting the challenge sought to be raised in this Writ
Petition based on the doctrine of separation of powers recognised by
the Constitution. Any way, it is for those who are concerned with the
process of amendment to consider that aspect. It cannot be gainsaid
that the Commission as now contemplated, as a number of adjudicatory
functions as well.”. The Hon’ble Supreme Court left open all questions
regarding the validity of the Competition Act, 2002 including rule 3 of
the Competition Commission of India (Selection of Chairperson and
Other Members of the Commission) Rules, 2003.
3. The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006, inter alia, seeks to
make the following amendments to the Competition Act so as to
address various legal issues and to make the CCI fully operational on
a sustainable basis, namely:—
(a) to provide the CCI would be an expert body which will
function as a market regulator for preventing anti-
competitive practices in the country and it would also have
advisory and advocacy functions in its role as a regulator;

99
(b) to omit the provisions relating to adjudication of disputes
between two or more parties by the CCI and to provide for
investigation through the Director General in case there exist
a prima facie  case relating to anti competitive agreements or
abuse of dominant position under the Competition Act, 2002
and conferring power upon the CCI to pass orders on
completion of an inquiry and impose monetary penalties
and in doing so the CCI would work as a collegium and
its decisions would be based on simple majority;
(c) to provide for establishment of the Competition Appellate
Tribunal (CAT), which shall be a three-member quasi-judicial
body headed by a person who is or has been a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High
Court and selection of the Chairperson and other Members
of CAT to be made by a Selection Committee headed by
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India or his
nominee, and having Secretaries of Ministries of Company
Affairs and Law as its members;
(d) to provide for hearing and disposing of appeals by the CAT
against any direction issued or decision made or order
passed by the CCI;
(e) to provide for adjudication by CAT of claims on
compensation and passing of orders for the recovery of
compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage
suffered as a result of any contravention of the provisions
of the Competition Act, 2002;
(f) to provide for implementation of the orders of the CAT as
a decree of a civil courts;
(g) to provide for filing of appeal against the orders of the
CAT to the Supreme Court;
(h) to confer powers to sectoral regulators to make suo motu
reference to CCI on competition issues, in addition to the
present provision of making reference, when such request
is made by any party in a dispute before it.
4. The Bill also aims at continuation of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission (MRTPC) till two years after
constitution of CCI, for trying pending cases under the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 after which it would stand

100
dissolved. The Bill also provides that MRTPC would not entertain any
new cases after the CCI is duly constituted. Cases still remaining
pending after this two year period, would be transferred to CAT or
the National Commission under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
depending on the nature of cases.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
PREM CHAND GUPTA
     N
EW D ELHI;
The 24th February, 2006.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 5/31/2003-IGC, dated the 24th February, 2006
from Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs to the
Secretary-General Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2006 recommends
introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) of the
Constitution and also recommends to Lok Sabha the consideration of
the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

101
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to definitions. It is proposed to define the expression
“Appellate Tribunal” used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to abuse of dominant position.
Under the existing provision contained in clause (c) of sub-section
(2) of said section, there shall be an abuse of dominant position of an
enterprise indulges in practice or practices resulting in denial of market
access.
It is proposed to amend the said clause (c) and to insert the words
“in any manner”. The proposed amendment is clarificatory  in nature.
Clause  4.—This clause seeks to substitute section 8 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to composition of Competition
Commission of India.
The new clause provides that the Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson and not less than two and not more than six other
Members instead of ten Members under the existing provisions of
section 8 to be appointed by the Central Government. It also proposes
to remove from eligibility requirement that the person who has been
or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court, omit the special
knowledge of, and professional experience of administration or in any
other matter from the qualifications for appointment as Chairperson
or any other Member.
Clause  5.—This clause seeks to substitute section 9 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to selection of Chairperson and other
Members of the Competition Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions, the Chairperson and other Members
shall be selected in the manner as may be specified by the rules made
by the Central Government. The Competition Commission of India
(selection of Chairperson and other Members of the Commission) Rules,
2003 made under this section provide for selection of the Chairperson
and other Members by a Selection Committee consisting of (a) a person,
who has been a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court
or a retired Chairperson of a Tribunal established or constituted under

102
an Act of Parliament or a distinguished jurist or a Senior Advocate for
five years or more—as Member, (b) a person who has special
knowledge of, an professional experience of twenty-five years or more
in international trade, economics, business, Commerce or Industry—as
member, (c) a person who has Special Knowledge of, and Professional
experience of 25 years or more in accountancy, management, finance,
public affairs or administration—as Member, to be nominated by the
Central Government.
The new clause provides that the Chairperson and other Members
of the Competition Commission of India shall be appointed by Central
Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection
Committee consisting of (a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee,
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Company Affairs—as Member and
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and  Justice—as Member:
It further provides that the term of the Selection Committee and
the manner of selection of panel of names shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Clause 6.—The clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to term of office of Chairperson and other Members
of the Competition Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions no Chairperson of the Competition
Commission of India can hold office as such after he has attained the
age of sixty-seven years and no other Member can hold office as such
after he has attained the age of sixty-five years,
It is proposed to amend the said Section 10 to provide that the
Chairperson or other Member shall not hold office as such after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 12 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to restriction or employment of Chairperson and
other Members of the Competition Commission of India in certain
cases.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
Chairperson and other Members shall not, for a period of one year
from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any
employment in, or connected with the management or administration
of, any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before the
Commission under this Act. However, this provision does not apply
to any employment under the Central Government or a State
Government or local authority or in any statutory authority or any
corporation established by or under any Central, State or Provincial

103
Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956.
It is proposed to amend said section 12 to increase the said
restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members of the
Competition Commission of India from one year to two years.
Clause  8.—This clause seeks to substitute section 13 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to financial and administrative powers
of Member Administration.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
financial and administrative powers of Member Administration are
vested in the Member Administration designated by the Central
Government.
It is proposed to substitute the said section 13 by a new section
to provide that the Chairperson shall have the powers of general
superintendence, direction and control in respect of all administrative
matters of the Commission. However, the Chairperson may delegate
such of his powers relating to administrative matters of the
Commission, as he may think fit to any other Member or officer of
the Commission.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to appointment of Director-General, etc.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
Central Government can appoint a Director General and as many
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such other
advisers, consultants or officers, as it may think fit, for the purposes
of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry into contravention
of any of the provisions of the Competition Act and for the conduct
of cases before the Commission and for performing such other
functions as are, or may be, provided by or under the Competition
Act, 2002.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to, inter alia , omit
the “advisers” and “consultants” from the scope of section 16 and
therefore the Central Government would not appoint “advisers” and
“consultants” in the Competition Commission of India. The power to
engage the “advisers”, and “consultants” is proposed to be conferred
upon the Competition Commission of India.
Clause  10.—This clause seeks to substitute section 17 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Registrar and officers and other
employees of the Competition Commission of India by a new section.

104
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
Commission may appoint a Registrar and such officers and other
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its
functions under this Act.
It is proposed to substitute said section to confer power upon the
Commission to appoint a Secretary instead of Registrar and such
experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability who have
special knowledge of, and experience in economics, law, business or
such other disciplines related to competition, as it deems necessary to
assist the Commission in addition to officers and other employees in
the discharge of its functions under the said Act.
Clause  11.—This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to inquiry into certain agreements and
dominant position of enterprise.
Under the existing provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of said section, the Commission may inquire into any alleged
contravention of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of section
3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 either on its own motion or on receipt
of a complaint.
It is proposed to amend said section so as to substitute “receipt of
a complaint”, by the words “receipt of any information, in such
manner” to enable the Commission to inquire into any alleged
contravention on receipt of any information instead of receipt of a
complaint.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to reference by statutory authority.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (1) of said
section where in the course of a proceeding before any statutory
authority an issue is raised by any party that any decision which such
statutory authority has taken or proposes to take, is or would be,
contrary to any of the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002, then
such statutory authority may make a reference in respect of such issue
to the Commission.
It is proposed to amend said Sub-section (1) so as to provide that
any statutory authority may make a reference on its own under that
sub-section. It further provides that on receipt of opinion of the
Competition Commission of India, the statutory authority shall pass
orders recording reasons thereon.

105
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to substitute section 22 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Benches of the Competition
Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof.
It is proposed to substitute the said section for the meetings of the
Competition Commission of India. It, inter alia , provides that the
Commission shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings as may be provided by regulations. It further provides that
all questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission
shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting,
and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. It
also provides that the quorum for such meeting shall be three members.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to omit sections 23, 24 and 25 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to distribution of business of the
Competition Commission of India amongst Benches, procedure for
deciding a case where Members of a Bench differ in opinion and
jurisdiction of Bench.
Clause  15—This clause seeks to substitute section 26 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to procedure for inquiry on complaints
under section 19.
It is proposed to provide that on receipt of a reference from the
Central Government or a State Government or a statutory authority or
on its own knowledge or information received under section 19, if the
Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie  case, it
shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made
into the matter. It further provides that on receipt of reference under
the above provision, if the Commission is of the opinion that there
exists no prima facie  case, it shall close the matter forthwith and pass
such orders as it deems fit and send a copy of its order to the Central
Government or the State Government or the statutory authority or the
person or consumer or their association or trade association, as the
case may be. The Director General on receipt of direction under the
above provision shall submit a report on his findings within such
period as may be specified by the Commission. The Commission may
forward a copy of the report to the parties concerned. It also provides
that if the report of the Director General recommends that there is no

106
contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall invite
objections or suggestions from the Central Government or the State
Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned as the
case may be, on such report of the Director General. It provides that
if the Commission agrees to the recommendations of the Director
General, he shall close the matter and pass such order as it deems fit
and communicate its order to the authorities mentioned. It further
provides that after consideration of the objections or suggestions
referred to above, if any, the Commission is of the opinion that further
investigations are called for, it may direct for further investigation. It
further provides that if the report of the Director General recommends
that there is contravention of any of the provisions of the Competition
Act and the Commission is of the opinion that further inquiry is called
for, it shall enquire into such contravention  in accordance with the
provisions of the Competition Act.
Clause  16.—This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Orders by the Competition
Commission of India after inquiry into agreements or abuse of
dominant position.
The provisions contained in the said section, inter alia, confer power
upon the Competition Commission of India to pass orders awarding
compensation to parties in accordance with the provisions contained
in section 34.
The power to award compensation is proposed to be conferred
upon the Appellate Tribunal by new section 53N proposed to be
inserted by clause 34 of the Bill.
It is, therefore, proposed to omit clause (c) of the aforesaid section
which confer power upon the Competition Commission of India to
pass orders awarding compensation. The proposed amendment is of
consequential in nature.
Clause 17 .—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the
Competition Act, 2002, relating to decision of enterprise enjoying
dominated parties.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
Central Government can, on recommendation of the Commission order
division of enterprise enjoying dominant position.
It is proposed to amend section 28 of the Act so as to confer said
power upon the Competition Commission of India to order division
of an enterprise, instead of the Central Government to order the
division on recommendation of the Commission.
Clause  18.—This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to procedure for investigation of
combinations.

107
It is, inter alia, proposed to insert a new sub-section (1A) to provide
that the Commission may, after receipt of the response of the parties
to the combination under sub-section (1), call for a report from the
Director General and such report shall be submitted by the Director
General within sixty days. However, the Commission may, on sufficient
reasons being submitted by the Director General for non-submission
of report within sixty days, grant up to sixty days more to the Director
General for submission of the report.
Clause  19.—This clause seeks to substitute section 30 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to inquiry into disclosures under sub-
section (2) of section 6.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, where
any person or enterprise has given a notice under sub-section (2) of
section 6, the Commission shall inquire, (a) whether the disclosure
made in the notice is correct (b) whether the combination has, or is
likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on competition.
It is proposed to substitute section 30 so as to provide that where
any person or enterprise has given a notice under sub-section (2) of
section 6, the Commission shall examine such notice and form its
prima facie  opinion and proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 29.
Clause  20.—This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to acts taking place outside India but
having an effect on competition in India. The proposed amendment is
clarificatory in nature.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to substitute section 33 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to power to grant interim relief.
Sub-section (2) of the said section confers specific power upon the
Competition Commission of India to grant, by order, a temporary
injunction restraining any party from importing such goods until the
conclusion of such inquiry or until further orders, without giving notice
to the opposite party, where it deems it necessary and a copy of such
order granting temporary injunction shall be sent to the concerned
authorities in cases specified in the said sub-section. Sub-section (3) of
the existing aforesaid section provides that the provisions of rules 2A
to 5 (both inclusive) of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, as far as may be, apply to a temporary
injunction issued by the Commission under this Act, as they apply to
temporary injunction issued by a civil court.

108
It is proposed to omit said sub-sections (2) and (3).
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to omit section 34 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to power to award compensation.
The power to award compensation is proposed to be conferred
upon the Appelate Tribunal by new section 53N proposed to be inserted
by clause 34 of the Bill. It is, therefore, proposed to omit aforesaid
section 34 conferring power upon the Competition Commission of India
to award compensation.
Clause  23.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to appearance before of the Competition
Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, a
complainant or defendant or the Director General may either appear
in person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company
secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any of his or
its officers to present his or its case before the Commission.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to substitute the
words “person or an enterprises”, for the words “a complainant or
defendant” for appearance before the Commission.
Clause  24.—This clause seeks to substitute section 36 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to power of Commission to regulate its
own procedure.
The existing provisions confer powers upon the Competition
Commission of India, inter alia,  to dismiss an application in default
or deciding it ex parte or exercise power in respect of any other matter
which may be prescribed and provides that every proceeding before
the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section
196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Commission shall be deemed to
be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
It is proposed to omit said powers and provision.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to omit section 37 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to review of orders of the Competition Commission
of India.
Clause  26.—This clause seeks to substitute section 39 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to execution of orders of the Competition

109
Commission of India which provides that every  order passed by the
Commission under this Act shall be enforced by the Commission in
the same manner as if it were a decree or order made by a High
Court or the principal civil court in a suit pending therein and it shall
be lawful for the Commission to send, in the event of its inability to
execute it, such order to the High Court or the principal civil court,
as the case may be.
It is proposed to substitute said section, inter-alia, to provide that
if a person fails to pay any monetary penalty, in the manner as may
be specified by regulations. Sub-section (2) of proposed new section
provides that in a case where the Commission is of the opinion that
it would be expedient to recover the penalty imposed under the
Competition Act, 2002 in accordance with the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, it may make a reference to this effect to the concerned
income-tax authority under Income-tax Act, 1961 for recovery of the
penalty as tax due under the said Act.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to omit section 40 of the Competition
Act, 2002 relating to appeal.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, any
person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Commission may
file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date
of communication of the decision or order of the Commission to him
or one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.
It is proposed to insert, by clause 34 of the Bill, new sections 53B
and 53T to provide filing of appeal from any direction, decision or
order referred to in clause (a) of new section 53A to the Appellate
Tribunal and filing of an appeal to the Supreme Court from any
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal. Omission of section 40 is
consequential in nature.
Clause  28.—This clause seeks to substitute section 42 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to contravention of orders of the
Competition Commission of India.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section if any
person contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the
Commission, or any condition or restriction subject to which any
approval, sanction, direction or exemption in relation to any matter
has been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act or fails to
pay the penalty imposed under this Act, he shall be liable to be
detained in civil prison for a term which may extend to one year,
unless in the meantime the Commission directs his release and he
shall also be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees ten lakh.

110
It is proposed to substitute the said section so as to provide that
a civil court having jurisdiction shall order for civil prison and
additional penalty on a complaint made by the Commission.
Clause  29.—This clause seeks to amend section 43 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to penalty for failure to comply with
directions of the Competition Commission of India and Director General
of the Commission. The proposed amendment is consequential in
nature.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 46 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to power to impose lesser penalty.
Under the existing provisions of the said section the Competition
Commission of India has been conferred power to impose lesser penalty
in the circumstances mentioned in that section. The first proviso to
said section provides that the Commission shall not impose lesser
penalty in cases where proceedings for the violation of any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations have been
instituted or any investigation has been directed to be made under
section 26 before making of such disclosure.
It is proposed to substitute said first proviso to provide that the
Commission shall not impose lesser penalty in cases where the report
of investigation directed to be made under section 26 has been received
before making of such disclosure.
Clause  31.—This clause seeks to amend section 49 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Competition advocacy .
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (1) of the
said section the Central Government may, in formulating a policy on
competition (including review of laws related to competition), make a
reference to the Commission for its opinion on possible effect of such
policy on competition and on receipt of such a reference, the
Commission shall, within sixty days of making such reference, give its
opinion to the Central Government, which may thereafter formulate
the policy as it deems fit.
It is proposed to amend said sub-section (1) to enable a State
Government, in formulating a policy on competition, make a reference
to the Commission for its opinion under said section and provisions
of this section would apply to the reference made by the State
Government.

111
Clause  32.—This clause seeks to amend section 51 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to constitution of fund.
The provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of the
existing said section, inter alia , provide that the monies received as
costs from parties to proceedings before the Commission shall be
credited to the “Competition Fund” constituted by that section.
It is proposed to omit said clause (b) so as to provide that the
monies received as costs from parties to proceedings before the
Commission shall not be credited to the Competition Fund.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend section 52 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to accounts and audit.
The Explanation to sub-section (2) of said section clarifies that the
orders of the Commission, being matters appealable to the Supreme
Court, shall not be subject to audit under this section.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend said Explanation so as to provide
that the orders of the Commission, being matters appealable to the
Competition Appellate Tribunal shall also not be subject to audit under
this section.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to insert new Chapter VIIIA of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to establishment of Competition
Appellate Tribunal.
The new Chapter VIIIA contains provisions for (a) establishment
of Appellate Tribunal, (b) appeal to Appellate Tribunal, (c) composition
of Appellate Tribunal, (d) qualifications for appointment of Chairperson
and members of Appellate Tribunal, (e) Selection Committee, (f) term
of office of Chairperson and members of Appellate Tribunal, (g) terms
and conditions of service of Chairperson and members, (h) vacancies,
(i) resignation of Chairperson and members, (j) member to act as
Chairperson in certain cases, (k) removal and suspension of Chairperson
and members of Appellate Tribunal, (l) restriction on employment of
Chairperson and other members in certain cases, (m) Staff of Appellate
Tribunal, (n) Procedure for awarding compensation, (o) procedure and
powers of Appellate Tribunal, (p) execution of orders of Appellate
Tribunal, (q) contravention of orders of Appellate Tribunal, (r) vacancy
or Appellate Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings, (s) right to
legal representation, (t) appeal to Supreme Court and (u) power to
punish for contempt.

112
Clause  35.—This clause seeks to amend section 57 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to restriction on disclosure of
information.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, no
information relating to any enterprise, being an information which has
been obtained by or on behalf of the Commission for the purposes of
this Act, shall, without the previous permission in writing of the
enterprise, be disclosed otherwise than in compliance with or for the
purposes of the Competition Act or any other law for the time being
in force.
Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert new Chapter VIIIA in the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Competition Appellate Tribunal. It is
proposed to bring the Appellate Tribunal within the scope of section
57 of the Competition Act, 2002. The proposed amendment is
consequential in nature.
Clause  36.—This clause seeks to amend section 58 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to Members, Director General, Registrar,
officers and other employees, etc., of the Competition Commission of
India, to be public servants.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, the
Chairperson and other Members and the Director General, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Registrar and officers
and other employees of the Commission shall be deemed, while acting
or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the
Competition Act, 2002, to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon the Commission
to appoint a Secretary instead of Registrar. Clause 34 of the Bill
proposes to insert new Chapter VIII-A in the Competition Act, 2002 to
establish the Competition Appellate Tribunal. It is proposed to bring
the Secretary or officers or other employees of the Commission,
Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the Appellate
Tribunal within the scope of section 58 of the Competition Act, 2002.
The proposed amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause  37.—This clause seeks to amend section 59 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to protection of action taken in good
faith.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, no
suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings can lie against the Central

113
Government or Commission or any officer of the Central Government
or the Chairperson or any Member or the Director General, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or Registrar or officers or
other employees of the Commission for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder.
Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon the
Commission to appoint a Secretary instead of Registrar. Clause 34 of
the Bill proposes to insert new Chapter VIII-A in the Competition Act,
2002 proposing to establish the Competition Appellate Tribunal. It is
proposed to bring the Secretary or officers or other employees of the
Commission, Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of
the Appellate Tribunal within the scope of the aforesaid section. The
proposed amendment is consequential in nature.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.
Under the existing provisions contained in the said section, no
civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding
in respect of any matter which the Commission is empowered by or
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by an
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken
in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
Clause 34 of the Bill proposes to insert new Chapter VIII-A in the
Competition Act, 2002 proposing to establish the Competition Appellate
Tribunal. It is proposed to exclude the jurisdiction of civil courts in
respect of any matter in which the Commission or Appellate Tribunal
is empowered to determine. The proposed amendment is consequential
in nature.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to amend section 63 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to power to make rules.
It is proposed to amend said section so as to confer powers upon
the Central Government to make rules in respect of certain matters
specified in that section and to make certain other amendments which
are consequential in nature.
Clause  40.—This clause seeks to amend section 64 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to power to make regulations by the
Competition Commission of India.

114
It is proposed to amend said section 64 so as to confer powers
upon the Competition Commission of India to make regulations in
respect of certain matters specified in the said section.
Clause  41.—This clause seeks to amend section 66 of the
Competition Act, 2002 relating to repeal and saving.
Under the existing provisions, the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Act, 1969 is proposed to be repealed and upon such repeal,
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established
under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the repealed Act shall stand
dissolved. Sub-sections (2) to (10) of the aforesaid section deals with
the matters arising out of such repeal.
It is proposed to amend said section 66 so as to provide that the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices commission may continue
to exercise jurisdiction and power under that Act for a period of two
years from the date of bringing into force of section 66 of the
Competition Act, 2002, only in respect of all cases of proceeding filed
before such commencement. It further provides that the transfer of
pending cases after the two years period to the Appellate Tribunal or
the National Commission under Consumer Protection Act, 1986
depending on the nature of cases. It also provides that the staff of the
Commission who has been employed on regular basis by the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission shall, on its
dissolution, become employees for the Competition Commission or
the Appellate Tribunal in the manner as specified by the Central
Government.

115
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to establish a Competition Appellate
Tribunal with a Chairperson and up to two members, along with
associated staff, whose expenses would be paid from the Consolidated
Fund of India. However clause (4) of the Bill seeks to reduce the
strength of the Competition Commission from ten additional Members
to six additional Members. Clause 13 of the Bill further provides for
Commission to function as a collegium and not through Benches,
leading to absence of need for provision of offices to these Benches,
and the need for branches of Director General’s office at these Benches.
2. The expenditure to be incurred on creation of the competition
Appellate Tribunal would be rupees 109.61 lakh per annum. However,
there would be a decrease in expenditure up to an extent of rupees
222.39 lakh in a year due to reduction of strength of Competition
Commission of India from ten additional members to six additional
members, and by removal of the concept of Benches functioning at
different locations, and their associated Director General subordinate
offices. Thus, there would be an overall saving of rupees 112.78 lakh
per annum.
3. Thus, there would not be any additional financial outgo due to
the changes proposed in the amendment Bill.

116
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend section 63 of the Competition
Act, 2002. This clause empowers the Central Government to make
rules, by notification, to carry out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made
are specified therein. These matters relate to, inter alia , provide for
(a) the term of selection committee and manner of selection of panel
of names under sub-section (2) of section 9; (b) the number of
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such officers
or other employees in the office of Director General and the manner
in which such Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors or such
officers or other employees may be appointed under sub-section (1A)
of section 16; (c) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions
of service of the officers and other employees in addition to the Director
General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General under
sub-section (3) of section 16; (d) the qualifications for appointment of
officers and other employees in addition to the Director General,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General under sub-
section (4) of section 16; (e) the salaries and allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of the Secretary in addition to the
officers and other employees payable, and the number of such officers
and employees under sub-section (2) of section 17; (f) the form in
which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal under
sub-section (2) of section 53B and the fees payable in respect of such
appeal; (g) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of
selection of panel of names under sub-section (2) of section 53E,
(h) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-
section (1) of section 53G; (i) the salaries and allowances and other
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 53M; (j) the fee
which shall be accompanied with every application made under sub-
section (2) of section 53N; (k) the other matters under clause (i) of
sub-section (2) of section 53-O in respect of which the Appellate
Tribunal shall have powers under the Code of Civil Procedure while
trying a suit; and (l) the manner in which the monies transferred to
the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as
the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Competition Commission
of India or the Appellate Tribunal under the fourth proviso to sub-
section (2) of section 66;

117
2. Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to amend section 64 of the
Competition Act, 2002. This clause empowers the Competition
Commission of India to make regulations, by notification, to carry out
the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of
which such regulations may be made are specified therein. These
matters relate to, inter alia, provide for (a) the procedures to be followed
for engaging the experts and professionals under sub-section (3) of
section 17; (b) the rules procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at the meetings of the Commission under sub-section (1) of
section 22; and (c) the manner in which penalty shall be recovered
under sub-section (1) of section 39.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations
made by the Competition Commission of India shall be laid, as soon
as may be after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power involved is of a normal character.

118
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002
(12 OF 2003)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* * * * *
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position
4. (1) No enterprise shall abuse its
dominant position.
(2) There shall be an abuse of dominant
position under sub-section (1), if an
enterprise,—
* * * * *
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting
in denial of market access; or
* * * * *
8. (1) The Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson and not less than two and not
more than ten other Members to be appointed
by the Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government shall
appoint the Chairperson and a Member during
the first year of the establishment of the
Commission.
(2) The Chairperson and every other
Member shall be a person of ability, integrity
and standing and who, has been, or is qualified
to be, a judge of a High Court, or, has special
knowledge of, and professional experience of
not less than fifteen years in international trade,
Definitions.
Abuse of
dominant
position.
Composition
of
Commission.

119
economics, business, commerce, law, finance,
accountancy, management, industry, public
affairs, administration or in any other matter
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, may be useful to the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members
shall be whole-time Members.
9. The Chairperson and other Members
shall be selected in the manner as may be
prescribed.
10. (1) The Chairperson and every other
Member shall hold office as such for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters
upon his office and shall be eligible for re-
appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other
Member shall hold office as such after he has
attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the
age of sixty-seven years;
(b) in the case of any other Member,
the age of sixty-five years.
* * * * *
12. The Chairperson and other Members
shall not, for a period of one year from the
date on which they cease to hold office, accept
any employment in, or connected with the
management or administration of, any
enterprise which has been a party to a
proceeding before the Commission under this
Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply to any employment under
the Central Government or a State Government
or local authority or in any statutory authority
or any corporation established by or under any
Central, State or Provincial Act or a
Government company as defined in section 617
of the Companies Act, 1956.
Selection of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Restriction
on
employment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members in
certain cases.
1 of 1956.

120
13. The Central Government shall designate
any Member as Member Administration who
shall exercise such financial and administrative
powers as may be vested in him under the
rules made by the Central Government;
Provided that the Member Administration
shall have authority to delegate such of his
financial and administrative powers as he may
think fit to any other officer of the Commission
subject to the condition that such officer shall,
while exercising such delegated powers
continue to act under the direction,
superintendence and control of the Member
Administration.
* * * * *
16. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, appoint a Director General and as
many Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant
Directors General or such other advisers,
consultants or officers, as it may think fit, for
the purposes of assisting the Commission in
conducting inquiry into contravention of any
of the provisions of this Act and for the conduct
of cases before the Commission and for
performing such other functions as are, or may
be, provided by or under this Act.
(2) Every Additional, Joint, Deputy and
Assistant Directors General or such other
advisers, consultants and officers, shall exercise
his powers, and discharge his functions, subject
to the general control, supervision and direction
of the Director General.
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the Director
General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and
Assistant Directors General or such other
advisers, consultants or officers, shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(4) The Director General and Additional,
Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General
Financial
and
administrative
powers of
Member
Adminis-
tration.
Appointment
of Director
General, etc.

121
or such other advisers, consultants or officers
shall be appointed from amongst persons of
integrity and outstanding ability and who have
experience in investigation, and knowledge of
accountancy, management, business, public
administration, international trade, law or
economics and such other qualifications as may
be prescribed.
17. (1) The Commission may appoint a
Registrar and such officers and other employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to
and other terms and conditions of service of
the Registrar and officers and other employees
of the Commission and the number of such
officers and other employees shall be such as
may be prescribed.
* * * * *
19. (1) The Commission may inquire into
any alleged contravention of the provisions
contained in sub-section (1) of section 3 or sub-
section (1) of section 4 either on its own motion
or on—
(a) receipt of a complaint, accompanied by
such fee as may be determined by regulations,
from any person, consumer or their association
or trade association; or
* * * * *
21. (1) Where in the course of a proceeding
before any statutory authority an issue is raised
by any party that any decision which such
statutory authority has taken or proposes to
take, is or would be, contrary to any of the
provisions of the Act, then such statutory
authority may make a reference in respect of
such issue to the Commission.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-
section (1), the Commission shall, after hearing
Registrar
and officers
and other
employees
of
Commission.
Inquiry into
certain
agreements
and
dominant
position of
enterprise.
Reference by
statutory
authority.

122
the parties to the proceedings, give its opinion
to such statutory authority which shall
thereafter pass such order on the issues referred
to in that sub-section as it deems fit:
Provided that the Commission shall give
its opinion under this section within sixty days
of receipt of such reference.
22. (1) The jurisdiction, powers and
authority of the Commission may be exercised
by Benches thereof.
(2) The Benches shall be constituted by the
Chairperson and each Bench shall consist of
not less than two Members.
(3) Every Bench shall consist of at least one
Judicial Member.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, “Judicial Member” means a member
who is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a
Judge of a High Court.
(4) The Bench over which the Chairperson
presides shall be the Principal Bench and the
other Benches shall be known as the Additional
Benches.
(5) There shall be constituted by the
Chairperson one or more Benches to be called
the Mergers Bench or Mergers Benches, as the
case may be, exclusively to deal with matters
referred to in sections 5 and 6.
(6) The places at which the Principal Bench,
other Additional Bench or Mergers Bench shall
ordinarily sit, shall be such as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify.
23. (1) Where any Benches are constituted,
the Chairperson may, from time to time, by
order, make provisions as to the distribution of
the business of the Commission amongst the
Benches and specify the matters, which may
be dealt with by each Bench.
Benches of
Commission.
Distribution
of business
of
Commission
amongst
Benches.

123
(2) If any question arises as to whether any
maters falls within the purview of the business
allocated to a Bench, the decision of the
Chairperson thereon shall be final.
(3) The Chairperson may—
(i) transfer a Member from one Bench
to another Bench; or
(ii) authorise the Members of one Bench
to discharge also the functions of the
Members of other Bench:
Provided that the Chairperson shall transfer,
with the prior approval of the Central
Government, a member from one Bench
situated in one city to another Bench situated
in another city.
(4) The Chairperson may, for the purpose
of securing that any case or matter which,
having regard to the nature of the questions
involved, requires or is required in his opinion
or under the rules made by the Central
Government in this behalf, to be decided by a
Bench composed of more than two Members,
issue such general or special orders as he may
deem fit.
24. If the Members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, they shall state the point
or points on which they differ, and make a
reference to the Chairperson who shall either
hear the point or points himself or refer the
case for hearing on such point or points by
one or more of the other Members and such
point or points shall be decided according to
the opinion of the majority of the Members
who have heard the case, including those who
first heard it.
25. An inquiry shall be initiated or a
complaint be instituted or a reference be made
under this act before a Bench within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction—
Procedure
for deciding
a case
where
Members of
a Bench
differ in
opinion.
Jurisdiction
of Bench.

124
(a) the respondent, or each of the
respondents, where there are more than
one, at the time of the initiation of inquiry
or institution of the complaint or making
of reference, as the case may be, actually
and voluntarily resides, or carries on
business, or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the respondents, where there
are more than one, at the time of the
initiation of the inquiry or institution of
complaint or making of reference, as the
case may be, actually and voluntarily
resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain provided that in such case
either the leave of the Bench is given, or
the respondents who do not reside, or carry
on business, or personally work for gain,
as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution;
or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in
part, arises.
Explanation.—A respondent, being a person
referred to in sub-clause (iii) or sub-clause (vi)
or sub-clause (vii) or sub-clause (viii) of clause
(1) of section 2, shall be deemed to carry on
business at its sole or principal place of
business in India or at its registered office in
India or where it has also a subordinate office
at such place.
26. (1) On receipt of a complaint or a
reference from the Central Government or a
State Government or a statutory authority or
on its own knowledge or information, under
section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion
that there exists a prima facie case, it shall direct
the Director General to cause an investigation
to be made into the matter.
(2) The Director General shall, on receipt
of direction under sub-section (1), submit a
report on his findings within such period as
may be specified by the Commission.
Procedure
for inquiry
on
complaints
under
section 19.

125
(3) Where on receipt of a complaint under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 19, the
Commission is of the opinion that there exists
no prima facie  case, it shall dismiss the
complaint and may pass such orders as it
deems fit, including imposition of costs, if
necessary.
(4) The Commission shall forward a copy
of the report referred to in sub-section (2) to
the parties concerned or to the Central
Government or the State Government or the
statutory authority, as the case may be.
(5) If the report of the Director General
relates on a complaint and such report
recommends that there is no contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act, the
complainant shall be given an opportunity to
rebut the findings of the Director General.
(6) If, after hearing the complainant, the
Commission agrees with the recommendation
of the Director General, it shall dismiss the
complaint.
(7) If, after hearing the complaint, the
Commission is of the opinion that further
inquiry is called for, it shall direct the
complainant to proceed with the complaint.
(8) if the report of the Director General
relates on a reference made under sub-section
(1) and such report recommends that there is
no contravention of the provisions of this Act,
the Commission shall invite comments of the
Central Government or the State Government
or the statutory authority, as the case may be,
on such report and on receipt of such
comments, the Commission shall return the
reference if there is no prima facie  case or
proceed with the reference as a complaint if
there is a prima facie  case.
(9) If the report of the Director General
referred to in sub-section (2) recommends that

126
there is contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act, and the Commission is of the
opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall
inquire into such contravention in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
27. Where after inquiry the Commission
finds that any agreement referred to in section
3 or action of an enterprise in a dominant
position, is in contravention of section 3 or
section 4, as the case may be, it may pass all
or any of the following orders, namely:—
* * * * *
(c) award compensation to parties in
accordance with the provisions contained
in section 34;
* * * * *
(f) recommend to the Central
Government for the division of an
enterprise enjoying dominant position;
(g) pass such other order as it may
deem fit.
* * * * *
28. (1) The Central Government, on
recommendation under clause (f) of section 27,
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, by order
in writing, direct division of an enterprise
enjoying dominant position to ensure that such
enterprise does not abuse its dominant position.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generally of the foregoing powers, the order
referred to in sub-section (1) may provide for
all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) the payment of compensation to any
person who suffered any loss due to dominant
position of such enterprise;
* * * * *
Orders by
Commission
after inquiry
into
agreements
or abuse of
dominant
position.
Division of
enterprise
enjoying
dominant
position.

127
29. (1) Where the Commission is of the
opinion that a combination is likely to cause,
or has caused an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within the relevant market in India,
it shall issue a notice to show cause to the
parties to combination calling upon them to
respond within thirty days or the receipt of
the notice, as to why investigation in respect
of such combination should not be conducted.
(2) The Commission, if it is prima facie  of
the opinion that the combination has, or is
likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on
competition, it shall, within seven working days
from the date of receipt of the response of the
parties to the combination, direct the parties to
the said combination to publish details of the
combination within ten working days of such
direction, in such manner, as it thinks
appropriate, for bringing the combination to the
knowledge or information of the public and
persons affected or likely to be affected by such
combination.
* * * * *
30. Where any person or enterprise has
given a notice under sub-section (2) of section
6, the Commission shall inquire—
(a) whether the disclosure made in the
notice is correct;
(b) whether the combination has, or is
likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect
on competition.
* * * * *
32. The Commission shall, notwithstanding
that,—
(a) an agreement referred to in section
3 has been entered into outside India; or
Inquiry into
disclosures
under sub-
section (2)
of section 6.
Acts taking
place
outside
India but
having an
effect on
competition
in India.
Procedure
for
investigation
of
combinations.

128
(b) any party to such agreement is
outside India; or
(c) any enterprise abusing the dominant
position is outside India; or
(d) a combination has taken place
outside India; or
(e) any party to combination is outside
India; or
(f) any other matter or practice or
action arising out of such agreement or
dominant position or combination is outside
India,
have power to inquire into such agreement or
abuse of dominant position or combination if
such agreement or dominant position or
combination has, or is likely to have, an
appreciable adverse effect on competition in the
relevant market in India.
33. (1) Where during an inquiry before the
Commission, it is proved to the satisfaction of
the Commission, by affidavit or otherwise, that
an act in contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 3 or sub-section (1) of section 4 or
section 6 has been committed and continues to
be committed or that such act is about to be
committed, the Commission may, by order,
grant a temporary injunction restraining any
party from carrying on such act until the
conclusion of such inquiry or until further
orders, without giving notice to the opposite
party, where it deems it necessary .
(2) Where during the inquiry before the
Commission it is proved to the satisfaction of
the Commission by affidavit or otherwise that
import of any goods is likely to contravene sub-
section (1) of section 3 or sub-section (1) of
section 4 or section 6, it may, by order, grant
a temporary injunction restraining any party
from importing such goods until the conclusion
Power to
great interim
relief.

129
of such inquiry or until further orders, without
giving notice to the opposite party, where it
deems it necessary and a copy of such order
granting temporary injunction shall be sent to
the concerned authorities.
(3) The provisions of rules 2A to 5 (both
inclusive) of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, as
far as may be, apply to a temporary injunction
issued by the Commission under this Act, as
they apply to temporary injunction issued by a
civil court, and any reference in any such rule
to a suit shall be construed as a reference to
any inquiry before the Commission.
34. (1) Without prejudice to any other
provisions contained in this Act, any person
may make an application to the Commission
for an order for the recovery of compensation
from any enterprise for any loss or damage
shown to have been suffered, by such person
as a result of any contravention of the
provisions of Chapter II, having been
committed by such enterprise.
(2) The Commission may, after an inquiry
made into the allegations mentioned in the
application made under sub-section (1), pass
as order directing the enterprise to make
payment to the applicant, of the amount
determined by it as realisable from the
enterprise as compensation for the loss or
damage caused to the applicant as a result of
any contravention of the provisions of
Chapter II having been committed by such
enterprise.
(3) Where any loss or damage referred to
in sub-section (1) is caused to numerous
persons having the same interest, one or more
of such persons may, with the permission of
the Commission, make an application under
that sub-section for and on behalf of, or for
the benefit of, the persons so interested, and
thereupon, the provisions of rule 8 of Order 1
Power to
award
compen-
sation.
5 of 1908.

130
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, shall apply subject to the
modification that every reference therein to a
suit or decree shall be construed as a reference
to the application before the Commission and
the order of the Commission thereon.
35. A complainant or defendant or the
Director General may either appear in person
or authorise one or more chartered accountants
or company secretaries or cost accountants or
legal practitioners or any of his or its officers
to present his or its case before the
Commission.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “chartered accountant” means a
chartered accountant as defined in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who
has obtained a certificate of practice under
sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(b) “company secretary” means a
company secretary as defined in clause (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-
section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost
accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and
Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who has
obtained a certificate of practice under sub-
section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(d) “legal practitioner” means an
advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High
Court, and includes a pleader in practice.
36. (1) The Commission shall not be bound
by the procedure laid down by the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by
Appearance
before
Commission.
Power of
Commission
to regulate
its own
procedure.
5 of 1908.
38 of 1949.
56 of 1980.
23 of 1959.
5 of 1908.

131
the principles of natural justice and, subject to
the other provisions of this Act and of any rules
made by the Central Government, the
Commission shall have powers to regulate its
own procedure including the places at which
they shall have their sittings, duration of oral
hearings when granted, and times of its inquiry.
(2) The Commission shall have, for the
purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) subject to the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(f) dismissing an application in default
or deciding it ex parte ;
(g) any other matter which may be
prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the
Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193
and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of
the Indian Penal Code and the Commission
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

132
(4) The Commission may call upon such
experts, from the fields of economics,
commerce, accountancy, international trade or
from any other discipline as it deems necessary,
to assist the Commission in the conduct of any
inquiry or proceeding before it.
(5) The Commission may direct any
person—
(a) to produce before the Director
General or the Registrar or an officer
authorised by it, such books, accounts or
other documents in the custody or under
the control of such person so directed as
may be specified or described in the
direction, being documents relating to any
trade, the examination of which may be
required for the purposes of this Act;
(b) to furnish to the Director General
or the Registrar or any officer authorised
by it, as respects the trade or such other
information as may be in his possession in
relation to the trade carried on by such
person, as may be required for the purposes
of this Act.
(6) If the Commission is of the opinion that
any agreement referred to in section 3 of abuse
of dominant position referred to in section 4
or the combination referred to in section 5 has
caused or is likely to cause an appreciable
adverse effect on competition in the relevant
market in India and it is necessary to protect,
without further delay, the interests of consumers
and other market participants in India, it may
conduct an inquiry or adjudicate upon any
matter under this Act after giving a reasonable
oral hearing to the parties concerned.
37. Any person aggrieved by an order of
the Commission from which an appeal is
allowed by this Act but no appeal has been
preferred, may, within thirty days from the date
Review of
orders of
Commission.

133
of the order, apply to the Commission for
review of its order and the Commission may
make such order thereon as it think fit:
Provided that the Commission may
entertain a review application after the expiry
of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied
that the applicant was prevented by sufficient
cause from preferring the application in time:
Provided further that no order shall be
modified or set aside without giving an
opportunity of being heard to the person in
whose favour the order is given and the
Director General where he was a party to the
proceedings.
* * * * *
39. Every order passed by the Commission
under this Act shall be enforced by the
Commission in the same manner as if it were
a decree or order made by a High Court or
the principal civil court in a suit pending
therein and it shall be lawful for the
Commission to send, in the event of its inability
to execute it, such order to the High Court or
the principal civil court, as the case may be,
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a
person referred to in sub-clause (iii) or sub-
clause (vi) or sub-clause (vii) of clause (1)
of section 2, the registered office or the sole
or principal place of business of the person
in India or where the person has also a
subordinate office, that subordinate office,
is situated;
(b) in the case of an order against any
other person, the place, where the person
concerned voluntarily resides or carries on
business or personally works for gain, is
situated,
and thereupon the court to which the order is
so sent shall execute the order as if it were a
decree or order sent to it for execution.
Execution of
orders of
Commission.

134
40. Any person aggrieved by any decision
or order of the Commission may file an appeal
to the Supreme Court within sixty days from
the date of communication of the decision or
order of the Commission to him on one or
more of the grounds specified in Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it
is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filling the appeal
within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty
days:
Provided further that no appeal shall lie
against any decision or order of the
Commission made with the consent of the
parties.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
P
ENALTIES
42. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions
of this Act, if any person contravenes, without
any reasonable ground, any order of the
Commission, or any condition or restriction
subject to which any approval, sanction
direction or exemption in relation to any matter
has been accorded, given, made or granted
under this Act or fails to pay the penalty
imposed under this Act, he shall be liable to
be detained in civil prison for a term which
may extend to one year, unless in the meantime
the Commission directs his release and he shall
also be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees
ten lakhs.
(2) The Commission may, while making an
order under this Act, issue such directions to
any person or authority, not inconsistent with
Appeal.
5 of 1908.
Contravention
of orders of
Commission.

135
this Act, as it thinks necessary or desirable, for
the proper implementation or execution of the
order, and any person who commits breach of,
or fails to comply with, any obligation imposed
on him under such direction, may be ordered
by the Commission to be detained in civil
prison for a term not exceeding one year unless
in the meantime the Commission directs his
release and he shall also be liable to a penalty
not exceeding rupees ten lakhs.
43. If any person fails to comply with a
direction given by—
(a) the Commission under sub-section
(5) of Section 36; or
(b) the Director General while
exercising powers referred to in sub-section
(2) of Section 41,
the Commission shall impose on such person
a penalty of rupees one lakh for each day
during which such failure continues.
* * * * *
46. The Commission may, if it is satisfied
that any producer, seller, distributor, trader or
service provider included in any cartel, which
is alleged to have violated section 3, has made
a full and true disclosure in respect of the
alleged violations and such disclosure is vital,
impose upon such producer, seller, distributor,
trader or service provider a lesser penalty as it
may deem fit, than leviable under this Act or
the rules or the regulations:
Provided that lesser penalty shall not be
imposed by the Commission in cases where
proceedings for the violation of any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules or the
regulations have been instituted or any
investigation has been directed to be made
Power to
impose
lesser
penalty.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
directions of
Commission
and Director
General.

136
under Section 26 before making of such
disclosure:
Provided further that lesser penalty shall
be imposed by the Commission only in respect
of a producer, seller, distributor, trader or
service provider included in the cartel, who first
made the full, true and vital disclosure under
this section;
Provided also that the Commission may, if
it satisfied that such producer, seller, distributor,
trader or service provider included in the cartel
had in the course of proceedings,—
(a) not complied with the condition on
which the lesser penalty was imposed by
the Commission; or
(b) had given false evidence; or
(c) the disclosure made is not vital,
and thereupon such producer, seller, distributor,
trader or service provider may be tried for the
offence with respect to which the lesser penalty
was imposed and shall also be liable to the
imposition of penalty to which such person has
been liable, had lesser penalty not been
imposed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
C
OMPETITION ADVOCACY
49. (1) In formulating a policy on
competition (including review of laws related
to competition), the Central Government may
make a reference to the Commission for its
opinion on possible effect of such policy on
competition and on receipt of such a reference,
the Commission shall within sixty days of
making such reference, give its opinion to the
Central Government, which may thereafter
formulate the policy as it deems fit.
* * * * *
Competition
advocacy.

137
51. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to
be called the “Competition Fund” and there
shall be credited thereto—
* * * * *
(b) the monies received as costs from
parties to proceedings before the Commission;
* * * * *
(d) the interest accrued on the amounts
referred to in clauses (a) to (c).
* * * * *
52. (1) * * * * *
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable
by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that the orders of the
Commission, being matters appealable to the
Supreme Court, shall not be subject to audit
under this section.
* * * * *
57. No information relating to any
enterprise, being an information which has been
obtained by or on behalf of the Commission
for the purposes of this Act, shall, without the
previous permission in writing of the enterprise,
be disclosed otherwise than in compliance with
or for the purposes of this Act or any other
law for the time being in force.
Constitution
of Fund.
Accounts
and audit.
Restriction
on
disclosure of
information.

138
58. The Chairperson and other Members
and the Director General, Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General and
Registrar and officers and other employees of
the Commission shall be deemed, while acting
or purporting to act in pursuance of any of
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
59. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or Commission or any officer of
the Central Government or the Chairperson or
any Member or the Director General,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General or Registrar or officers or other
employees of the Commission for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder.
* * * * *
61. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of
any matter which the Commission is
empowered by or under this Act to determine
and no injunction shall be granted by any court
or other authority in respect of any action taken
or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.
* * * * *
63. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the
Chairperson and other Members shall be
selected under Section 9;
* * * * *
(c) the financial and administrative
powers which may be vested in the
Member Administration under Section 13;
* * * * *
Members,
Director
General,
Registrar,
officers
and other
employees,
etc., of
Commission
to be
public
servants.
Power to
make rules.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction
of civil
courts.
Protection of
action taken
in good
faith.
45 of 1860.

139
(e) the salary, allowances and other
terms and conditions of service of the
Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy
or Assistant Directors General or such other
advisers, consultants or officers under sub-
section (3) of section 16;
(f) the qualifications for appointment of
the Director General, Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General or
such other advisers, consultants or officers
under sub-section (4) of section 16;
(g) the salaries and allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of the
Registrar and officers and other employees
payable, and the number of such officers
and employees under sub-section (2) of
Section 17;
(h) for securing any case or matter
which requires to be decided by a Bench
composed of more than two Members
under sub-section (4) of Section 23;
* * * * *
(n) the manner in which the monies
transferred to the Central Government shall
be dealt with by that Government under
the fourth proviso to sub-section (2) of
Section 66;
64. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing provisions, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) the fee which may be determined
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section
19;
(e) any other matter in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by
regulations.
* * * * *
Power to
make
regulations.

140
66. (1) The Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Act, 1969 is hereby repealed and
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission established under sub-section (1)
of section 5 of the said Act (hereinafter referred
to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved.
(2) On the dissolution of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, the
person appointed as the Chairman of the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission and every other person appointed
as Member and Director General of
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint
Deputy or Assistant Directors General of
Investigation and Registration and any officer
any other employee of that Commission and
holding office as such immediately before such
dissolution shall vacate their respective offices
and such Chairman and other Members shall
be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding
three months’ pay and allowances for the
premature termination of term of their office
or of any contract of service:
Provided that the Director General of
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint,
Deputy or Assistant Directors General of
investigation and Registration or any officer or
other employee who has been, immediately
before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission
appointed on deputation basis to the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission, shall, on such dissolution, stand
reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or
Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that the Director General
of Investigation and Registration, Additional,
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Director General of
Investigation and Registration or any officer or
other employee who has been, immediately
before the dissolution of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission,
Repeal and
saving.
54 of 1969.

141
employed on regular basis by the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission,
shall become, on and from such dissolution,
the officer and employee, respectively, of the
Central Government with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like
matters as would have been admissible to him
if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had not
been transferred to, and vested in, the Central
Government and shall continue to do so unless
and until his employment in the Central
Government is duly terminated or until his
remuneration, terms and conditions of
employment and duly altered by that
Government:
Provided also that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time
being in force, the transfer of the services of
any Director General of Investigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Directors General of Investigation and
Registration or any officer or other employee,
employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission, to the Central
Government shall not entitle such Director
General of Investigation and Registration,
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General of Investigation and Registration or any
officer or other employee any compensation
under this Act or any other law for the time
being in force and no such claim shall be
entertained by any court, tribunal or other
authority:
Provided also that where the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission has
established a provident fund, superannuation,
welfare or other fund for the benefit of the
Director General of Ivnestigation and
Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or
Assistant Director General of Investigation and
14 of 1947.

142
Registration or the officers and other employees
employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission, the monies
relatable to the officers and other employee
whose services have been transferred by or
under this Act to the Central Government shall,
out of the monies standing, on the dissolution
of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission to the credit of such
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or
other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in,
the Central Government and such monies
which stand so transferred shall be dealt with
by the said Government in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic
trade practices or restrictive trade practices
pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission on or before the
commencement of this Act, including such
cases, in which any unfair trade practice has
also been alleged, shall, on such
commencement, stand transferred to the
Competition Commission of India and shall be
adjudicated by that Commission in accordance
with the provisions of the repealed Act as if
that Act had not been repealed.
(4) Subject to  the provisions of sub-section
(3), all cases pertaining to unfair trade practices
other than those referred to in clause (x) of
sub-section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and
pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission on or before the
commencement of this Act shall, on such
commencement, stand transferred to the
National Commission constituted under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and the National
Commission shall dispose of such cases as if
they were cases filed under that Act:
Provided that the National Commission
may, if it considers appropriate, transfer any
case transferred to it under this sub-section, to
the concerned State Commission established
54 of 1969.
68 of 1986.

143
under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 and that State Commission shall dispose
of such case as if it was filed under that Act.
(5) All cases pertaining to unfair trade
practices referred to in clause (x) of sub-section
(1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 and
pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Commission on or before the
commencement of this Act shall, on such
commencement, stand transferred to the
Competition Commission of India, and the
Competition Commission of India shall dispose
of such cases as if they were cases filed under
that Act.
* * * * *
54 of 1969.

144
LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
——————
(Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Company Affairs)