72 
                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
                                                             (2008-09) 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
  
 
 
Authority for Advance  Rulings on  
Central Taxes Bill, 2007   
 
 
SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
         
  
 SECRETARIAT 
  
October, 2008/Asvina 1930 (Saka)
                                            
                                                      
LOK SABHA
NEW DELHI 

  
SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2007-08) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
Authority for Advance  Rulings on  
Central Taxes Bill, 2007   
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 October, 2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21  October, 2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
October, 2008/Asvina 1930 (Saka) 
 
                                                                            1 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2008-2009    
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
12. Shri R. Prabhu 
13. Shri K.S. Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Lakshman Seth 
16. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
19. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
20. Shri Brajesh Pathak 
21. Shri Ramakrishna Badiga• 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Raashid Alvi 
23. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
24. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
25. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
26. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
27. Shri Vijay J. Darda 
28. Shri S. Anbalagan 
29. Shri Moinul Hassan 
30. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
     1.   Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
     2.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Director 
     3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Deputy Secretary 
                                                                  • Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008           2 
 
 
 
                                                 
 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been authorized by  
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventy-second Report 
on the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007.  
2. The Authority for Advance Ru lings on Central Taxes Bill, 200 7, introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 6 Dec ember, 2007, was refe rred to the Committee on 10 December, 
2007 for examination and report  thereon, by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha in 
consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules  of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committee, at their si tting held on 19 June, 20 08 heard the views of PH D 
Chamber of Commerce and Indu stry (PHDCCI), Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India (ICAI) and Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO) in connection with the 
examination of the Bill.  
4. The Committee took oral evidence of the representati ves of the Min istry of  
Finance (Department of Revenue) on 25 January, 2008 and 27 June, 2008.  
5. The Committee considered a nd adopted this report at their sitting held o n 24 
September, 2008. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to PHD Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry (PHDCCI), Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) Federation of 
Indian Export Organisations  (FIEO), Taxindi aonline.com Pvt. Ltd. and Shri S.R. 
Wadhwa, former Chairman, Income Ta x Settlement Commission for furnishing 
Memoranda in connection with examination of the Bill. They also wis h to thank in 
particular the representatives  of PHDCCI, ICAI and FIEO who appeared before the 
Committee and placed their views.  
7.  The Committee also wis h to express  their thanks to the Ministry of Fin ance 
(Department of Revenue) for placing before them the material and information they 
wanted in connection  with e xamination of the Bill. Th ey also wish to thank in particular  
the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of  Revenue) who gave 
evidence and placed their considered views before the Committee. 
 
 
                                                                            3 
 
 
 

 
8. For facility of reference, the obse rvations/recommendations of t he Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                            ANANTH KUMAR, 
 7  October, 2008                                                                                 Chairman, 
 15 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
                                                                            4 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………..….(iii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………..(iv) 
 
REPORT 
 
I. Authority for Advance Rulings – Present set-up…….………………….1 
          and the proposed Common Authority                        
 
 
II.     Functioning of the Authorities on Advance Rulings…………..………. 7 
           
 
III. Scope and ambit of Advance Rulings…………………………………18 
 
 
IV.   Miscellaneous matters…………………………………………………. 25 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 25  
          JANUARY, 19 & 27 JUNE AND 24 SEPTEMBER, 2008 ……………. 
   
II. AUTHORITY FOR ADVANCE RULINGS ON CENTRAL  
          TAXES BILL, 2007…………………………………………..……….. 
 
                                                                            5 
 
 
 

 REPORT 
 
The Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007 was introduced 
in the Lok Sabha on 7 December, 2007 and was referred to the Standing Committee 
on Financ e on 10 December, 2007 by the Ho n’ble Speaker for examination and 
report thereon. 
 
2. The Committee invited memoranda/sug gestions regarding the Authority on 
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007 from t he Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, various interest groups and or ganizations and experts.  The Committee 
received memoranda/suggestio ns on the provis ions of the Bill from the (i) PHD 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI ), (ii) Institute of Chartered  
Accountants of India (ICAI), (iii) Federation of Indian Export Organisatio ns (FIEO), 
(iv) Taxindiaonline.com and (v) Shri S.R. Wadhwa, Fo rmer Chairman, Income Tax 
Settlement Commission. 
 
3. The Committee heard the views of  the representatives of the PHD 
Chamber of Commerce and I ndustry, ICAI  and Federation of Indian Export  
Organisations (FIEO) on the Bill. The Chambers of Commerce, other interest groups 
and experts have, in general, expressed the need for expanding the ambit and 
scope of the present scheme of advance rulings on Central Taxes to enable resident 
Indian assessees also to avail the facility.  
 
4. The Committee also took evidence of t he representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) in connection with examination of the Bill. 
 
I.  Authorit y for Advance Rulings – Present Set-up and the proposed Common 
Authority  
 
A. Authorities for Advance Rulings: 
 
5.    At present, there are two Authorities for Advance Rulings; one constituted 
under Section 245-O of the Income Tax Ac t, 1961, which has, under Section 24 of 
the Central Sales Ta x Act, 1956, also be en notified as the Central Sa les Ta x 
Appellate Authority, and t he other constituted under Se ction 28-F of the Custom s 
 
                                                                            6 
 
 
 

Act, 1962, which is also an Authority for Advance Rulings under the Central Excis e 
Act, 1944 and the Finance Act, 1994 for purposes of Service Ta x.  These 
Authorities, called as “Authority for Advance Rulings (Income Tax)” and “Authority for 
Advance Rulings (Central Excis e, Cust oms and Service Tax)”, have been 
established to enable applicants to obtain, in advance, bind ing rulings from the said 
Authorities on issues which may arise in the determination of their tax liabilities.   
  6.  The Authority for Advance Rulings  for direct tax es was constituted under 
the Finance Act, 1993 and has been functioning since 01.6.1993, and the Authority  
for Advance Rulings f or Indirect taxes was constituted under the Finance Ac t, 1999 
and has been functioning since 26.02.2002. 
7.   While the Authority for Advance Rulings (Income Tax) has been set up 
with the objective of reduc ing needless litigation and pr omoting better taxpay er 
relations in respect of transactions involving non-residents; the Authority for Advance 
rulings ( Central Excis e, customs, Servic e T ax) has been establis hed for pr oviding 
binding rulings on important issues so that the intending foreign investors will have a 
clear cut indication of their duty liability in advance. 
8.  Each of  the two existing Authorit ies for Advance ( Tax) Rulings comprises 
of: 
- Chairman who is a retired Supreme Court Judge. 
- Member  (Legal) from Indian Legal Serv ice, who is, or is qualified to 
be an Additional Secretary to the Government of India. 
- Member (Revenue) from the respective Indian Revenue Service, who 
is qualified to be a Member of CBDT/CBEC. 
 
Scheme of Advance Rulings: 
 
 9.   The scheme of advanc e rulings  f or Direct and Indirect Taxes as 
developed since inception and presently prevalent is as follows: 
 
Direct Taxes: 
 
10.  Initially, applicants to the A uthority for Advance Rulings could only be 
non-residents.  Advance Ruling was defined to mean the determination of a question 
 
                                                                            7 
 
 
 

of law or fact in relation to a transac tion, which has been under taken or is proposed 
to be undertaken by a non-resident.  S ubsequently, in 1998, the definition of  
advance ruling was amended to include decis ions in relation to an assessment 
pending before an income-tax aut hority or Tribunal in  case of a resident who falls  
within such class or category of persons as the Central Government may notify.  The 
Central Government, vide Notific ation No.S.O.473(E) dated 21.06 .1999 notified the 
following class of persons as eligible  residents under this provision:-  
 
(a) public sector company as defin ed in clause (36A) of section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act; and 
(b) person seeking advance ruling in relati on to the tax liability of a non-
resident ar ising out of a transaction undertaken or proposed t o be 
undertaken by him with a non-resident. 
    
11.  In the year 2000 and then further  in 2003, the Income-tax Act was  
amended and advance ruling was re-defined to include:- 
(i) a determination by the Authority  in relation to a transaction whic h has 
been undertaken or is proposed to  be undertaken by a non-resident 
applicant; or 
(ii) a determination by  the Authority  in rela tion to the tax liability of a non-
resident arising out of  a transacti on which has been undertaken  or is 
proposed t o be undertaken by a re sident applicant with such non-
resident, and such determination shall include the determination of any 
question of law or of fact specified in the application; 
(iii) a determination or decision by  the Authority in respect of an issue 
relating to computation of total in come which is pending before any  
income-tax authority or the appellate tribunal and such determination or 
decision shall inc lude the determination or decision of any question of 
law or of f act relating to such com putation of total inc ome specified in 
the application. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                            8 
 
 
 

12.  Simultaneous ly, amendments were made in the definition of applicant 
and it was redefined to mean any person who – 
(i) is a non-resident referred to in (i) above; or 
(ii) is a resident referred to in (ii) above; or 
(iii) is a resident falling within any such class or category of persons as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
in this behalf. 
 
13.    Public sector companies are re sidents that are expressly notified by the 
Government as eligible to approach the Au thority for Advance Ru lings in respect of 
issues relating to computation of total income which is pending before any income-
tax authority or appellate tribunal or any ques tion of law or fact relating to such 
computation of total income.  Howev er, in the context of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court’s Judgment in ONGC Vs. Collector of Central Excise {1995 Supp (4) SCC 541 
= 1992(61) ELT 3 (SC)}, the Authority for Advance Rulings held that clearance of the 
Committee on Disputes (COD) would be necessary before an application is made to 
it by the public sector company.  
 
Indirect Taxes: 
 
14.  In regard to the scheme pertaining to indirect taxes, in itially, the 
applicants before Authority for Advance Rulings could be the following :- 
 
A non-resident setting up a joint ventur e i n India in co llaboration with a 
non-resident or a resident or a resident setting up a joint venture in India in 
collaboration with a non-resident.  
 
15.  In 2005, the Customs, Central Excise and Finance Acts were amended to 
enlarge the scope of the Authority to cove r the following categor ies of persons as  
applicants:-  
(i) A non-resident setting up a joint vent ure in India who propo ses to 
undertake any business activity in India; 
(ii) A resident setting up a joint venture in India in collaboration with a non-
 
                                                                            9 
 
 
 

resident who proposes to undertake any business activity in India;  
(iii)  A wholly owned subsidiary Indi an company, of which the holding 
company is a foreign company which proposes to undertake any  
business activity in India; 
(iv) A joint venture in India in whic h one or more of the participants  is a 
non-resident having substantial interest;  
(v) In addition to the above, the scope of the ‘applicant’ in the Customs Act 
was also expanded to cover a resi dent belonging to a category of 
persons that is notified by the C entral Government {eg., Importers 
importing from Singapore under Comprehensive Economic  Co-
operative Agreement (CECA) vide Notification No. 69/2005-Cus(NT)}  
 
B.    Proposed Common Authority 
 
16. According to the Minis try of Fi nance, while reviewing t he performance 
of the two Authorities for Advance Ruli ngs, viz., Authority on Advance Rulings  
(Income Tax) and Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Exc ise, Customs and 
Service Tax),  it was notic ed that these Authorities di d not have adequate work, to 
justify separate Authorities with separate establishments.  A decision was, therefore, 
taken to constitute a common Authority for Advanc e Rulings for performing the 
functions of these Authorit ies, vide the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central 
Taxes Bill, 2007.   
17.   Some of the Salient  features of t he Authority for Ad vance Rulings on 
Central Taxes Bill, 2007 are as follows: 
(i)     The Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxe s shall exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions, as have been conferred 
on it under the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
the Customs Act, 1962, the Fi nance Act, 1994, the propos ed 
Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act  or any other 
Act.   
 
(ii) The Autho rity shall, for the purposes of exercis ing its power s 
regarding discovery and inspec tion, summoning and enforcing the 
 
                                                                            10 
 
 
 

attendance of any person and ex amining him on oath, issuing 
commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents, 
compelling production of books of  account, other records and 
documents, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. 
 
(iii) Every proceedin g before the Authority shall be deem ed to be a  
judicial proceeding within the me aning of sections  193 and 228 of  
the Indian Penal Code and for t he purpos e of section 196 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and the Authority shall be de emed to be a c ivil 
court for the purpos es of section 195 an d Chapter XXVI of the  
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
(iv) The Authority shall have power to  regulate its own pro cedure in all 
matters arising out of the exercise of its powers. 
 
 
18. The Authority  for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 
2007 is aimed to provide for the constitution of an Authority for Adva nce 
Rulings o n Central Taxes as a substitu te of the Authorit y for Advan ce 
Rulings (Income Tax) constituted under section 245-O of the Income-Tax 
Act, 1961 and the Authority for Ad vance Ru lings (Central Excise, 
Customs and Ser vice Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Cust oms 
Act, 1962.   The Committee having exam ined the Bill from all angles, 
propose it, for consideration by  the Ho use, subject to  follow ing specific 
recommendations 
 
                                                                            11 
 
 
 

 
II.    Functioning of the Authorities for Advance Rulings  
 
 
 19.  Detailing the background to the proposal to constitute a Common Authority 
for Advance Rulings by an independent enactm ent, the Department of Revenue, in a 
written note informed the Committee,  inter alia: 
 
“The Authority for Advance Rulings  (Customs and Central Ex cise) 
consists of a Chairman (retired Judge of the Supreme Court with a fixed 
salary of Rs.30,000) with two Mem bers of the rank of Additional 
Secretary to the Gov ernment of  India and other  Gazetted and non-
gazetted staff.  The total sanctioned strength of the Authority is 12, which 
were earlier sanctioned for a pe riod of three years w.e.f. 11.1 2.2000. 
Subsequently, with the appr oval of Competent Aut hority, the sanction 
was extended for one year upto 10.12.2004. When the proposal was  
referred to Hon’ble PM fo r further continuation of  the post of Chairman, 
the PM directed that a view may be taken by the Ministry on the 
justification for continuation of the AAR  (C&CE) in view of practically no 
work with it.”   
 
20. According to the Department of Revenue, in pursuance of the directions 
of the Prime Minister, the matter relating to  the justification fo r continuation of the 
Authority for Advance Rulings  (Customs  and Central Exc ise) was examined by a 
departmental Committee, which considered  the objective of setting up of the 
Authority, the work done by  the Authority since it became functional,  the 
expenditure incurred and the sanctioned st rength etc.  Having observed that the 
work load in the AAR (IT) was also not very heavy,  the Departmental Com mittee 
felt that the benefits of merging the tw o AARs would be substantial.  This , the 
Committee felt was in view of t he fact  that the Chair man was holding c harge of 
both the authorities and one Member was a person fr om the Indian Legal Service,  
who is or is qualified to be an Additional Secretary to the Government of India and 
the second Member had to be an officer of  the respective Indian Revenue Service, 
who is qu alified to b e Mem ber of the respective Boar d.   Considering  that a 
common authority for Advance Rulings ca n be made functional by addin g one 
Member from the Indian Cust oms and Central Excis e Service to the Authority for 
Advance Rulings (IT) in addition to ot her Members of that  Authority, the 
 
                                                                            12 
 
 
 

departmental Committee propos ed transferring of the work of the Authority for 
Advance Rulings for Customs and Central Excise and the Authority for Advance 
Rulings for Income Tax to a Common Authority.    
 
 21.  The Department, in this regard, also informed as under: 
 
“While considering the propos al for transfer of the work of  
Authority for Advanc e Rulings f or Customs and Central Excise and the 
Authority for Advance Rulings for Inco me Tax to a c ommon Authority,  it 
emerged that there are two distinct al ternatives to achieve the objective 
of a single Authority on Advance Rulings.  
(i) to constitute a new common AAR by an independent enactment  
and transfer work of both authorities for Advance Rulings to this. 
(ii) to make modifications in the Cust oms Act to the  effect that the 
Authority for Advance Rulings created under the Income Tax Act  
will also work as an Authority on  Advance Rulings (C&CE) with t he 
modification that when the Aut hority decides cases  related to 
Customs and Central Exc ise, the Te chnical Member on the Bench 
would be from the Cust oms and Central Excise side in place of the 
Technical member from Income Tax.  
 
 On consideration of the above alte rnatives, in a meeting taken by 
Hon’ble Finance Minister, it was decided to draft a separate Act for the 
Authority for Advance Rulings to take care of all matters relating to direct 
and indirect taxes.   Accordingly, a draft legis lation was prepared in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law  to provide for constitution of an 
Authority for Advanc e Rulings on Cent ral Taxes as a substitute of the 
Authority for Advance Rulings cons tituted under section 245-O of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authorit y for Advanc e Rulings (Central 
Excise, Customs and Service T ax) constituted under s ection 28F of the 
Customs Act, 1962, and for matters c onnected therewith or incidental 
thereto.” 
 
 
                                                                            13 
 
 
 

 22. The Committee desired to know det ails of the nature and number of 
cases for advance rulings dealt with by  the two Authorities since inception mainly in 
consideration of the fact that the dec ision to consti tute a Common Authority for  
Advance Rulings for transferring the functi ons of the  ex isting two Authorities was 
taken as it was notic ed that the Authorit ies did not h ave adequate work to justify 
separate Authorities with separate establishments.    The Department of Revenue, in 
this regard, in a written reply, informed, inter alia: 
  
 “Since its inceptio n, Authority for Advanc e Rulings (Income Tax)  
has dealt with 577 applications.  Rulings have been pronounced by the 
Authority on several co mplex is sues of non-resident taxation, which 
inter-alia included determination regarding ‘r esident of the contracting 
state’; ‘permanent es tablishment’; ‘cap ital gains ’; ‘roy alty’; ‘fees  for 
technical services’ etc. Besides, in their capacity as the Central Sales  
Tax Appellate Authorit y (CSTAA), the Authority also dealt wit h 32 
appeals relating to CST till May, 2008. 
Authority for Advanc e Rulings  (Central Excise, Customs and 
Service Tax) from the date of inc eption till 31.3. 2008 has dispos ed of 
101 applications out of 112 applications received.   Rulings hav e been 
pronounced by the Authority on several issues pertaining to indirect tax 
laws which inter -alia included classification/valuation of 
goods/services; applicability of notif ications issued in respect of 
customs, central excise and service tax.” 
 
 
23.    Shri S.R. Wadhwa, forme r Chairman, Income Tax Settlement 
Commission in a memorandum submitted to the Committee, pointed out, inter alia,  
that the decisions  of the Authorit y for Ad vance Rulings (Income Tax) in the  recent 
years, and the attitude of the G overnment in not acc epting s ome of the decisions 
and going to the Supreme Court, in writ petitions, had diminis hed, significantly, the 
utility of the mechanism for advance rulings, and more importantly, the confidence of 
the non-residents and the legal profession in the correctness of the rulings. 
  
 
                                                                            14 
 
 
 

24. Asked to furnish their response on the points raised by Shri Wadhwa 
the Department of Revenue, in a written reply stated: 
“Out of 547 rulings pronounced by AAR (IT), 542 (99%) 
have resulted in finalization of issues involved.  Only in one 
case has the Department filed SLP before the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court and in 4 c ases applicants have filed SLP.  As f ar as AAR 
(Central Excis e, Cus toms and Service Tax) is c oncerned, 
neither the Department nor any  applic ant has gone to the 
Supreme Court against any  decision.  The year-wise 
applications received in both the authorities are as under: 
 
Financial 
year 
Applications 
received in AAR 
(IT) 
Applications 
received in AAR 
(C&CE) 
1993-1994 5  
1994-95 15 - 
1995-96 67 - 
1996-97 65 - 
1997-98 69 - 
1998-99 47 - 
1999-2000 31 - 
2000-01 39 - 
2001-02 55 - 
2002-03 16 1 
2003-04 26 6 
2004-05 23 16 
2005-06 65 57 
2006-07 22 14 
2007-08 26 18 
Total 571 112 
 
From the above, it is revealed t hat there is no definite pattern in 
the number of applic ations rece ived by both authorities on an 
annual basis. The Government has felt the need to invoke the 
extraordinary jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in only one case 
out of over 600 cases where rulings were pronounc ed by the 
two Authorities for Advance Rulings. “  
 
25. As indicated in Chapter I of th is report, the scope of the scheme of  
advance rulings under the Income Tax Ac t was expanded by way of amendments 
carried out in 1998 and again in 2000 and 2003, for inc luding, inter alia,  decisions 
 
                                                                            15 
 
 
 

in relation to, an assessment pending before an income-tax authority or Tribunal in 
case of a resident who falls within such class or category of persons as the Central 
Government may notify; transactions, wh ich have been undertaken or proposed to 
be undertaken by a non-resident applicant; and applications of residents on the tax 
liability of non-resident with whom a transaction is proposed or undertaken. 
26. Asked to furnish a category-wis e break-up of the app lications (non-
residents, residents and PSUs ) who ma y have approached t he Authority for 
Advance Rulings (Income Tax)  over t he years, the Department furnished the 
following information: 
 
FY Applicants 
 Non-
Residents 
Residents PSUs Total 
1993-94 05 00 00 5 
1994-95 15 00 00 15 
1995-96 67 00 00 67 
1996-97 65 00 00 65 
1997-98 69 00 00 69 
1998-99 46 01 00 47 
1999-00 25 03 03 31 
2000-01 11 13 15 39 
2001-02 40 10 05 55 
2002-03 09 05 02 16 
2003-04 12 08 06 26 
2004-05 14 05 04 23 
2005-06 51 09 05 65 
2006-07 13 06 03 22 
2007-08 13 11 02 26 
April – M ay, 
2008  
06 00 00 06 
Total 461 71 45 577 
 
 
 
                                                                            16 
 
 
 

27. The scope of the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Exc ise, 
Customs and Servic e Tax) has  also been expande d by wa y of amendments 
carried out in 2005 to cover inter  alia  ‘a  non-resident setting up a joint vent ure in 
India, a resident setting up a joint venture in India, a wholly  owned subs idiary 
Indian Company, of which t he holding company is a foreign company, and a joint  
venture, with one or more non-residents having substantial interest.   
28.   Asked to furnish the reasons for the number of applications filed 
before the Authority being very few desp ite expanding the am bit and scope of the 
scheme; and a category-wise break-up (Cus toms, Excise and Serv ice Tax) of the 
number of applications filed /rulings pronounced by  the Authority, the Depar tment 
of Revenue, in a written reply informed: 
 
(i)  Rationalization of ta x structur e, l iberalization of r ules and 
procedure and harmonization of Cu stoms & Excise Tariff with 
international tariff structure has yielded results in reducing the 
disputes relating to assessment of goods.  This may have led to 
taxpayers not seeking advance rulings from the Authority. 
(ii) The receipt and disposal of appl ications – financial year-wise in 
Authority for Advanc e Rulings (Central Excis e, Customs and 
Service Tax) is as under:-  
 
 
                                                                            17 
 
 
 
No. of applications 
disposed Sr. 
No 
Financial 
year 
Opening 
balance 
No. of 
applications 
received Rulings Orders 
No. of 
applications 
pending at the 
close of the 
year 
Remarks 
  CE Cus ST CE Cus ST CE Cus ST CE Cus ST CE Cus ST  
1 2 3a 3b 3c 4a 4b 4c 5a 5b 5c 5d 5e 5f 6a 6b 6c 7 
1 2002-03 - - - 1 - - 1 - - - - - - - -  
2 2003-04 - - - 1 4 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 3 -  
3 2004-05 - 3 - 2 11 3 - 4 - 2 3 2 - 6 1 
One Cus. 
application 
withdrawn 
within 30 
days. 
4 2005-06 - 6 1 4 50 3 1 54 2 - 1 1 3 1 - 
One CE 
application 
withdrawn 
within 30 
days. 
5 2006-07 3 1 - 1 6 7 3 1 - - 4 6 1 2 1  
6 2007-08 1 2 1 3 8 7 1 3 2 1 2 4 6 1 2  
 Total    12 79 21 6 63 4 4 10 14 6 1 2 
02  
application 
withdrawn 
within 30 
days. 

 
SUMMARY 
 
• Applications received    -  112 
• Disposal 
o (i) Rulings    - 73 
o (ii) Orders    - 28 
o (iii) Withdrawn within 30 days  - 02 
• Total (Disposal)     -  103 
• Applications pending    -     09” 
 
29. Responding to a question on the reasons for the number of  
applicants approaching the Auth orities for Advance Rulings  being very few, the 
Secretary, Department of Revenue, while tendering evidence before the 
Committee stated: 
 
“I cannot take a final position in this situation.  I have no data 
to suggest people come in hav ing a partner or appointing a 
firm to take care of their issues.” 
 
 
30. Asked further whether it would not be desirable for the Department to 
conduct an in-house-s tudy to assess the reasons for the number of applications  
filed with the Authorities being very few, the Revenue Secretary stated: 
 
“If the Committee desires, we will have a survey done” 
 
Necessity of the system of advance rulings: 
 
31.  The objective of setting up of the Authority for Advance Rulings  
(Income Tax) was to reduc e needless  litigation and promote better taxpayer 
relations in respect of transactions involving non-residents. Similarly, Authority for 
Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Cust oms and Service Tax) was set up to 
provide binding rulings on important issues so that the intending foreign investors 
will have a clear cut indication of their duty liability in advance.  
 
 
                                                                            18 
 
 
 

32.   Acc ording to the Department of Revenue, out of the 547 rulings 
pronounced by the Authority for Advance Ruli ngs (IT) till date, 542 have re sulted in 
finalization of the issues inv olved.  Similarly, Authority f or Advance Rulings (Central 
Excise, Customs and Service T ax) has dis posed off 101 applic ations.  Hence, the 
Department of Revenue is of the opinion  that both the Aut horities have been 
successful in achieving the stated objectives. 
 33. The Committee desired to have deta ils of the total volume of demands  
raised by Government on assessees on acc ount of Income Tax, Customs Duty and 
Central Excise Duty but have remained locked in dis pute with various adjudicating 
authorities as on March 31, 2008. 
     34. The Department of Revenue, in this regard, in a written reply, furnished 
the following information: 
 “Outstanding demand raised by the Income-tax Depart ment and 
its available details as on 31.03.2008 are as follows:- 
 
(Rupees in crores) 
Total 
Demand 
Raised 
Disputed demand 
 Less 
than 
one 
year 
Between 
one and 
two years 
Between 
two and 
five 
years 
Between 
five and 
ten 
years 
More 
than 10 
years 
Total  
1,24,274 20,419 17,625 18,070 10,781 678 67,573 
 
The total demand raised against the assessees on account of 
Customs duty and Central Exc ise Duty and cases pending before 
various adjudicating authorities as on March 31, 2008 with age-wise 
break up is as follows:-  
 
Age-wise break-up (number of cases) Sl. 
No. 
Indirect 
taxation 
No. o f
cases 
 Amount 
involved 
(Rupees 
in crores) 
Upto 6 
months 
6-12 
months 
1-3 
years 
Above 
3 years 
1 Customs   4,806 2,497 3,465 659 541 141 
2. Excise 11,594 8,348 9,055 2,089 445    5 
 
35.   Asked further w hether the Department could furnish a break-up of the 
total volume of demands raised by the Government on non-residents assessees, 
 
                                                                            19 
 
 
 

including Multi National En terprises (MN Es) etc. on account of income tax,  
customs and excis e duties and service tax whic h may have remained loc ked in 
dispute with various adjudicating authorities, the Depar tment of Revenue, in reply  
informed:  
“The Central Board of  Excise an d Customs (CBEC) and Central 
Board of Direct Taxes  (CBDT) maintain updated data of all the 
revenue locked up in Demands pendi ng adjudication with various  
authorities and give priority to the recovery thereof wherever  
required.  Therefore,  there has been no n eed so far to make a 
distinction between Demands raised on Residents and Non-
Residents either at the Board level or at the field level. 
If separate data on the total Demands against Non-Residents and 
MNEs is required to be collect ed, it w ould be a very time 
consuming exercise which would require examination of individual 
files all across the country.” 
 
36.   As  FDI and other inv estments ( FII) were on the increase, the 
Committee desired to know whether it was, at all, essential to continue with the 
system of Authority for Advanc e Rulings in the present scenario. The Department 
of Revenue, in this regard, in a written reply, stated: 
 
“The need  for such a mecha nism is to  facilitate non  
residents who are not familiar with the Indian tax system and have 
the need to clear misapprehensions  and ambiguities.  In the 
context of increasing trade and commerce between countries and 
globalization of bus inesses, t he AAR c ontinues to serve an 
important purpose.  Till such tim e as the national legislations on 
issues that have international significance develop fully and gain  
widespread acceptance, it is c onsidered necessary to have a 
mechanism for such advance rulings.” 
 
37. In respons e to question pos ed by the Committee on whether the 
purpose with which the Author ities we re establis hed was  being s erved and 
whether it  would not be appropriate to  discontinue the system, the Revenue 
Secretary, while rendering evidence stated: 
 
“We have taken a decision that single Authority should 
 
                                                                            20 
 
 
 

continue.  We welcome the suggestions and advice of the 
hon. Committee.  We will duly  reflect on them and take a 
final decision.” 
 
38. In this regard, the Secretary also added: 
“……especially in today’s times, in a sense, we are back into 
certain economic turbulence.  We do not need to have two 
separate authority.  We do believe that a single authority  
should continue.  Sometime later may be we can visit the 
issue once again and then further  a view c an be taken with 
respect to reforms and making taxa tion, etc. simple.  We are 
open to it.  That is our endeavour.” 
 
 
39.   An  anal ysis of the number of applications recei ved in the 
Authority for Advance Rulings (Incom e Tax) and  Authorit y for Advance 
Rulings (Customs & Central Excise) r eveals that over the years the number 
of applications received b y these Auth orities has declined and during the 
two year period – 2006-07 and 2007-08, the former received o n an average 
just 24 applications and the later 16 ap plications a y ear.  Obviously , these 
Authorities did not  have adequate w ork to justify  their existence.  It is 
doubtful whether the proposed Common Authority for Advance Rulings too 
will have adequate work to justify its constitution and continuance. 
40.    Th e Authority for Advance Ru lings (Income Tax) w as set u p in 
1993 with the objective of redu cing needless litigation and  promote better 
tax payer relations in respect of tr ansactions involving non-residents and  
Authority for Advance Rulings (Customs  & Central Excise) w as set up in  
2002 to provide binding rulings on important issues so that the intending  
foreign investors w ill have a clear i ndication of their dut y liability  in 
advance.  Though the Department of Reve nue is of  the opinion that both 
 
                                                                            21 
 
 
 

the Autho rities have been  su ccessful in achievi ng these objectives, the 
Department have no separ ate data to substantiate their claim.  The 
Department have no data indicating the demands raised on non-residents  
regarding income t ax, custo ms, excise duties and servi ce tax an d the 
related amount locked in dispute.  The Committee desire that an exercise in 
this regard be undertaken w ith a view to assessing the effectiveness of the 
system of  Advance Rulings and to decide abo ut the co ntinuance o r 
otherwise of the syst em, taking into account the need to ensu re necessary 
transparency, accountability , equit y and level play ing field to domesti c 
industries including Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs). 
 
                                                                            22 
 
 
 

 
III. Scope and ambit of Advance Rulings 
 
i) Expansion of Scope: 
 
 41. The representatives of FIEO , PHDCCI and the ICAI, in the 
Memoranda submitted to the Committee and while presenting their views  on the 
Bill before the Committee emphasized on widening the scope of the scheme of 
advance rulings to cover resident assessees as well to obtain advance rulings on 
the potential tax or duty liabilit ies on their projec ted investments/enterprises, 
instead of restricting the sco pe of the facility to non-residents a nd public sector 
undertakings as applicable at present. 
 42. Questioned whether widening of the scope of the schemes of 
advance rulings, as suggested, would not result in a sharp increase in the 
number of applications and ex tra ordinary delay in th e adjudic ating proces s, a 
representative of PHDCCI, while presenting his  view s before the Committee, 
stated inter alia.  
“We are conscious of this fact  and this can be addressed by  
putting a c eiling on the question of  amount involv ed or secondly 
substantial question of law as it  is the normal case where appeal 
is not allowed. 
……. So one provis ion can be  kept where there is a 
substantial question of law is in volved on interpretation, then that 
application can be entertained.  This will reduce the number of 
applications which will come up. 
Secondly, there can be some mo netary limit that the amount 
involved should not be less than some rupees/ lakhs.  That can 
also address the issue. 
The third alternative can be,  as my two colleagues have 
spoken about it, it can be allowed to corporates.” 
 
 43. Emphasizing the need for expandi ng the ambit of the scheme of 
advance rulings, the representative of PHDCCI also added: 
 
“What is happening, every y ear so many new amendments 
are carried out to Inc ome Tax and to other Indirect Taxes.  
Immediately thereafter interpretation of issues come up.  After 
 
                                                                            23 
 
 
 

a lot of litigations of three years or five years, then an 
amendment is brought in the legislation clarifying what was the 
intention.  So by that time, many things happen in between.   
The moment the legis lation is enacted, the person hav ing any 
issue concerning him, he will file  an application.  Another idea 
can be that we can put a reasonable amount of fees for any 
applicant t o make an application so that  the cost is als o 
covered of the Authority is al so covered.  So this will 
discourage those who want to have a frivolous or a minor 
issue getting reported.” 
 
44.   In essence, the suggestions m ade by the representatives centered 
on expanding the ambit of  the scheme of advanc e ru lings to cover resident 
assessees by restricting the eligible appli cants to corporates, or alternatively, 
laying down a financ ial lim it in terms of tax implications, pr escribing a higher  
processing fee etc. 
45.   Asked to furnish the views of  the Department on the suggestions of  
the Chambers of Commerce, in particular on the need for expanding the scope of 
the Authority for Advance Rulings to cove r transactions of resident assessees so 
as to enable in having advance knowl edge of likely tax implications of  
transactions in c ases of ambiguity and uncertaint y, and thereby minimize 
wasteful and protracted litigations,  the Department of Revenue, in a written reply 
stated: 
     “The Government’s intention to constitute the Authority for  
Advance Rulings for direct taxe s was announced in the Financ e 
Bill, 1992 for giving advance rulings in respect of transactions  
involving non-residents in the in terest of avoiding needles s 
litigation and promoting better taxpayer relations.  On the indirect 
tax side, the scheme of Advance Ruling wa s incorporated in the 
statute keeping in v iew the n eed of foreign inves tors to be 
assured in advance of their lik ely indirect tax liabilit y.  In the 
Statement of Objects in  the Finance Bill, 19 99, it was  laid down  
before the Parliament  that the s aid scheme has been introduced 
for giving binding rulings  in  respect of activities  of  
import/export/manufacture and production of goods involving non-
 
                                                                            24 
 
 
 

residents in advance of the commenc ement of the activities to 
avoid needless litigation and to provide better compliance with the 
provisions of the Act. The Adva nce Ruling mechanism presently 
in vogue is strictly in consonance with the aims and objective with 
which the said Authority was set up.  Further if all residents are 
brought under the purview of AAR , the system may get choked 
with all parties short circuiting assessing authorities, appellate 
authorities, tribunals, et c.  This is not the intention of  setting up 
the AARs.  Hence, it may not be desirable to extend the  
jurisdiction of AARs to all residents.” 
 
46. News reports and analysis indicate that the work of the authorities on 
(tax) rulings could be increased and made more effective by expanding the ambit 
to cover, tax pay ers operating under Lar ge Tax Pay ing Units (LTUs), Indian 
public limited companies, large infrastructure  projects etc.  Asked  to furnish t heir 
views on s uch reportage and analysis, the Department of Revenue, in a written 
reply, stated inter alia: 
 
“The feasibility of extendin g t he advance rulin g facilit y to Large 
Tax paying Units (LT Us) was examined and it was observed that 
the facility of advance ruling is  a special provision to facilitate 
entities, not familiar with the dom estic laws, so that they get 
speedier and advanc e decisions on classification of goods, and 
services etc. at the beginning of  their operations  in India.   
Extending the scheme to LTUs  would lead to disc rimination 
against ot her domestic units.  The existing units operating as  
Large Tax Payers are well awar e of the law and, therefore, may 
appropriately use the remedy av ailable under the respective 
statute for resolution of an issue.  Hence, it was cons idered not  
appropriate to extend the facility of  advance rulings to LTUs.  As 
regards the Indian Public Limi ted Companies, the facility o f 
advance ruling has been extended in special circumstances in the 
 
                                                                            25 
 
 
 

Income Tax statute. Under the Customs Act also, the scope of the 
‘applicant’ has been expa nded to cover a resident belonging to a 
category of persons that is notified by the Central Government.”  
 
   47. Questioned about the statutory means or remedies that may be 
available to resident assessees in parti cular in seeking clarifications on t ax 
implications on proposed transactions etc ., the Department of Revenue, informed 
inter alia: 
“The only  other mechanism ava ilable is  clarifications  
issued by  the respective Boar ds under sections 119 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, 151A of the Customs Act, 1962, 37B of 
the Central Excise Act, 1944 and 83 of the Finance Act, 1994.”     
 
48. Section 119 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 inter alia enables the Board 
(CBDT) to issue suc h orders, instructi ons and direc tions to ot her Income Tax 
Authorities as it may deem fit for the pr oper administration of the Act, Further, 
Section 151A of the Customs Act, 1962, 37B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and 
83 of the Finance Bill, 1994 enable the B oard (CBEC) to issue instructions and 
directions for the purpose of maintaining uniformity on the classification of goods,  
or with respect to the levy of duty thereon, etc. 
49. Queried whether the re levant sections of th e taxation laws c ited by 
the Department enable resident  assessees  to approach the Boards to have 
advance knowledge of likely tax implications on transactions  in case of ambiguit y 
and uncertainty, the Department, in reply stated: 
 
“The relevant Sections empower the respective revenue boards to 
issue order s, instructi ons and dire ctions to their field formations 
for ensuring uniformity for proper administ ration of the relevant 
Acts.  However, such instructions /directions should not relate to 
particular assessments/cases and s hould not be in the nature of 
directions to Appeal Commissioner s.  Ambiguity that hamper the 
efficient management of assessment may be brought to the notice 
of the two Boards by  the field formations or indiv idual assessees 
or otherwise and the Boar ds may issue general 
orders/instructions on the subject.” 
 
 
 
                                                                            26 
 
 
 

50. Further, in response to a related i ssue raised on the provisions  of the 
proposed Bill not containing any additional  ‘reform’  element on the scheme of 
advance ruling, the Department, in reply stated inter alia: 
  
“The Bill is mainly  administrative in natur e and has  not been 
introduced with the intent  to bring in any  legal ‘reforms’ in the 
scheme of advance rulings as such.”   
 
ii) Scope of Advance Rulings  (Income Tax) vis-à-vis Advance Rulings  (Cent ral 
Excise, Customs and Service Tax) 
 
51.   A comparative account  of the scope of advance rulings (Income Tax) vis-
à-vis the s cheme pertaining to Excis e, Customs and Service Tax as furnished by the 
Department of Revenue reveal as follows: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Scope of  Advance 
Ruling 
Under the Income Tax provision Under the Central Excise, Customs & 
Service Tax provisions 
1. Persons eligible to 
seek Ad vance 
Rulings 
 
Section 245 N of th e In come 
Act, 1961  provide s that 
‘applicant’ m eans any person 
who –  
(i) is a non-resident 
(ii) is a re sident who ha s 
undertaken or proposes to 
undertake a  transa ction 
with a non-resident 
(iii) is a  resi dent falling within 
such cla ss o r category of 
person as the Central 
Government may notify – 
(a publi c se ctor company  for  
determination or decision by the 
Authority in respect of an issue 
which is p ending b efore any 
Income Ta x authority  or 
Appellate Tribunal.). 
Sections 28E of the  Customs Act, 1962 / 
Section 2 3A of the Ce ntral Exci se A ct, 
1944 and Section 96A of the Finance Act, 
1994 provide that an ‘applicant’ means – 
(i) a non -resident setting u p a joint 
venture in In dia in colla boration with 
a non-resident or a resident ; or  
(ii) a re sident se tting up a joi nt venture  
in India  in collaboration with a  no n-
resident; or  
(iii) a wholly o wned sub sidiary Indian  
company, of which holding company 
is a foreign company. 
(iv)  a resi dent f alling withi n any su ch 
class o r category of pe rsons a s th e 
Central Government may notify –  
 (a resident who proposes to import a ny 
goods from Republic of S ingapore under 
Comprehensive Econ omic Co -operation 
Agreement betwe en Re public of India  
and Republ ic of Singapore date d 
29.6.2005 for the purpo se of se eking 
advance ruling in  re spect of 
determination of origin of goods.).   
 
                                                                            27 
 
 
 

2. Stage of seeki ng 
advance ruling 
Advance ruli ng can be sought 
in relatio n to a tran saction, 
which ha s been und ertaken or 
is propo sed to be und ertaken 
by an applicant. 
Advance ruling ca n be sought in relat ion 
to a tran saction, which is proposed to be 
undertaken by an applicant.   
3. Areas in which advance 
ruling can be sought 
(a)  Any qu estion of l aw or of  
fact in relation to a transac tion 
which ha s been und ertaken or 
is propo sed to be und ertaken 
by a no n-resident ap plicant/ 
resident appl icant with a non-
resident. Any question of law o r 
of fact relati ng to com putation 
of total inco me in respe ct of an 
issue pe rtaining to a publi c 
sector un dertaking which  wa s 
pending before any Income Tax 
authority o r the Ap pellate 
Tribunal. 
The qu estions on which advance ruli ng 
can be sought have be en enumerated in 
the statute  and broadly cove r i ssues 
relating to assessment of goods /services 
in its entirety.  The ques tions relate to (i) 
classification of good s /taxable services;  
(ii) applicability of notificat ion p rescribing 
rate of duty/ tax; (iii) principles of valuation 
of goo ds/ taxable  se rvices; (iv) 
admissibility of credit of duty/service tax; 
(v) determination of liability to duty/ tax on 
goods/ se rvices und er the Act; (vi) 
determination of origin of goods. 
 
 
52.   The proposal to constitute a Com mon Authority for Advance (Ta x) 
Rulings has been initiated primarily becaus e of the few applic ations that w ere filed 
before the Authority for Advanc e Rulings  (Central Excis e, Cus toms and Servic e 
Tax). Cons idering this  aspect and the fact  t hat the sc ope of adv ance (tax) rulings 
(Income Tax) encom passes a much wider ar ea vis-à-vis the s chemes pertaining to 
Excise, Customs and Service T ax to cover transactions already undertaken as well 
as issues pending before any Income tax Authority, appellate tribunal etc., the 
Committee desired to know whether the Government was contemplating or 
considering expanding the ambit of schemes pertaining to indirect taxes as well.   
53.   The Department of Revenue, in this  regard, in a written reply stated as  
follows:  
“currently there is  no such proposal for e xpansion of  the 
ambit of the existing schemes under the indirect taxes.” 
 
 
 
 
                                                                            28 
 
 
 

54.   Advance Rulings have been esse ntially for non-residents except  
certain specified categories of  residents.  The onl y mechanism available for 
the resident assesees is clarifications issued by the CBDT and CBEC, w hich 
may not b e a viable alternative to the system of specific rulings.   Th e PHD 
Chambers of Commerce and some other organizations have suggested that 
the ambit of the proposed Common Aut hority could be expanded to cover a 
larger section of reside nt assessees on the basis of  pre-fixed criteria 
involving, inter-alia large corporates, specified businesses an d 
entrepreneurial activities etc.   The Committee agree w ith the contention of 
the Depar tment of Revenu e t hat ext ending the scheme o nly to  large tax 
paying units would lead to discrimination against other domestic units.  If all 
residents are brought under the purview  of Authority for Advance Rulings,  
the sy stem may  g et choked  w ith all parties shor t-circuiting assessing 
authorities, appellate authorities, tri bunals, etc.  The Commi ttee, therefore, 
suggest that in case it is decided to continue w ith the sy stem of Advance 
Rulings, there should be a provision enabling any resident assesse to seek a 
ruling on matters of interpretation involving substantial question of law.   
 
                                                                            29 
 
 
 

 
IV.  Miscellaneous Matters 
 
A.  International Comparison  
 
55.   Salient features of advance rulings are as follows: 
 
- A ruling can be amended or modified be fore being giv en effect to if  
there is a c hange in law or fact s based on which the said ruling was  
pronounced. 
 
- Authority can declare a ruling void, if the ruling is obtained by fraud or 
misrepresentation of facts. 
 
- Ruling is binding on the applicant  and the Department.  No provision 
for appeal is provided in the respective Acts. 
 
- The writ jurisdiction of the High C ourt in terms of Arti cle 226 of the 
Constitution can be invoked. 
 
- Jurisdiction as conferred upon th e Supreme Court under A rticle 136 
of the Constitution can also be invoked. 
 
    56. Indicating the circumstances in which the Authority may declare a 
ruling void and the natur e of appeal process on t he rulings pronounced,  the 
Department of Revenue, in a written note stated inter alia: 
“….if the Authority finds, on a re presentation made to it by the 
Commissioner or otherwise, that t he ruling has been obtained by fraud 
or misrepresentation of facts then it can declare such ruling void.  The 
rulings can also be amended or  modified before  being given effect to 
by the assessing authority  if there  has been a ch ange in law o r facts  
based on which the said ruling was pronounced.   
There is no specific provision in  the proposed Bill, which allows  
the filing of an SLP before the Hon’ ble Supreme Court.  However, SLP 
can be filed before the Hon’ble Supreme Court under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India and as s uch specific provisions under the Act s for 
filing of SL Ps are n ot required.  Wr it Petition can  also be filed  before 
High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.” 
 
                                                                            30 
 
 
 

57. The repres entatives of PHDCCI, in their Memorandum and while 
presenting their views before the Committee emphasized on the need for making 
explicit provisions in the Bill for reconsideration of rulings by the Authority and for  
appeal in the Supreme Court on the orders/rulings.  
58. Asked to furnish their res ponse to the suggestions made, the 
Department of Revenue, in a written reply stated: 
“The advance ruling authorities were set up to give 
binding rulings expeditiously at t he very first stage itself.  There 
are existing provisions for the authorities to modify/rectify their 
rulings if there is any mistake of law or facts.  The extraordinary  
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court has been invoked against very 
few rulings pronounced by the Aut horities.  The experience s o 
far bears out that there may not be any necessity for specific  
provisions for review/reconsideration of rulings.”           
 
59. As informed by the Departmen t, on the direct taxes side, the 
applicants had filed SLPs in four  cases,  while the Department approached t he 
Supreme Court in one case, and there have been no SLPs/writs on the rulings on 
indirect taxes side. 
 60. A comparative account of advanc e rulings schemes as prevalent in 
India vis-à-vis the developed countries  as furnished by the Department of 
Revenue, is as follows: 
          
 U.S.A. UK Sweden Canada  India 
Which 
Authority gives 
advance 
rulings? 
IRS 
National 
Office (for 
Letter 
Rulings) 
Inland 
Revenue 
Head 
Office (for 
Private 
Rulings)  
Council 
for 
Advance 
Tax 
Rulings  
Rulings 
Directorate 
of Revenue 
Canada  
Authorities for 
Advance 
Rulings 
Are the tax 
authorities 
bound by 
advance ruling 
on legal 
questions? 
Yes. Yes. Yes Yes Yes 
 
                                                                            31 
 
 
 

Does the 
Department 
have a right to 
appeal? 
No.  The 
Ruling is 
given by 
the 
Depart-
ment itself 
No.  The 
Ruling is 
given by 
the 
Departme
nt itself 
Yes No.  The 
Ruling is 
given by the 
Department 
itself 
Writ jurisdiction 
of the High 
Courts under 
Article 226 and 
extraordinary 
jurisdiction of 
the Supreme 
Court under 
Article 136 of 
the Constitution 
can be invoked. 
Is it binding on 
the tax payer? 
No No No No Yes 
Does the 
taxpayer have 
a right to 
appeal? 
Not 
required 
as Ruling 
is not 
binding on 
taxpayer 
Not 
required 
as Ruling 
is not 
binding on 
taxpayer 
Not 
required 
as Ruling 
is not 
binding on 
taxpayer 
Not required 
as Ruling is 
not binding 
on taxpayer 
Writ jurisdiction 
of the High 
Courts under 
Article 226 and 
extraordinary 
jurisdiction of 
the Supreme 
Court under 
Article 136 of 
the Constitution 
can be invoked. 
 
61. Responding to a query on the reasons for the scheme of advance 
rulings in India being essentially different  from that of the other Countries, where 
the rulings were not bindi ng on the applicants; and the need felt  for providing an 
appeal mechanism on the Aut horities ru lings, the Secretary, Department of  
Revenue, while tendering evidence, stated inter alia: 
“……over 600 cases  were decided and only in five of them, the 
necessity for questioning the ruling has  arisen.  Four times by the 
private parties concerned and one time by the Government.  
…….the rulings are binding on both, t hat is the party as well as the 
Government.  At the same time t he extraordinary jurisdiction of the 
Constitution and the special powe rs under  Article 226 and Artic le 
136 are available and those were taken recourse to.  So, the 
decision not to provide an appeal pr ovision in the Act was to make 
it binding.  At the sam e time the Constitutional provision that there 
shall be recourse to high courts and Supreme Court in the event of 
somebody so desir ing is also av ailable.  T hat would answer the 
appeal provision s ituation.  With respect to why countries adopt 
certain positions and approaches, we have our own choices of  
democratic processes.  We have chosen a particular way approved 
by Parliament and that is how we  have gone.  So, we need not be 
bound down by what a particular  country does.  After all, we hav e 
not adopted a foreign legislation totally. 
 
                                                                            32 
 
 
 

 
 
      B.  Composition of the Authority and term of of fice of Members – Clause 4 and 
Clause 5          
 
62.   Clause 4 relating to the Composition of the Authority reads as under: 
 
“The Authority shall c onsist of  the following Members appointed 
by the Central Government, namely:— 
 
(a) a Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court; 
(b) an offi cer of the Indian Rev enue Ser vice, who is, or has 
been, or is qualified to be, a Member  of the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes; 
(c) an offi cer of the Indian Revenue Service (Customs and 
Central Excise), who is, or ha s been, or is qualified to be, a 
Member of the Central Board of Excise and Customs; 
(d) an officer of the Indian Legal Service, who is, or has been, or 
is qualified to be, an Additional Secretary to the Government of 
India:  
 
 Provided that for giving advance rulings— 
 
(i) under the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Authority shall 
exclude the Member under clause (c); and 
(ii) under the Acts ot her than the Income-tax Act, 1961, the 
Authority shall exclude the Member under clause (b).” 
. 
63.    Clause 5, pertaining to the term of office of Members provides as follows: 
 
 “The Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such for a 
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
until he attains,— 
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years; and 
(b) in the c ase of any  other Mem ber, the age of sixt y-five years, 
whichever is earlier.” 
 
                                                                            33 
 
 
 

 
i) Compositio n of the Authority: 
 
64. In the exis ting authorities ther e are two posts of Chairman, one 
each in AAR (IT) and  AAR (Central Excise,  Customs and Servic e Tax).  T here 
are two posts of Member (Revenue) and tw o posts of Member (Legal), one each 
in both the authorities .  Also, there are two posts of Commissioners, one in the 
AAR (IT), which is  held by an officer of the IRS (IT) and another in the AAR 
(Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax), which is held by an officer of the IRS 
(C&CE).   
65. In terms of the provisions of  Clause 4, the pr oposed ‘Authority for 
Advance Rulings on Central Ta xes’ shall consist of (i) a Cha irperson, who is a  
retired Judge of the Supreme Court (ii) an officer of the Indian Re venue Service, 
who is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Member of the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes (iii)  an officer of the Indian Reve nue Servic e (Customs and Ce ntral 
Excise), who is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Member of the Central Board 
of Excise and Customs and (iv) an office r of the Indian Legal Service, who is, or 
has been, or is qualified to be, an Additional Secretar y to the Government of 
India.  
66. As against  two posts of Chairmen, 4 posts of Members and two 
posts of Commissioners in the existing authorities, there will be one post of  
Chairman, 3 posts of Members and 1 post of Commissioner in the merged 
Authority.  
 67. Further, as per the scheme of functioning of the Authority as  
envisaged terms of the provisions of Cl ause 4, when the Au thority considers a 
direct tax issue, the Member who is a cu stoms officer will n ot sit and the third 
Member will be the  Member from the inc ome-tax side.  At the time whe n the 
Authority considers an indirect tax iss ue, the third Member  will be the Member 
from the customs side and the Member fr om income-tax will  not sit for the 
proceedings. For Central Sales T ax issues, the Authority will also function as the 
Central Sales Tax Appellate  Authority.  For dischar ging this  function, both 
Members from the two I ndian Revenue Services  will not  participat e in 
 
                                                                            34 
 
 
 

proceedings and instead a sales -tax Member appointed in terms of the Central 
Sales Tax Act will be a Member of the Authority.     
68. Shri S.R. Wadhwa, f ormer Ch airman, ITAT, in his Memorandum 
submitted to the Committee pointed out, inter alia that lack of public confidence in 
the selection procedure for constituting the Authority, and lim iting the field of 
choice for selection of me mbers of the Authority (to the Indian Revenue Service 
Officers an d Indian Judicial Service Offi cers) to be the main reasons for the  
Authority for Advanc e Rulin gs being no longer a pr eferred method of ensuring 
certainty in relation to the tax im plications of cross-border transactions.  It has 
been suggested in the Memorandum that apart from the qualifications prescribed 
for the Indian Revenue Service Office rs and Indian Legal Service Officers in 
terms of sub-clauses  (b), (c) and (d) of Clause 4, a minimum experience of five 
years of dealing with probl ems relating to internati onal taxation should be added 
for this category of Members; and addit ionally serving Members of ITAT and 
CESTAT with a minim um experience of 30 y ears in tax practice inclusiv e of at 
least 10 years in international taxation who may be eligible to become judges of  
the High Court could be made eligible to become Members of the Authority. 
69. Additionally, the representative of  ICAI, while presenting his views  
on the Bill before the Commi ttee expressed the nee d for including a Member of 
the ICAI in the Authority, as in t he case  of ITAT so as to enable in prov iding 
technical expertise to the Authority. 
70. Asked to detail the selection pr ocedure stipulated  and followed for 
appointment of the Chairman and Members of the Authority, the Department, in a 
written reply stated, inter alia: 
“……..The selection process of t he Chairman and Members of the 
Authorities has not been specified in any Act or Rules.  The Income 
Tax Act and the Custom s Act however lay d own the e ligibility 
criterion for selection of C hairmen and Members of both the 
Authorities for Advance Rulings as under: 
 
(a) a Chairman, who is  a retired Judge of  the Supreme 
Court; 
(b) an officer of the Indian Re venue Service/Indian Customs  
and Central Exc ise Service w ho is qualified to be  a 
Member of the respective revenue board; 
 
                                                                            35 
 
 
 

(c) an officer of the Indian Legal Service who is, or is  
qualified to be, an Additi onal Secretary to the 
Government of India. 
 
As per prevalent procedure, for the post of Chairman, who is 
a retired Judge of the Supreme C ourt, nomination is obtained from 
the Chief Justice of India an d appointment is made with t he 
approval of the Appointments Committee of Cabinet.  For the posts 
of Technical Members, applications ar e called from eligible officers  
of the two Indian Rev enue Services and selection is  made by t he 
Central G overnment on the re commendation of  a Select ion 
Committee comprising Cabinet Secret ary, Principal Secretary to 
PM, Home Secretary, Rev enue Sec retary and Secretary 
(Personnel). The same Selection Committee recommends the 
selection of Chairmen and Members of the two revenue boards.  
For the post of Member (Legal) , nominations are obtained from 
Ministry of Law and a ppointment is made with  the approval of the 
Appointments Committee of Cabinet.” 
 
71. On the suggestion m ade for expanding the ambit of the selection 
criteria of members of t he Authority, the response of the Department of Revenue 
reads as follows: 
“The qualifications of Chairmen and Members are laid down in the 
Acts whic h provide that Mem bers should be appointed from  
amongst those IRS/IRS(C&CE)  office rs who are qua lified to be 
Members of the respective rev enue boards.  These are senior 
officers who have handled tax m atters for several years.  However, 
as a general rule, the Select ion Committee can adopt its own 
procedures to recommend suitable candidates.  Members of the 
ITAT/ CESTAT who are qualified to  be Members of the respective 
revenue boards are eligible for selection as Members of the AARs.” 
 
72. On the issue of including a mem ber of IC AI in the Authority for  
providing technical expertise, the Department’s reply states, inter alia: 
 
“Technical expertise to the Aut horities is  provided by the 
member from the respective Indian Revenue Servic es.  Henc e 
there may not be a need to widen the scope for  selection  of 
Members.” 
 
 
73. Questioned whether it would not be appropriate to have the 
rules/prescribe the procedure for selection of Members of  the Authority, which is 
 
                                                                            36 
 
 
 

presently not specified, the Department, in reply informed: 
“New rule s will b e draft ed after the “Authority for 
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007” is passed as  
Law by t he Parliament.  Pr escribing t he procedure for 
selection of Members of the Au thority may be considered at 
that stage.” 
 
ii) Term of Office: 
 
74.  The existing Rules governing the terms and conditions of service of  
Chairmen and Members of the AARs prov ide that the Chairman and Members 
hold office for a term of three years but are eligible for re-appointment for another 
term of three years.  Chairm en and Members can be in offi ce till they attain the 
ages of 70 and 62 years respectively. 
75.  In term of the provisions of Clasue 5 of the Bill, the Chair man and 
members shall hold office fo r a term of five years or till attaining the age of 7 0 
years and 65 years respectively , whichever is  earlier.  There is no provision for 
re-appointment. 
 76. The Committee, while taking evid ence of the representatives of the 
Department of Revenue felt that the te rm of five years for the Chairman and 
Members of the Authority,  as proposed, was too long a period, which may not  
facilitate in making an objective assessment of the working of th e Authority.  In  
response to the view expr essed by the Committee, t he Department, in a written 
reply stated inter alia: 
 
“The change in tenures of Chairmen and members to five 
years has been finalized in consul tation with the Ministry of Law  
and Department of Personnel & Training.”  
 
77. By way of elaborating the rationale for proposing to increase the term 
of the Chairman and Mem bers of the proposed Comm on Authority from the 
existing position of three years to five  years; and the retirement age of the 
members from 62 years to 65 years, the Department, in a pos t evidence reply  
informed: 
“The provision of s ixty five year s was proposed upon the 
advice of Department of  Personnel & Traini ng.  T he DOP&T had 
at that time taken a v iew that tenure of five years and age limit of 
 
                                                                            37 
 
 
 

sixty-five years be kept for Member s.  There was also thinking in 
the Government that there shoul d be uniformity in the terms and 
conditions of appointment et c. of Chair persons/Vice-
Chairpersons/Members in various 
Tribunals/Commissions/Statutory Regulator y Au thorities etc. set  
up by the Government.  DOP&T had advised the limits of five 
years and sixty-five y ears keeping in view the similar stand taken 
by them in few other cases to ensure unif ormity, continuity and 
effective discharge of functions atl east for a period of  five years.  
The existing provisions in two AA Rs provide for a three year term 
with one r e-appointment for the Chairmen and Members which 
implies a maximum tenure of si x years.  DOP&T’s advice was  
further on consideration that no provision for re-appointment was 
proposed in the Bill.” 
 
 
C.       Officers and staff of the Authority -  Clause 11 and Clause 13 (3) 
 
78.  Clause 11 relating to the staff of the Authority reads as under: 
 
“The Centr al Government shall,  in c onsultation with t he Author ity, 
provide the Authority with such officers and staff, as may be 
necessary, for the exercise of  the power s and disc harge of the 
functions of the Authority.”  
 
79.  Further, Clause 13 (3) provides as follows: 
 
“(3) The officers and other employees of the Authorities  under sub-
section (1), appointed to the sanctioned posts, shall be deemed to 
be the officers and other employees  of the Authority constituted 
under section 3.” 
 
80. Savings in costs has been indic ated to be a major benefit that would 
accrue following the merger of the existing two Auth orities in  terms of propose d 
Bill. 
81. Asked to furnish details  of th e ex penditure i ncurred on the tw o 
Authorities since their establishment, t he Department of Revenue furnished t he 
 
                                                                            38 
 
 
 

following information: 
Financial 
Year 
Expenditure (in Rs. crore) 
 AAR (IT)  AAR (C&CE) 
1993-94 1.10       - 
1994-95 0.99       - 
1995-96 0.81       - 
1996-97 0.85       - 
1997-98 0.85       - 
1998-99 0.95       - 
1999-00 1.03       - 
2000-01 1.02       - 
2001-02 1.15     0.50 
2002-03 1.03     0.95   
2003-04 1.24     1.03 
2004-05 1.27     1.08 
2005-06 1.31     1.12  
2006-07 1.43     1.24  
2007-08 1.70     1.32 
 
82. Also asked to furnish details of the number of permanent/temporary 
posts of officers/supporting staff pr esently sanctione d and the number of 
persons currently in position in the tw o Authorities  the Department furnished 
the following information: 
 
 No. of Sa nctioned 
posts 
No. of persons in  
position against  
sanctioned post 
AAR(IT) 36 30 
AAR(C&CE) 12 08 
Total 48 38 
 
 
    83. Questioned on the likely reduc tion in expenditure and the resultant 
savings on account of merging the two Authorities by way of reduction in 
number of sanctioned/temporary posts etc., the Department, furnished t he 
following information: 
 
                                                                            39 
 
 
 

 
No. of 
posts 
Name of posts Scale of pay 
(Rs.) 
Annual 
average 
cost (Rs.) 
Total savi ngs 
(Rs.) 
Remarks 
1 Chairman 30000 (fixed) 869880 869880 Notional 
1 Member 22400-26000 728460 728460 Notional 
1 Commissioner 18400-22400 618974 618974  
1 PPS 10000-15200 383665 383665 Notional 
2 PS   6500-10500 251592 503184  
  TOTAL 11,22,158 Actual 
 
D.           Transfer of Pending Cases – Clause 14 
 
84.  Clause 14 relating to transfe r of pending cases to the  Common 
Authority proposed to be set up provides as under: 
 
“Every application or other proceeding pending before the 
Authority for Advanc e Rulings c onstituted under sec tion 245-O of  
the Income-tax Act, 1961, functioning as s uch and as the Central 
Sales Tax Appellate Authority under sub-section (I) of Section 24 of 
the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and the Authority for Advance 
Rulings (Central Exc ise, Customs and Service Tax constituted 
under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, shall stand transferred 
to the Authority on the appointed day.” 
 
 
 
85.    While the Authority for Advanc e Rulings (Income Ta x) [under section 
245 R (6) of the Income Tax Act] has been pre scribed a time limit of six months for 
pronouncing the rulings on applications, the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central 
Excise, Customs and Service Tax) [under section 28 I (6 ) of the Customs Act] has 
been prov ided with t hree months’ time li mit for giving rulings  on applic ations 
brought before it. 
86. Asked to furnish details of  the number of applications and 
proceedings pending before the respective AARs as on May 31, 2008 indic ating 
different age-wise break-ups of s uch pendencies, which could be transferred to 
the Authority to be constituted under the proposed Act, the Department of 
Revenue furnished the following information: 
“Total and age-wise pendency of cases before the AAR (IT) as on 31 st 
 
                                                                            40 
 
 
 

May, 2008, is as follows:- 
 Number of cases pending since 
 2008 2007 2006 2005 and 
earlier 
Total 
IT Act 10 16 02 02 30 
CST Act 01 08  12 00 21 
 
Details of pending c ases befor e the AAR (C&CE) as on 31 st May, 
2008, are as follows:- 
No. of applications pending disposal from the date of receipt 
 0-90 
days 
90-180 
days 
180-270 
days 
More than 
270 days 
Total 
C. Excise 02 00 01 00 03 
Customs 01 02 02 00 05 
Service Tax 00 01 00 00 01 
Total 03 03 03 00 09 
 
87. Responding to a question on whether  the time taken for disposal of 
applications by the two Authorities was not more than the mandated time frame for 
pronouncing the rulings, and the pendenc y position of cases with the Authoritie s 
quite large, the Revenue Secretary, while tendering evidence, stated: 
 
“The pendency, as I said, appears to be large, but there 
are safeguards for disposal.  Bu t then, the inev itable, we still 
have the process of adjournments, et c.  firs t time, I rec all, we 
made a presentation when it  had been mentioned the 
maximum disposal period was  131 days and in s ome case it  
was 90.  That can change.” 
 
 
88. It has been suggest ed to the Committee that the Bill should provide 
for right to appeal against the advance  rulings. The Co mmittee feel that th e 
extraordinary writ jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court as the 
only available option may not fully serve the cause of assessees. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that there shoul d be an express provision in the Bill 
providing for right to appeal. The Com mittee also desire that there should be an 
enabling provision in the Bill for establis hment of  additional Benches of the 
 
                                                                            41 
 
 
 

Authority based on workload. 
89. The merged Authority is to have one post of Chairman and three post s 
of members (tw o from the respective Re venue Services and one from the Indian 
Legal Service) as against tw o posts of Chairmen and four posts of members in 
the existing tw o A uthorities.  The Co mmittee desire that the procedure for 
selecting the members, which is presently not stipulated under any Act or rule, be 
prescribed under the rules to b e framed under the proposed Act so as to provide 
clarity and avoid possible misgivings on the selection procedure. 
90.   The Committee desire that w hile providing the proposed Authorit y 
with officers and staff as may be necessary in terms of the provisions of Clause 
11, and tr ansferring the officers and staff of the existing two Authorities to the 
proposed Common Authorit y in terms the pr ovisions of Clause 13 ( 3), issues 
relating to cost effectiveness are appropr iately considered and such of the post s 
of supporting staff etc. found to be redundant o r in excess abolished.  The 
Committee also note in this regard that while savings in costs has been indicated  
to be a major benefit that w ould accrue following the merger of the existing t wo 
Authorities, the exp enditure incurred o n the Authorities has increased from 1.65 
crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 3.02 crore in 2007- 08,  while, the net savings o r reduction 
in the establishment expenditure expect ed to accrue on account of re duction in 
the number of sanctioned posts consequent  on the merger of the Authorities is 
expected to be just Rs. 11.22 lakhs.  The Committee desire that efforts be made to 
bring down the establishment costs of the Authority substantially. 
91.  A total of 51 cas es pertaining to the AAR (IT) and 9 cases pertaining to 
 
                                                                            42 
 
 
 

the AAR (C&CE) w ere pending as on 31 st May, 2008.  It is observed that though  
the time limit for pronouncing rulings by  the Authority  on Advance Rulings 
(Income Tax) is six months, there have been 16 cases pending with it for over one 
year.  Similarly, the Authority on Advance Rulings (Customs and Centr al Excise), 
which is to give rulings within three months has six cases pending over 180 days.  
The Committee trust that, as assured b y the Revenue Secretar y, the prescribed  
time frame for pronouncing the rulings by the Authority is adhered to. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                 ANANTH KUMAR, 
 7 October, 2008                                                                                         Chairman, 
 15  Asvina, 1930 (Saka)                                                    Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
                                                                            43 
 
 
 

Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 25th January, 2008 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs.   
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri K.S. Rao  
6. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
3. Shri Raashid Alvi 
4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
5. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
6.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri A.Louis Martin   -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
    WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri P.V. Bhide, Secretary, Revenue, Ministry of Finance 
2. Shri B.K. Gupta, Member, CBEC 
3. Shri A.J. Mazumdar, Member, CBDT 
4. Shri Mukul Singhal, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Sanjay Puri, Commissioner-cum-Secretary (Income Tax) 
6. Shri Rajendra Prakash, Commissioner (Customs & Central Excise) 
7. Shri Rajeev Tandon, Commissioner (Legal-CBEC) 
 
 
 
                                                                            44 
 
 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of  the Ministry 
of Financ e (Department of Rev enue) to the si tting of the Com mittee and  invited their 
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance briefed the Committee 
on the provisions contained in the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill,  
2007.  The main issues disc ussed during t he meeting relate to appropriatness of the 
time span of six months for pronouncing the Advanc e rulings, t erm of Chairman and 
Members of the Authority, quantum of work, international practice on the system of pre-
determining tax liability, possibility of tax avoidance by obtaining Advance rulings owing 
to Double Taxation Avoidanc e Agreements with some countries, scope for review and 
appeal of the rulings etc.   In regard to the points on wh ich the r epresentatives of the 
Department of Revenue could not readily respond, the Chairman desired them to 
furnish written replies early. 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
          The witnesses then withdrew. 
5.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
  
     The Committee then adjourned. 
 
                                                                            45 
 
 
 

Minutes of the Twenty-seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Thurday, the 19th June, 2008 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.   
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
8. Shri Rupchand Pal 
9. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
12. Shri S. Anbalagan 
13. Shri Moinul Hassan 
14. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   -   Director 
      3. Shri G. Srinivasulu   -   Deputy Secretary-II 
 
WITNESSES 
 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI) 
 
1. Mr. R. Murlidharan, Member 
2. Ms. Ruchira Chaudhury, Member 
3. Mr Rohit Pandit, Additional Secretary 
 
 
                                                                            46 
 
 
 

Federation of Indian Export Organisation (FIEO) 
 
1. Shri Subhash Mittal, Member, Managing Committee 
2. Shri Ajay Sahai, Direct or General 
3. Shri Ashok Kumar, Dy. Director General                     
                   
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) 
 
1. Shri Ved Jain, President 
2. Shri M.P. Sarda, Chairman, Director Taxes Committee of the ICAI 
3. Dr. Ashok Haldia, Secretary 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the repr esentatives of the PHD 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHD CCI), Federation of  Indian Export 
Organisation (FIEO) and  the Ins titute of C hartered Accountants of India (ICAI) to the 
sitting of the Committee and invited their att ention to the provisio ns c ontained in 
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3.  The Committee then heard the views o f the representatives on Authority for  
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007.  The issues disc ussed relate bringing 
Indian companies within ambit of the Bill, ap pointment of chairperson and its members, 
establishment of benches of  authority in four metr os, one dedicated bench for 
reconsideration of rulings, appellate aut hority, reasonable applic ation amount for  
seeking rulings etc.   
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman directed t he representatives to furnish notes on 
certain points raised by the Members to which  replies were  not readily  available with 
them during the discussion. 
5.    A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.                  
6.   The witnesses then withdraw 
 
     The Committee then adjourned 
 
                                                                            47 
 
 
 

Minutes of the Twenty-eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th June, 2008 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.   
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
4. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
5. Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
7. Shri Rupchand Pal 
8. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
9. Shri K.S. Rao 
10. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
13. Shri S. Anbalagan 
14. Shri Moinul Hassan 
15. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Director 
3.  Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri G. Srinivasulu   -  Deputy Secretary-II 
       
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
1. Shri P.V. Bhide, Secretary 
2. Shri J.K. Batra, Member, CBEC 
3. Shri Vijay Singh, Member, CBEC 
4. Mrs. Saroj Bala, Member, CBDT 
5. Shri Mukul Singhal, Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Anita Kapur, Joint Secretary, CBDT 
 
                                                                            48 
 
 
 

7. Shri Ashutosh Dixit, Joint Secretary, CBDT 
8. Shri Sanjay Puri, Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Authority for Advance Rulings 
9. Shri Rajendra Prakash, Commissioner, Authority for Advance Rulings 
 
 
Ministry of Law & Justice  
(Legislative Department)  
 
1. Shri K.D. Singh, Secretary  
2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary 
 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions 
(Department of Personnel and Training) 
 
Shri C.B. Paliwal, Joint Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Finance ( Department of Revenue), Ministry of Law & Justice and Department o f 
Personnel and Training to the Si tting of the Committee and invi ted their attention to the 
provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3.  After a brief power  point pres entation, the Committee heard t he views of the 
representatives on the Authority for Advanc e Rulings on Central Ta xes Bill, 2007. The 
issues dis cussed relate to applicability of the Right  to Information (RTI) Act on  th e 
Authority on Adv ance Rulings, delays in gi ving rulings on applic ation, cases pending 
with the existing two Authorities and the duration of their pendency, need for providing a 
mechanism for appeal on the rulings, establishi ng additional Benc hes of the Authority  
and the necessity of having the Authority on Advance Rulings.   
4.   Thereafter, the Chairman directed t he representatives to furnish notes on 
certain points raised by the Members to which  replies were  not readily  available with 
them during the discussion. 
5.    A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.                  
6.   The witnesses then withdraw 
 
          The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
                                                                            49 
 
 
 

Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2008-09) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 24th September, 2008 from 1200 hrs. to 
1345 hrs.   
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
6. Shri Rupchand Pal 
7. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
8. Shri K.S. Rao 
9. Shri Lakshman Seth 
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Raashid Alvi 
14. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
15. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
16. Shri Vijay J. Darda 
17. Shri S. Anbalagan 
18. Shri Moinul Hassan 
19. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri A.K. Singh   -  Director 
3.  Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri R.K. Suryanarayan  -  Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
                                                                            50 
 
 
 

3. The Committee then took up for cons ideration, the draft report on the 
Authority for Advanc e Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007. The Committee, after 
detailed deliberation,  adopted the draft report with th e modifications/amendments 
shown in the Annexure. 
4. The Committee then author ized the Chairman to finalis e the report in th e 
light of the suggestions made by the Me mbers and also to make consequential 
changes and present the report to the Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament. 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
                                                                            51 
 
 
 

 ANNEXURE 
 
 
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON 
AUTHORITY FOR ADVANCE RULINGS ON CENTRAL TAXES BILL, 2007  
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 24TH  SEPTEMBER, 2008] 
 
Page Para Line Amendments/Modifications 
1 2 3 4 
6 18 8 For: 
“The Committee having examined the 
Bill from all angles, recommend it for 
consideration by the House.” 
 
Read: 
 
“The Committee having examined the 
Bill from a ll angles, p ropose it for 
consideration by the House, subject to  
following speci fic 
recommendations.” 
 
17 40 8 After:  
 
“… continuance or oth erwise of the 
system”  
 
Add: 
 
“taking into account the need to ensure 
necessary transparency , accountability, 
equity and level playing field to domestic 
industries including C entral Public 
Sector Enterprises.” 
 
 
                                                                            52 
 
 
 

 
                                                                            53 
 
 
 
36   After para 87, add new Para  No. 88 and 
re-number the subsequent paras serially:  
 
“It has been suggested to the 
Committee that the Bill should 
provide for right to appeal against the 
advance rulings. The Committee feel 
that the extraordinary writ jurisdiction 
of the High Courts and the Supreme 
Court as the only available option 
may not fully serve the cause of 
assessees. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that there should be an 
express provision in the Bill 
providing for right to appeal. The 
Committee also desire that there 
should be an enabling provision in the 
Bill for establishment of  additional 
Benches of the Authority based on 
workload.”    
 
 
 

1
THE  AUTHORITY  FOR  ADV ANCE  RULINGS  ON  CENTRAL
TAXES BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes as a
substitute of the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act
shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 99 of 2007

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ''appointed day'' means the date with effect from which the Authority is
constituted under section 3;
(b) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3;
(c) ''Central taxes'' means taxes or duties levied or collected under the Central
Excise Act, 1944, the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff
Act, 1975, Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994, and taxes or duties chargeable under
any other law for the time being in force in the same manner as taxes or duties under
any of the said Acts, as the case may be;
(d) ''Chairperson'' means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(e) ''Member'' means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;
(f) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER II
A
UTHORITY FOR ADV ANCE RULINGS ON CENTRAL TAXES
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an
Authority for giving advance rulings on Central taxes, to be called as the Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes.
4. The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court;
(b) an officer of the Indian Revenue Service, who is, or has been, or is qualified
to be, a Member of the Central Board of Direct Taxes;
(c) an officer of the Indian Revenue Service (Customs and Central Excise), who
is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Member of the Central Board of Excise and
Customs;
(d) an officer of the Indian Legal Service, who is, or has been, or is qualified to
be, an Additional Secretary to the Government of India:
Provided that for giving advance rulings—
(i) under the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Authority shall exclude the Member
under clause (c); and
(ii) under the Acts other than the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Authority
shall exclude the Member under clause (b).
5. The Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years; and
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier.
6. The salary, allowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of service of,
the Members shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority shall
be questioned or be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect
in the constitution of the Authority.
Definitions.
1 of 1944.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
51 of 1975.
32 of 1994.
Constitution
of Authority.
Composition
of Authority.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Term of office
of Members.
Salary,
allowances,
pension and
other
conditions of
service of
Members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.

3
8. (1) The Authority shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions, as have
been conferred on it under the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs
Act, 1962, the Finance Act, 1994, this Act, or any other Act.
(2) The Authority shall, for the purposes of exercising its powers regarding discovery
and inspection, summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath, issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents, compelling
production of books of accounts, other records and documents, have all the powers of a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
9. Every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code, and the Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
10. The Authority shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising
out of the exercise of its powers.
11. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Authority, provide the
Authority with such officers and staff, as may be necessary, for the exercise of the powers
and discharge of the functions of the Authority.
12. The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
13. (1) On and from the appointed day, the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted
under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings
(Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act,
1962 shall stand abolished.
(2) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authorities under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority constituted under
section 3 for the remainder of their respective tenures in the Authorities abolished.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Authorities under sub-section (1), appointed
to the sanctioned posts, shall be deemed to be the officers and other employees of the
Authority constituted under section 3.
14. Every application or other proceeding pending before the Authority for Advance
Rulings constituted under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961, functioning as such
and as the Central Sales Tax Appellate Authority under sub-section (1) of section 24 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, shall stand
transferred to the Authority on the appointed day.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority, or
against the Chairperson or other Member, or any other person authorised by any of them for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for salary, allowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of
service of, the Members under section 6.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Powers and
functions of
Authority.
1 of 1944.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
32 of 1994.
5 of 1908.
Proceedings
before
Authority to
be judicial
proceedings.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Procedure of
Authority.
Staff of
Authority.
Location of
Authority.
Abolition of
existing
Authorities.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
43 of 1961.
74 of 1956.
52 of 1962.

4
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
18. In the Central Excise Act, 1944,—
(a) in section 23A, for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(e) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of the
Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(b) sections 23B, 23G and 23H shall be omitted.
19. In the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,—
(a) in section 19, for sub-section ( 2A), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
''(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the
Chairperson or a Member holding a post as such in the Authority for Advance
Rulings on Central Taxes appointed under clause (a) or clause (d), as the case
may be, of section 4 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act,
2007 may, in addition to his being the Chairperson or a Member of that Authority,
be appointed as the Chairman or a Member, as the case may be, of the Authority
under this Act.'';
(b) in section 24,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words, figures and letter ''the Authority for
Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961'',
the words and figures ''the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes
constituted under section 3 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central
Taxes Act, 2007'' shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words ''the Authority for Advance Rulings'',
the words ''the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be
substituted.
20. In the Income-tax Act, 1961,—
(a) in section 153, in sub-section (3), in Explanation I, for the words ''Authority
for Advance Rulings'', at both the places where they occur, the words ''Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be substituted;
(b) in section 153B, in sub-section (1), in Explanation, for the words ''Authority
for Advance Rulings'', at both the places where they occur, the words ''Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be substituted;
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of Central
Excise Act,
1944.
Amendment
of Central
Sales Tax Act,
1956.
Amendment
of Income-
tax Act,
1961.
1 of 1944.
74 of 1956.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

5
(c) in section 245N,—
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(d) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of
the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(ii) clauses (e) and (f) shall be omitted;
(d) sections 245-O, 245P, 245U and 245V shall be omitted.
21. In the Customs Act, 1962,—
(a) in section 28E,—
(i) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(e) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of
the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(ii) clauses (f) and (g) shall be omitted;
(b) sections 28F, 28G, 28L and 28M shall be omitted.
22. In the Finance Act, 1994, in Chapter VA,—
(a) in section 96A, for clause ( d), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(d)'' Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of the
Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(b) sections 96B, 96G and 96H shall be omitted.
Amendment of
Customs Act,
1962.
Amendment of
Chapter V A of
Finance Act,
1994.
52 of 1962.
32 of 1994.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, there are two Authorities for Advance Rulings, one constituted under
section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961, which has under section 24 of the Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956, also been notified as the Central Sales Tax Appellate Authority, and the other
constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, which is also an Authority for
Advance Rulings under the Central Excise Act, 1944 and  the Finance Act, 1994 for  purposes
of Service Tax. These Authorities, called as "Authority for Advance Rulings (Income-tax)"
and "Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax)", have been
established to enable applicants to obtain, in advance, binding rulings from the said
Authorities on issues which may arise in the determination of their tax liabilities.
2. While reviewing the performance of the said Authorities on Advance Rulings, it was
noticed that these Authorities did not have adequate work to justify separate Authorities
with separate establishments. A decision was, therefore, taken to constitute a common
Authority for Advance Rulings for performing the functions of these Authorities. For this
purpose, it is necessary to enact a separate legislation. Hence, the Authority for Advance
Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007, for constituting an Authority for Advance Rulings on
Central Taxes.  Consequential amendments to the relevant provisions of the Income-tax Act,
1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Central Sales Tax  Act, 1956 and
the Finance Act, 1994 are also sought to be done through the Bill.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI;
The 30th November, 2007. P. CHIDAMBARAM.
————
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 29/5/2005-Ad.IC, dated the 3rd December, 2007 from Shri P.
Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Authority
for Advance Rulings on Central Texes Bill, 2007, recommends under clause (1) of article 117
of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the above Bill in Lok Sabha.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007, seeks to provide for
the constitution of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes consisting of a
Chairperson and three Members. As the Authority will be in lieu of the existing Authority for
Advance Rulings (Income-Tax) and Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax), each consisting of a Chairperson and two Members, there will be no extra
expenditure in constituting the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes and its
supporting staff.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 16 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill,
2007, seeks to empower the Central Government to make, by notification in the Official
Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the said Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
specifies that such rules may be made for salary, allowances and pension payable to and
other conditions of service of the Members, which includes the Chairperson.
2. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after they
are made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are generally matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
8

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT, 1944
(1 OF 1944)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III—A
ADV ANCE RULINGS
23A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962.
* * * * *
23B. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
* * * * *
23G . (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195,
but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and every
proceeding before the Authority shall be  deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal
Code.
23H. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this Act.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956
(74 OF 1956)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
AUTHORITY TO SETTLE DISPUTES IN COURSE OF INTER-STATE TRADE OR COMMERCE
19. (1)* * * * *
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chairman  or a Member
holding a post as such in the Authority for Advance Rulings appointed under clause (a) or
clause (c), as the case may be, of sub-section (2) of section 245-O of the Income-Tax Act,
1961 may, in addition to his being the Chairman or a Member of that Authority, be appointed
as the Chairman, or a Member, as the case may be, of the Authority under this Act.
* * * * *
24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force and in section 19 of this Act, the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under
section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be notified by the Central Government in the
official Gazette, with such modifications as may be necessary, to make its composition in
Definitions.
52 of 1962.
Central Sales
Tax Appellate
Authority.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of
Authority.
Authority for
Advance
Rulings to
function as
Authority
under this Act.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Procedure of
Authority.
9

10
conformity with section 19 of this Act, as the Authority under this Act till such time an
Authority is constituted under that section.
(2) On and from the date of the constitution of the Authority in accordance with the
provisions of section 19 of this Act, the proceedings pending with the Authority for
Advance Rulings shall stand transferred to the Authority constituted under that section
from the stage at which such proceedings stood before the date of constitution of the said
Authority.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
153. (1)* * * * *
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (1A), (1B) and (2) shall not aply to the following
classes of assessments, reassessments and recomputations which may, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2A), be completed at any time—
* * * * *
(ii) where the asessment, reassessment or recomputation is made on the assessee
or any person in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained
in an order under section 250, 254, 260, 262, 263, or 264 or in an order of any court in a
proceeding otherwise than by way of appeal or reference under this Act;
 (iii) where, in the case of a firm, an assessment is made on a partner of the firm
in consequence of an assessment made on the firm under section 147.
Explanation 1.—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section—
(i) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding or in
giving an opportunity to the assessee to be re-heard under the proviso to section 129,
or
(ii)  the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an  order
or injunction of any court, or
(iia)  the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer
intimates the Central Government or the prescribed authority, the contravention of the
provisions of clause ( 21) or clause ( 22B) or clause ( 23A) or clause ( 23B) or  sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)  or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C)
section 10, under clause ( i) of  of the proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 143 and
ending with the date on which the copy of the order  withdrawing the approval or
rescinding the notification, as the case may be, under those clauses is received by the
Assessing Officer.
(iii) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer directs
the asessee to get his accounts audited under sub-section ( 2A) of section 142 and
ending with  the last date on which the assessee is required to furnished a report of
such audit under that sub-section, or
* * * * *
(iva) the period (not exceeding sixty days) commencing from the date on which
the  Assessing  Officer received the declaration under sub-section (1) of section 158A
and ending with the date on which the order under sub-section ( 3) of that section is
made by him, or
(v) in a case where an application made before the Income-tax settlement
Commission under section 245C is rejected by it or is not allowed to be proceeded with
Time limit
for comple-
tion of assess-
ments and re-
assessments.

11
by it, the period commencing from the date on which such application is made and
ending with the date on which the order under sub-section ( 1) of section 245D is
received by  the Commissioner under sub-section (2) of that section, or
(vi) the  period commencing from the date on which an application is made
before the Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and
ending with the date on which the order rejecting the application is received by the
Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 245R, or
(vii)  the period commencing from the date on which an application is made
before the Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and
ending with the date on which the advance ruling pronounced by it is received by the
Commissioner under sub-section (7) of section 245R,
shall be excluded:
Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid time or period, the
period of limitation referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A), (1B), (2) and (2A) available to the
Assessing Officer for making an order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation, as the
case may be, is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days
and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
Explanation 2.—Where, by an order referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (3)
any income is excluded from the total income of the assessee for an assessment year,
then, an assessment of such income for another assessment year shall, for the purposes
of section 150 and this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence of or to give
effect to any finding or direction contained in the said order.
Explanation 3.—Where, by an order referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (3),
any income is excluded from the total income of one person and held to be the income
of another person, then, an assessment of such income on such other person shall, for
the purposes of section 150 and this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence
of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in the said order, provided
such other person was given an opportunity of being  heard before the said order was
passed.
* * * * *
153B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 153, the Assessing Officer
shall make an order of assessment or reassessment.—
(a) in respect of each assessment year falling within six assessment years referred
to in clause (b) of section 153A, within a period of two years from the end of the
financial year in which the last of the authorisations for search under section 132 or for
requisition under section 132A was executed;
(b) in respect of the assessment  year relevant to the previous year in which
search is conducted under section 132  or requisition is made under section 132A,
within a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which the last of the
authorisations for search under section 132 or for requisition under section 132A was
executed:
Provided that in case of other person referred to in section 153C, the period of limitation
for making the assessment or reassessment shall be the period as referred to in clause (a) or
clause (b) of this sub-section or one year from the end  of the financial year in which books
of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned are handed over under section
153C to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person, whichever is later.
Provided further that in the case where the last of the authorisations for search under
section 132 or for requisition under section 132A was executed during the financial year
commencing on the  1st day of April, 2004 or any subsequent financial year,—
Time limit for
completion of
assessment
under section
153A.

12
(i) the provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of this sub-section shall have effect as if
for the words "two years" the words "twenty-one months" had been substituted;
(ii) the period of limitation for making the  assessment or reassessment in case of other
person referred to  in section 153C, shall be the period of twenty-one months from the end of
the financial year in which the last  of the authorisations for search under section 132 or for
requisition under section 132A was executed or nine months from the end of the  financial
year in which books of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned are handed
over under section153C to the Assessing Officer having  jurisdiction over such other person,
whichever is later.
Explanation.—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section,—
(i) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or
injunction of any court; or
(ii) the period commencing from the day on which the Assessing Officer directs the
assessee to get his accounts audited under sub-section ( 2A) of section 142 and ending on
the day on which the assessee is required to furnish a report of such audit under that sub-
section; or
(iii) the time taken in reopening the  whole or any part of the proceeding or in giving
an opportunity to the assessee of being re-heard under the proviso to section 129; or
(iv) in a case where an application made before the Settlement Commission under
section 245 is rejected by it or is not allowed to be proceeded with by it, the period commencing
from the date on which such application is made and ending with the date on which the order
under sub-section (1) of section 245D is received by the commissioner under sub-section (2)
of that section, or
(v) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the
Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and ending with the
date on which the order rejecting the application is received by the Commissioner under sub-
section (3) of section 245R, or
(vi) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the
Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and ending with the
date on which the advance ruling pronounced by it is received by the Commissioner under
sub-section (7) of section 245R,
shall be excluded:
Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the afforesaid period, the period
of limitation referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of this section available to the Assessing
Officer for making an order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, is less than
sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of
limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIX—B
A
DV ANCE RULINGS
245N. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under
section 245-O;
(e)  "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority;
(f)  "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairman.
245-O. (1) The Central Government  shall constitute an Authority for giving advance
rulings, to be known as "authority for Advance Rulings".
Definitions.
Authority for
Advance
Rulings.

13
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairman, who is a retired Judge of the supreme Court;
(b) an Officer of the Indian Revenue Service who is qualified to be a
member of the Central Board of Direct Taxes;
(c) an Officer of the Indian Legal Service who is, or is qualified to be, an
Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of
service of, the Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide the Authority with such officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient exercise of the powers of the Authority
under this Act.
(5) The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
245P. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy
or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
*****
245U. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers, have all the
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as are referred to in section
131 of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI, of  the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and every proceeding before the Authority shall be  deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section
196 of the Indian Penal code.
245V. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VB
ADV ANCE RULINGS
28E. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings  (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F;
(f)  "Chairperson" means the Chairperson  of the Authority;
(g)  "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;
and
* * * * *
28F. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority for giving advance rulings, to be called as  the Authority for Advance
Rulings Central Excise, Customs & Service Tax.
V acancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of the
Authority.
Procedure of
Authority.
Definitions.
Authority for
advance
rulings.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

14
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(a) A Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of the Supreme court;
(b) an officer of the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service who is qualified
to be a Member of the Board;
(c)  an officer of the Indian Legal Service who is, or is qualified to be, an Additional
Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The salaries  and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service of,
the Members shall be such as the Central Government may by rules determine.
(4) The Central Government shall provide the Authority with such officers and staff as
may be necessary for the efficient exercise of the powers of the  Authority under this Act.
(5) The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
28G. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
*****
28L. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling, production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
and every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the
Indian Penal code.
28M. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
E
XTRACTS FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 1994
(32 OF 1994)
* * * * *
CHAPTER V A
ADV ANCE RULINGS
96A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Authority" means the Authority  for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962;
* * * * *
96B. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
* * * * *
96G . ( 1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
Procedure of
Authority.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of
Authority.
Definitions.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
Powers of
Authority.
52 of 1962.

15
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195,
but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and every
proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal
Code.
96H. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in  all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
* * * * *
Procedure of
authority.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

LOK    SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes as a
substitute of the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—5183LS(S-5)—04.12.2007.