27
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
THE TAXATION LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
THE TAXATION LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 13.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 27
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on
14 July, 2005, 6 September, 2005, 29 September, 2005,
30 September, 2005, 8 November, 2005 and 8 December, 2005 ... 26
APPENDIX
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 .................................. 40
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised to submit the Report on their behalf present this
Twenty Seventh Report on the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
2. The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005, introduced in
Lok Sabha on 12th May, 2005, was referred to the Committee on
13th May, 2005 for examination and report thereon, by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue), who also briefed them at their sitting held
on 14th July, 2005.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII), Taxindiaonline, Shri R.N. Lakhotia, Senior
Tax Consultant and Advocate, Shri R. Krishnan, Advocate and
Consultant-Indirect Taxes, Shri S. Sampath, Consultant-Corporate Taxes,
Shri P .N. Mittal, Member, CBDT (Retd.), Shri Vijay Mathur, DGIT
(International Taxation), Delhi (Retd.) and Shri A.N. Prasad, CCIT,
Delhi (Retd.)
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 6 September, 2005 heard
the views of the representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), Shri P .N. Mittal, Shri Vijay Mathur and Shri A.N. Prasad.
6. On 29th September, 2005 the Committee heard the views of
Shri R. Krishnan and Shri S. Sampath.
7. On 30th September, 2005 the Committee heard the views of
Shri R.N. Lakhotia and the representatives of Taxindiaonline.
8. The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) on 8th November, 2005.
9. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at their
sitting held on 8th December, 2005.
10. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Finance (department of Revenue), representatives of
(v)

the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Shri R. Krishnan,
Shri S. Sampath, Shri R.N. Lakhotia, Shri P .N. Mittal, Shri Vijay Mathur,
Shri A.N. Prasad and the representatives of Taxindiaonline for their
co-operation in placing before them their considered views and
perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection
with the examination of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
11. For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 proposes to carry out
certain amendments in the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act,
1962, the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944 and
the Central Sales  Tax Act, 1956 with the object of rationalising and
simplifying certain procedures, widening of tax base and plugging
loopholes leading to leakage of revenue.
2. The Finance Minister, in his Budget speech, while introducing
the Finance Bill, 2005 had stated:
“I have received many suggestions on amendments to the direct
tax laws and the indirect tax laws. I have decided to accept some
suggestions that require to be acted upon immediately, but I do
not propose to burden the Finance Bill with those changes. Instead,
I intend to introduce a separate Bill for that purpose during this
session. In due course, I intend to place before Parliament a revised
and simplified Income Tax Bill.
3. The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced in
Lok Sabha on 12 May, 2005 and referred to the Standing Committee
on Finance by the Hon’ble Speaker on 13 May, 2005 for examination
and report thereon.
4. On the purport of introducing the Bill and the current status in
regard to formulation of the revised simplified Income Tax Bill
mentioned about by the Finance Minister in the Budget Speech
(2005-06), the Ministry, in their written reply to queries raised by the
members of the Committee, inter alia , states as under:
“…certain consequential and procedural provisions have been
introduced in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The new
simplified Income-tax Bill is only intended to be a simplified form
of the existing Act. Therefore, these provisions have been proposed
through the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.”
Overview of the provisions
5. Some of the provisions of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005 pertaining to Direct Taxes (Income Tax) as well as Indirect Taxes

2
(Customs and Central Excise) and the rationale and purpose of
introducing the provisions, as seen from the Notes furnished by the
Ministry and the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, are
briefly delineated as under:
(a) Direct Taxes:
(i) Clause 2
6. As per the existing provisions of the Income Tax Act, “Tax
Recovery Officer” means any Income-tax Officer who may be authorised
by the Chief Commissioner or  Commissioner, by general or special
order in writing, to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer. The
amendment proposal under Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide that
the Tax Recovery Officer may also exercise or perform such powers
and functions which are conferred on, or assigned to, an Assessing
Officer under the Income-tax Act, and which may be prescribed.
(ii) Clause 3
7. Tax exemptions that are provided to various entities under the
Income Tax Act inter alia , include:
(i) Charitable fund or institution having importance throughout
India or throughout any State or States—Section 10 (23C)
(iv);
(ii) Trust or legal obligation or institution wholly for public
religious purposes or wholly for public religious and
charitable purposes—Section 10(23C) (vi);
(iii) University or other educational institution existing solely
for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit if
the aggregate annual receipts of such university or
educational institution exceed the prescribed amount of
Rs. 1 crore—Section 10(23C) (v);
(iv) Hospital or other medical institution existing solely for
philanthropic purposes and not for purposes and profit if
the aggregate annual receipts of such hospital or other
medical institution exceed the prescribed amount of
Rs. 1 crore—Section 10 (23C) (via).
8. As the procedure of periodic renewal of approval has proved to
be cumbersome and is also resulting in considerable delays, with the
amendment proposals under Clause 3, the requirement of renewal for

3
entities claiming exemption under section 10(23C) (iv), (v), (vi) and
(via) is sought to be done away with. Once the approval is granted/
notification issued, the same will be valid till it is withdrawn or
rescinded, as the case may be. Further, it is proposed to provide a one
year time limitation for grant/refusal of the approval or issue of
notification, and simultaneously make it mandatory for entities claiming
exemption under section 10(23C) (iv), (v), (vi) and (via) to get the
accounts audited by an accountant, obtain an audit report and file a
copy of such audit report along with their return of income.
9. The universities or other educational institutions or hospitals or
other medical institutions whose aggregate annual receipts do not
exceed the prescribed amount of Rs. 1 crore are given unconditional
exemption without requirement of any approval or renewal under
section 10(23C) (iiiad) and (iiiae) of the Income-tax Act. There is no
stipulation for these entities to file their tax returns or get their accounts
audited. With a view to enable the department to ascertain whether
the aggregate annual receipts of such entities is below Rs. 1 crore and
are established solely for educational/medical/philanthropic purposes,
as the case may be, and not for the purpose of profit, the Income-tax
Act, 1961, is proposed to be amended to make it mandatory for the
entities to file their returns of income, if the income exceeds the basic
exemption limit.
(iii) Clauses 5 and 10
10. Under the existing provisions contained in the provisos to clause
(ii) and clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the Income-tax
Act, the Central government grants approval to an association,
university, college or other institution donations to which are entitled
to a deduction to the extent of 125% of the sum donated. With the
proposals under Clause 5, the provisos to clause (ii) and clause (iii) of
sub-section (1) of section 35 are inter alia sought to be amended so as
to empower the Central Board of Direct Taxes to lay down, by rules,
the manner in which an association, university, college or other
institution is to be granted approval and the guidelines and conditions
to be fulfilled for grant of such approval by the Central Government.
it is further proposed to do away with the requirement of renewal of
approval for such institutions and to provide a time limit of one year,
from the end of the month in which the application is received, within
which the Central Government may grant approval in suitable cases.
11. With the amendments proposed to be carried out in Section
143 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (in terms of Clause 10) the assessment

4
procedure would be used as a check-point against any malpractice in
the absence of any requirement for renewal. In a case of contravention
found during the assessment proceedings, the Assessing Officer would
be required to intimate the contravention to the Central Government
and thereupon, the Central Government may withdraw the Notification
rescinding the approval granted earlier.
(b) Indirect Taxes (Customs and Central Excise)
(iv) Clause 18
12. Presently, Section 18 of the Customs Act, which provides for
provisional assessment of duty does not provide for various issues
arising from the finalisation of provisional assessment. The proposals
of Clause 18 seek to insert sub-section (3), sub-section (4) and
sub-section (5) to section 18 of the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for
a mechanism to regularise the payments of duty short levied and
interest thereon and duties that are to be refunded on finalisation of
a provisional assessment.
(v) Clause 19 (Amendment of Section 28 of the Customs Act) and
Clause 32 (Amendment of Section 11A of the Central Excise Act)
13. An optional scheme for enabling voluntary payment of duty
by assessees, in full or in part, in cases involving fraud, mis-statement
etc. alongwith interest and 25% of the duty amount as penalty within
30 days of the receipt of the show-cause-notice is proposed to be
introduced by amending Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962 in terms
of the proposals under Clause 19. This scheme is intended to be an
additional facility to the Trade to settle disputes at an early stage and
is independent of the existing Section 114A  of the Act, which
inter alia allows a reduction in the penalty by 75% of the duty
determined if all the dues are paid within 30 days of the
communication of the adjudication order.
14. With the proposals under Clause 32, a similar optional scheme
for enabling voluntary payment of duty by assessees, in full or in part
within 30 days of the receipt of the show-cause-notice is sought to
introduced in the Central Excise Act, 1944 by amending Section 11A
of the Act. As in the case of the Customs Act, the proposal is
independent of the existing Section 11A of the Central Excise Act,
which allows a reduction in the penalty by 75% of the duty determined
if all the dues are paid within 30 days of the communication of the
adjudication order.

5
(vi) Clause 20 (Insertion of a new Section 28BA in the Customs Act)
15. Whereas the proposals of Clause 20 seek to insert a new section
28BA in the Customs Act, 1962, Clause 33 aims to insert a new Section
11DDa in the Central Excise Act, 1944 to provide for provisional
attachment of property during the pendency of proceedings relating to
the determination of Custom duty or Excise duty evaded as the case
may be.
16. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill from
(i) Confederation of Indian Industry, (ii) Shri R.N. Lakhotia, Senior Tax
Consultant and Advocate, (iii) Shri K. Vijay Kumar, Editor-in-Chief,
Taxindiaonline.com Pvt. Ltd., (iv) Shri Krishnan, (v) Shri S. Sampath,
(vi) Shri P .N. Mittal, (vii) Shri Vijay Mathur, and (viii) Shri A.N. Prasad.
17. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to further enlighten
themselves on various aspects of the proposed legislation.
18. The Committee note that the amendments proposed in the
Income Tax, Customs and Central Excise Acts are mainly intended
to rationalise and simplify certain procedures, widen the tax base
and plug loopholes, that lead to leakage of revenue. While some of
the proposals, which inter-alia include streamlining the approval
and monitoring processes for Charitable Institutions, Scientific
Research Institutions etc. under the Income Tax Act; and issuance of
‘speaking order’ within 15 days in the event of contradictory views
on valuation of import and export goods under the Customs Act
have been generally welcomed by the Experts and other interested
bodies, certain other provisions have been viewed with an element
of skepticism.
19. Upon considering the provisions of the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 in the light of the views expressed by Experts
and other interested bodies, and the clarifications furnished by the
Ministry of Finance, the Committee endorse the same for enactment
subject to the observations/recommendations as detailed in the
subsequent paragraphs of the report.
Clause 2 (Amendment of section 2)
20. The Clause reads as under:
In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Income-tax Act), in clause (44), after the words

6
“powers of a Tax Recovery Officer”, the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
“and also to exercise or perform such powers and functions which
are conferred on, or assigned to, an Assessing Officer, under this
Act and which may be prescribed”.
21. Questioned about the rationale or the justification for seeking
to confer certain powers of the Assessing Officer (AO) on the Tax
Recovery Officer (TRO), the representative of the Ministry stated as
under during the briefing meeting:
“…what we noticed and what was happening was that the TRO
was being asked by the Assessing Officer to make recovery. When
he issues the notice and the assessee comes to him and says that
he has already made the payment or some rectification is required
or some appeal effect has not been given, the TRO says him to go
to the Assessing Officer and get this done, or he does not listen
to him at all and says: “No. No, you are making misrepresentation,
you make the payment right now.” That was happening. The TRO
himself did not have any power to provide instant relief to the
person. Suppose a TRO has issued a notice and somebody comes
to him and explains him that that amount is not due, he should
have the power to pass an order, stating that he has seen the
receipts, he has seen the evidence. That is what is being provided
here.”
22. Questioned further whether the proposal intend to confer upon
the TRO the powers of imposing ‘punishment’ in addition to providing
relief to the assessees, the representative stated as follows:
“It is only a power to give relief. It is because whenever assessees
come to TRO, they only say that they have already paid it or
some adjustment is required, some appeal effect is pending or
rectification is pending. But the TRO did not have the power to
do it. He used to tell them to go to the Assessing Officer and get
the same done. That created some problems. That is why in order
that these things get done expeditiously, this provision is put here.”
23. The individual experts, who gave their views on the provisions
of the Bill have been generally skeptical on the proposal to confer
additional powers of the Assessing Officer on the TRO in terms of the
provisions of clause 2. It was inter-alia pointed out that the move
would be practicable or effective only if the TRO has easy access to
the assessment records for carrying out rectifications; problems relating

7
to co-ordination between the  TRO and the Assessing Officer would
arise owing to the proposal; and the issue of conferring additional
powers, as may be needed on the TRO, could be achieved through
administrative means rather than the proposed amendment.
24. Asked to respond to these view points expressed before the
Committee, the Ministry, in a written reply stated as follows:
“Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to enable a Tax Recovery Officer (TRO)
to exercise limited functions of an Assessing Officer (AO) as may
be prescribed. Such limited functions shall be like carrying of
rectification of apparent mistakes, giving effects to order of appellate
authorities, etc. Such power will enable a TRO to expeditiously
determine the demand to be collected by him in cases where a
claim is made before him that demand referred to him for collection
needs some adjustments. The delay in giving appeal effects, etc. in
such cases, may not be solved administratively, because TRO has
to refer the matter back to the Assessing Officer. Therefore, it is
appropriate to assign such powers to TRO himself. Further, as a
TRO will have to act upon in respect of application made to him,
there will be no problem in fixing responsibility for delay in
disposing off such application by him. There is also no legal conflict
in assigning the limited functions of AO to TRO.”
25. In this regard, a representative of the Ministry inter alia stated
as follows during oral evidence:
“It was felt by the Committee that most probably the role which
we are assigning to the TRO may not be in line with the functional
requirement of the work. It was also felt that the TRO is given
only the work of recovery, and, with much more functional
specialization, he may be able to perform better. But our experience
has been that sometimes, the TRO is not effective. The point is
that when he proceeds to recover the demand dues, the point that
comes is that some rectification is pending or sometimes it is found
that some other appeal effect is not given. We want to give limited
powers to the TRO. We are not giving all the powers of the
Assessing Officer but only a limited power.”
26. By way of conferring additional powers of the Assessing
Officer on the TRO—which are proposed to be limited to rectification
of mistakes in the assessment orders, giving effect to orders of
appellate authorities etc., it is intended to enable speedy and effective
settlement of the demands/applications of the assessees. Though the
proposal enabling for speedy settlement of assessment related issues

8
would be tax payer friendly, the Committee feel that for achieving
the intended purpose it may be essential to comprehensively address
the prevailing norms, procedures and regulations relating to  the
functioning of the ‘Tax Administration’. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the administrative instructions/regulations relating to the
additional powers proposed to be conferred on the TRO are clear
and specific on confining such powers to rectification of mistakes in
assessment orders, effecting orders of Appellate Authorities etc. The
Committee also expect the Government to ensure that the proposal
would, in no way, affect the co-ordination in the hierarchy of Income
Tax authorities.
27. The Committee find that the Government are bringing in
amendments to the Income Tax Act very frequently, which cause
difficulties in comprehending the law by various people concerned.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to come out with a
comprehensive simplified single legislation at the earliest.
Clause 5 (Amendment of section 35) and clause 10 (Amendment of
section 43)
28. Clause 5 of the Bill which relates to ‘Expenditure on Scientific
Research’ reads as follows:
“In the Income-tax Act, in section 35, in sub-section (1), with effect
from the 1st day of April, 2006,—
(a) in clause (ii), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:
“Provided that such association, university, college or other
institution for the purposes of this clause—
(A) is for the time being approved, in accordance with the
guidelines, in the manner and subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed; and
(B) such association, university, college or other institution is
specified as such, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the
Central Government,”;
(b) in clause (iii), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided that such university, college or other institution for the
purposes of this clause—

9
(a) is for the time being approved, in accordance with the
guidelines, in the manner and subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed; and
(b) such university, college or other institution is specified as such
by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government,”;
(c) in the second proviso, for the word “authority”, the word
“Government” shall be substituted;
(d) in the third proviso, for the words, brackets and letters
“notification issued by the Central Government under clause (ii)
or clause (iii) shall, at any time, have effect for such assessment
year or years, not exceeding three assessment years”, the words,
brackets, figures and letters “notification issued, by the Central
Government under clause (ii) or clause (iii), before the date on
which the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 received the
assent of the President, shall, at any time, have effect for such
assessment year or years, not exceeding three assessment years”
shall be substituted;
(e) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted
at the end, namely:—
“Provided also that where an application under the first proviso is
made on or after the date on which the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the President, every
notification under clause (ii) or clause (iii) shall be issued or an
order rejecting the application shall be passed within the period of
twelve months from the end of the month in which such
application was received by the Central Government:”.
29. Clause 10, which relates to ‘withdrawal’ of approval to
institutions referred to under the provisions of clause 5 of the Bill
reads as follows:
In section 143 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3), after the
proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, with effect from
the 1st day of April, 2006, namely:—
“Provided further that where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that
the activities of the university, college or other institution referred
to in clause (ii) and clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 are
not being carried out in accordance with all or any of the conditions
subject to which such university, college or other institution was

10
approved, he may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause against the proposed withdrawal to the concerned university,
college or other institution, recommend to the Central Government
to withdraw the approval and that Government may by order,
withdraw the approval and forward a copy of the order to the
concerned university, college or other institution and the Assessing
Officer.”
30. Giving the rationale behind the proposals made under
clause 5 of the Bill, a representative of the Ministry stated as follows
during the briefing meeting:
“Under the present provisions, even if approval is granted in any
case, it has to be renewed again after three years. It was observed
that there were great delays both in grant of approval and in
renewal. It is proposed, therefore, to do away with the requirement
of renewal of approval. This will make it possible for us to use
our manpower resources more effectively in grant of approvals.
We have, therefore, provided a time-limit of one year, from the
end of the month in which the application is received, within
which the Central Government may grant approval in suitable
cases.
However, it is necessary to maintain constant vigil to ensure that
this concession is not misused. We are, therefore, proposing to
amend the Income Tax Act to ensure that all entities furnish their
returns of income, irrespective of whether their income is taxable
or below the taxable limit. If the Assessing Officer finds any case
of contravention during the assessment procedures, he would be
required to inform the Central Government whereupon a
notification may be issued rescinding the approval granted earlier.”
31. The written submission made by an expert on the proposals
relating to ‘granting’ and ‘rescinding’ of approvals to research
institutions in terms of the provisions of clauses 5 and 10 of the Bill
inter-alia reads are as follows:
“Clause 10 seeks to insert another proviso in sub-section (3) of
Section 143 of the Act to require an Assessing Officer to satisfy
himself whether a university/college/institution referred to in
Section 35(1)(ii) and 35(1)(iii) is carrying out its activities in
accordance with the guidelines and conditions set out at the time
of according approval and, if necessary to recommend to the
Central Government, withdrawal of the said approval.

11
Two questions arise for consideration:
First why have the persons covered under Section 10(23C) been
left out? The second revolves round the competence and adequacy
of the Assessing Officer to conduct an objective evaluation, if the
shortcomings relate to matters other than financial norms. There
may also be a charge of bias or vindictiveness. It may, therefore,
be advisable, that he be assisted by experts of repute and integrity,
in arriving at his conclusion.”
32. The written submission, made by yet another expert on these
issues reads as follows:
“…one problem faced by associations applying for approval as a
research unit is that they have to satisfy first the Department of
Science and Technology and then the Income-tax Department. The
nodal agency for determining as to whether an association is
carrying on or is capable of carrying on scientific research is the
Department of Science and Technology. Once this is accorded by
this department, the Income-tax Department should thereafter make
no enquiries in this regard. The parameters of enquiry by the
Income-tax Department should be limited to examine only the
accounts of the institution. The functions of the Department of
Science and Technology and the Income-tax Department/DG
exemptions should be prescribed in the rules.”
33. He added:
“…the person claiming the deduction in the computation of
business income in respect of the payments made to the University,
College or other institutions should not be denied such deduction
because of the withdrawal of the approval of an organisation. The
expenditure by way of payment to the organisation would have
been made in good faith and only after the approval has been
granted by the Central Government. Specific  provision in this
regard should be enacted for protecting the interest of the taxpayer
incurring an expenditure in this regard.”
34. In the course of personal hearing, the following viewpoint was
expressed by an expert on the proposed amendment of section 143(3)
in terms of the provisions of clause 10:
“I am apprehensive about this particular provision. The reason for
that is the exemption is granted by very high authority, that is,
Director General, in coordination with the Ministry of Finance by

12
way of a notification. If the assessing officer is supposed to go
into the aspects of the society’s or the institution’s activities and
try to frame a conclusion and withdraw that exemption, then it is
not fair.”
The views expressed before the Committee have generally been in
favour of ensuring a system of consultation or co-ordination,
particularly with other departments in deciding on ‘approvals’ and
rescinding of the approvals.
35. Questioned whether it was appropriate to confer the assessing
officer with the power to recommend for withdrawal of approvals
granted under the Section, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
follows:
“The Assessing Officer under the Income-tax Act is equipped with
technical knowledge which enables him to notice shortcomings and
requisition necessary details from the applicants. Assessing Officer,
therefore, will not need any external expertise to assist in the
assessment proceedings by virtue of his competence to examine
the evidence produced before him and to see the compliance of
the provisions of the Act.”
36. Asked whether it would not be appropriate to give the
aggrieved party an opportunity of being heard before an order is issued
rejecting the applications made under the proviso to Section 35, the
Ministry, in a written reply, stated as under:
“The prevailing practice is that an opportunity of being heard is
always given in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
There is no proposal in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005,
which dilutes this principle of natural justice. Administrative
instructions can be issued once again to reiterate the prevailing
practice.”
37. Asked further whether any provision could be made to provide
for an appeal mechanism if an applicant is aggrieved of the decision,
the Ministry in a written reply stated as follows:
“The power to pass an order rejecting the application has been
vested in the Central Government. Orders passed by the Central
Government are not appealable under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
The applicant may, however, take recourse to writ jurisdiction of
the High Court against the order of rejection by the Central
Government. Further, the assessee may also file an application for
review of the order rejecting his application.”

13
38. On the role of the Income Tax Department vis-a-vis other
Government bodies/agencies such as the Department of Science and
Technology in recognising research institutions, the Ministry, in a
written response, inter-alia stated as follows:
“As per the existing provisions of section 35(1)(ii), a scientific
research association is approved by the Central Government which
would mean the Ministry of Finance. The Department of Science
and Technology (DST) is not the nodal agency for approval of a
scientific research association for the purposes of section 35(1)(ii).
Since the authority granting the approval is the Central
Government, the withdrawal and rescinding of the approval is
also by the Central Government. In fact, as per sub-section (3) of
section 35, the Central Government is the final authority to decide
to what extent an activity constitutes or constituted or any asset
is or was being used for scientific research. Therefore, there is no
overlap of functions between DST and the Income Tax  Department,
as the former is not the nodal agency for rescinding/withdrawing
approvals.”
39. Section 35(2) AB of the Income Tax Act provides as follows:
“[(2AB)(1) Where a company engaged in the business of [bio-
technology or in the business of] manufacture or production of
any drugs, pharmaceuticals, electronic equipments, computers,
telecommunication equipments, chemicals or any other article or
thing notified by the Board incurs any expenditure on scientific
research (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of any land
or building) on in-house research and development facility as
approved by the * prescribed authority, then, there shall be allowed
a deduction of [a sum equal to one and one-half times of the
expenditure] so incurred.
[Explanation.  For the purposes of this clause, expenditure on
scientific research, in relation to drugs and pharmaceuticals, shall
include expenditure incurred on clinical drug trial, obtaining
approval from any regulatory authority under any Central, State
or Provincial Act and filing an application for a patent under the
Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970).]
(2) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the expenditure
mentioned in clause (1) under any other provision of this Act.
*(Prescribed authority is Secretary, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research,
Government of India).

14
(3) No company shall be entitled for deduction under clause (1)
unless it enters into an agreement with the prescribed authority
for co-operation in such research and development facility and for
audit of the accounts maintained for that facility.
(4) The prescribed authority shall submit its report in relation to
the approval of the said facility to the Director General in such
form and within such time as may be prescribed.]
[(5) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the expenditure
referred to in clause (1) which is incurred after the 31st day of
March, (2005)].
40. The Committee find substantial credence in the viewpoints
expressed that matters relating to granting of approvals to research
institutions for tax exemption purposes, as well as rescinding of
such approvals or recognition should also involve such authority
concerned with the activity of the institution. They are of the opinion
that the assessing officer may not be competent enough to
recommend either for according approval or withdrawal of the licence
of the institutions. In terms of the present provisions of Section
35(2)AB, deduction is allowed to institutions only after approval by
the prescribed authority. On similar analogy, the Committee feel that
the guidelines to be formulated and prescribed for approval of
research institutions should involve the consent of the authority
concerned.
41. The Committee perceive the proposal to fix a time limit of
one year for considering applications of research institutions as a
step in the right direction which would put an end to the inordinate
delays presently witnessed in considering the applications. This move,
as well as the proposal to do away with renewal of approvals, and
making it mandatory for the institutions to file their tax returns,
would help in streamlining the approval and monitoring process.
42. The Committee are further of the view that a donee who is
entitled for tax deduction on sums donated to a ‘recognised’ research
institution should not be deprived of such benefit owing to the
subsequent rescinding of the recognition within the same financial
year. The Committee therefore, desire that suitable provisions be
made to protect the interests of the taxpayer/donee in such instances.

15
Clause 7 (Amendment of Section 40A)
43. Clause 7 of the Bill reads as follows:
In section 40A of the Income-tax Act in sub-sections (3) and (4),
for the words “a crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed
bank draft”, wherever they occur, the words “an account payee
cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft” shall be
substituted.
44. On the proposals of clause 7 of the Bill, the Background Note
of the Ministry, states as follows:
“Under the existing provisions of sub-section (3) of section 40A of
the Income-tax Act, where any sum exceeding Rs. 20,000 is paid
by a business or professional concern otherwise than by a crossed
cheque or crossed bank draft, 20% of such sum is disallowed in
the computation of income. A crossed cheque or a crossed bank
draft can, however, be endorsed to any third person any number
of times. An account payee cheque or account payee bank draft
can be deposited only in the account of the person named in the
cheque or draft and therefore, helps in verification of expenditure.
This would help to put a stop to claims of bogus expenditure
resulting from endorsement of crossed cheque or crossed bank
draft.”
45. An expert, in the course of personal hearing, expressed the
following viewpoint on the issue of negotiability or transferability of
account payee cheques:
“I just happened to go through the Negotiable Instruments Act
and I find that account payee cheque is not defined whereas the
crossed cheque is. Secondly, the account payee cheque according
to certain commentaries, it has been stated that it would not restrain
negotiability. Negotiability can be only restrained if  you write
non-negotiable or not negotiable. So, if the purpose is to see that
there should be no negotiation or no discounting of the cheque or
the cheque is used by somebody else, then it would be best served
by writing not-negotiable.”
46. Questioned whether it was essential to add the words ‘not
negotiable’ to the ‘crossing’ on a cheque to restrict the negotiability or
transferability of account payee cheques, the Ministry in a written
reply inter-alia stated as follows:
If ‘Account Payee’ cheques can be negotiable/transferable, the
purpose of preventing bogus claims of expenditure may not be

16
served. The Reserve Bank of India has, however, issued a circular
vide DBOD. No. BC. 193/17.4.001/93 dated 18th November, 1993,
as per which an account payee cheque should be credited only to
the account of the payee. The RBI, in this circular at paragraph 3,
addressed to the Chief Executives of all commercial banks (other
than RRBs), has stated the following:
“3. In this connection, a reference is invited to our circular DBOD
No. GC.BC.62/C.409 (A)-87 dated 11th November, 1987 and
subsequent circulars issued from time to time on the subject. We
also invite your attention to paras 1.10, 1.11 and 1.13 to 1.15
(Part II) of Ghosh Committee report indicating precautions to be
taken by the banks in regard to opening and conduct of deposit
accounts. We are, however, constrained to observe that despite our
repeated instructions/guidelines issued to the banks, instances of
fraudulent encashment of instrument either through opening of
accounts in fictitious names or irregularly collecting such ‘Account
Payee’ instrument through the third party accounts are on the
increase which goes to provide that these instructions are not being
followed by the banks scrupulously at the operating level ( i.e.
branches) and no punitive action is taken by bank management
for such gross violation of the instructions by the erring officials.”
47. The Ministry also informed that the issue was referred to the
Reserve Bank for their advice in the matter. Subsequently, in a post-
evidence reply, the Ministry informed that the Reserve bank had
advised as follows:
“As advised to you vide our letter dated October 4, 2005, even if
the words “not transferable” are inscribed in the crossing of cheques
or drafts, it would not restrict the negotiability/transferability of a
cheque or a draft as there is no provisions under Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 restricting the transferability/negotiability of
a cheque or a draft. However, it is mentioned in Bhashyam and
Adiga’s Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 [17th edition, Page 667]
that “to have the effect of thus restricting the negotiability, it is
necessary that the words ‘not negotiable’ should appear on the
instrument and as part of crossing. It is said that they must occur
in close proximity to the lines or to the name of the bank. It must
be noticed that there is clear distinction between a cheque crossed
‘not negotiable’ and a cheque in its origin not transferable, as
where it is drawn payable to “AB only” and having the words
“bearer’ or ‘order’ struck out.

17
Thus if a cheque is crossed “not negotiable” and drawn payable
to “AB only” i.e. “payee only” and the words “bearer” or “order”
are struck out, the cheque would be paid to the payee only and
no one else and no endorsement or transfer can be recognised.”
48. On the need to enlarge the scope of modes of payment
permissible under section 40A(3) to cover payments made through
credit cards and Electronic Clearance System (ECS) etc., the Ministry
in a written reply inter-alia stated as follows:
“Payments made by using credit cards though varifiable may have
been issued by companies which do not exist for long. In such
cases verification of the expenditure claimed by the assessee will
not become possible. As regards payments by the electronic
clearance system, sub-clause (iii) of clause (d) of rule 6DD of the
Income-tax Rules, 1962 reproduced below apparently covers such
payments:
“(d) where the payment is made by—
(i) any letter of credit arrangements through a bank;
(ii) a mail or telegraphic transfer through a bank;
(iii) a book adjustment  from any account in a bank to any other
account in that or any other bank;
(iv) a bill of exchange made payable only to a bank.”
... suitable clarifications may be issued that  payments by electronic
clearance system  through banks would be covered under the
exceptions laid down at sub-clause (iii) of clause (d) of rule 6DD
and,   therefore, shall not attract any disallowance in the
computation of income.”
49. From the information furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee note that the proposal to replace the words “a crossed
cheque or crossed bank draft” with “an account payee cheque or
account payee draft” in Section 40A is intended to prevent bogus
claims of expenditure on account of third party endorsement of
crossed cheques or bank drats. However, the Committee note from
the Reserve Bank’s Circular cited by the Ministry that despite their
repeated instructions/guidelines issued to the banks, ‘instances of
fraudulent encashment of instrument either through opening of
accounts in fictitious names or irregularly collecting such ‘Account

18
Payee’ instrument through the third party accounts are on the
increase.’ The Committee, therefore, expect the Government to address
this issue in clear terms so that the intended purpose of preventing
bogus claims of expenditure on account of third party endorsement
of cheques and drafts is achieved.
50. The Committee find that as per the amendments proposed in
section 40A, the modes of payment permissible for the purpose of
deduction in computation of income are sought to be confined to
the instrument of account payee cheques/drafts. The Committee are
of the opinion that in the present day circumstances, payments made
through other modes or instruments, inclusive of Electronic Clearance
System (ECS), that may be offered or made available by banking
companies, should be made permissible for purposes of deduction
in computation of income in clear and unambiguous terms. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the government to seriously
consider enlarging the scope of section 40A to include bonafide
payments made through such instruments.
Clause 20 and Clause 33: (Provisional Attachment to Protect Revenue
in certain cases)
51. Clause 20 of the Bill reads as under:
After section 28B of the Customs Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:
“28BA. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases.—
(1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under section
28 or section 28B, the proper officer is of the opinion that for the
purpose of protecting the interests of revenue, it is necessary so to
do, he may, with the previous approval of the Commissioner of
Customs, by order in writing, attach provisionally any property
belonging to the person on whom notice is served under sub-
section (1) of section 28 or sub-section (2) of section 28B, as the
case may be, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf
under section 142.
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect
after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of the
order made under subsection (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner of Customs may , for reasons
to be recorded in writing, extend aforesaid period by such further
period or periods as he thinks fit, so, however, that the total period
of extension shall not in any case exceed two years:

19
Provided further that where an application for settlement of case
under section 127B is made to the Settlement Commission, the
period commencing from the date on which such application is
made and ending with the date on which an order under sub-
section (1) of section 127C is made shall be excluded from the
period specified in the preceding proviso.”
52. Clause 33 of the Bill relating to the Central Excise Act reads
as under:
After section 11DD of the Central Excise Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“11DDA. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain
cases.—(1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under
section 11A or section 11D, the Central Excise Officer is of the
opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of revenue,
it is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the
Commissioner of Central Excise, by order in writing, attach
provisionally any property belonging to the person on whom notice
is served under sub-section (1) of section 11A or sub-section (2) of
section 11D, as the case may be, in accordance with the rules
made in this behalf under section 142 of the Customs Act, 1962
(52 of 1962).
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect
after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of the
order made under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner of Central Excise may , for
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid period by
such further period or periods as he thinks fit, so, however, that
the total period of extension shall not in any case exceed two
years:
Provided further that where an application for settlement of case
under section 32E is made to the Settlement Commission, the period
commencing from the date on which such application is made
and ending with the date on which an order under sub-section (1)
of section 32F is made shall be excluded from the period specified
in the preceding proviso.”.
53. The Background Note of the Ministry on the provisions of
Clause 20 and Clause 33 reads as follows:
“Often, after the proceedings for evasion of duty are initiated
against an importer/exporter/assessee, he alienates his property

20
by way of creating encumbrance or by sale or transfer. By the
time the proceedings are completed, no property or assets are
legally available with the defaulter for effecting recoveries of dues.
This creates serious handicap before the Government
and manipulative defaulters contrive to thwart the recoveries of
dues.
To remove the aforesaid situation, a  new provision is proposed to
be inserted to enable the Government to provisionally attach the
property belonging to such offenders during the pendency of
proceedings relating to the determination of Customs/Excise duties
evaded. The proposed provisional attachment may be done only
with the previous approval of the Commissioner of Customs/
Central Excise and it shall be valid only for six months. However,
in suitable cases, the Chief Commissioner of Customs/Central
Excise may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the
aforesaid period subject to the condition that the total period of
extension shall be limited to only two years.
Such a proposal is in line with the similar provisions already
contained in Section 281B of the Income Tax Act 1961.”
54. An expert, in his written comments on the amendments, stated
that the provisions are repugnant to Principles of fairness and natural
justice; that most of the cases are settled in favour of the assessees
and in case of companies with manufacturing facilities, the proposed
provisions may hamper the manufacturing operations, which may
impact adversely on excise revenues in the event of stoppage of
production. Similar views were expressed by other interested bodies
as well.
55. On the point that the concept of provisional attachment of
property before adjudication was repugnant to the principles of fairness
and natural justice, the Ministry, when asked to comment, replied as
under:
“Provisional attachment is resorted to only after the proceedings
for evasion of duty are initiated against an importer or exporter to
ensure that he does not alienate such property by way of creating
encumbrance or by sale or transfer. This provision can be resorted
to only with the previous approval of the Commissioner of
Customs/Central Excise, by an order in writing and in respect of
the property belonging to the person to whom notice is served

21
under sub-section (1) of section 28/sub-section (2) of section 28BA.
This shall be valid only for six months period and only in suitable
cases, the Chief Commissioner of Customs/Central Excise, for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, can extend the aforesaid period
subject to the condition that the total period of extension shall be
limited to only two years. Hence the power of provisional
attachment is to be exercised with adequate care and caution at
senior level and is proposed to be resorted to only in deserving
cases to protect the interests of revenue. Further, the procedure
relating to actual attachment of property envisages following of
the principles of natural justice by issue of notice of attachment to
the assessee as prescribed under section 142 of the Customs Act,
1962. Hence it can be said that principles of fairness and natural
justice will be followed even for exercising the powers of
provisional attachment of property .”
56. The representatives of the industry expressed the concern that
the provisions relating to provisional attachment of property can be
used by junior officers to harass the industry by the power given to
them to issue show cause notice. Further, they felt that attachment of
movable property may lead to closing down of the business. As regards
the similar provisions contained in the Income Tax  Act, providing for
provisional attachment of properties, it was pointed out to the
Committee that the interaction between the industry and the Customs
and Central Excise Officers was more frequent and hence would lead
to harassment.
57. When asked to furnish data relating to the success ratio
on settlement of litigations involving the Customs as well as the
Central Excise Departments, the Ministry furnished the following
information:
“The expert group set up by the Department collected relevant
data from Customs field formations for the period 1998-99 to
2001-02. The range of success ratio at various appellate levels is
indicated below:
Sl.No. Appellate Authority Success Ratio
1. Commissioner (Appeals) 41%-45%
2. Tribunal 32%-49%
3. High Court 51%-66%

22
The data for the later period 2004-05 (upto December 2004) indicate
the following:
Sl.No. Appellate Authority Success Ratio
1. Commissioner (Appeals) 33%
2. Tribunal 58%
3. High Court 56%
4. Supreme Court 60%
The C&AG in its report No. 11/2003 pertaining to Central Excise
and Service Tax highlighted inter-alia the poor success ratio of the
Department in defending its cases. This conclusion was arrived on
the basis of sample study by audit of 29 commissionerates for the
period 1998-99 and 2000-01. The expert group set up by the Dept.
collected relevant data from 64 Central Excise commissionerates
for the period 1998-99 to 2001-02. The range of success ratio for
the above four year period at various appellate levels is indicated
below:
Sl.No. Appellate Authority Success Ratio
1. Commissioner (Appeals) 37%-47%
2. Tribunal 30%-32%
3. High Court 51%-65%
4. Supreme Court 29%
De-novo orders only remand the matter for a fresh look by the
adjudicating/appellate authority and are not to be taken as adverse
decisions.
The data for the later period 2004-05 (upto December 2004) indicate
the following:
Sl.No. Appellate Authority Success Ratio
1. Commissioner (Appeals) 41.2%
2. Tribunal 37.4%
3. High Court 53%
4. Supreme Court 29.5%

23
58. Asked to detail the means  by which the concerns expressed
from various quarters on preventing harassment, ensuring that
manufacturing activities were not hampered etc., could be addressed,
the Ministry responded by inter-alia proposing as follows:
“It is emphasized here such attachment will not hamper the
manufacturing activities. The business activities of the assessees
will carry on in the normal fashion. The Government will only
provisionally attach the property so that the evaders cannot alienate
or create encumbrances by way of sale or transfer of the property.”
“…In order to ensure that there is no harassment to the assessees,
the Government proposes to issue administrative instructions that
the value of the property attached will be equal to the duty liability
only. The Government will attach only the immovable property
and only if the duty liability is not covered, then the movable
property of the company will be provisionally attached. The
personal property of the proprietor/Directors will not be
provisionally attached on any account. As regards the initial order
of provisional attachment, it is proposed that the Commissioner
will order such attachment only after the receipt of a report from
the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner justifying the
reasons for seeking provisional attachment and duly certified by
the controlling Additional/Joint Commissioner. It is envisaged that
the report will be in the nature of a speaking order giving the
reasons, backed by sufficient evidence to justify such provisional
attachment.”
59. The Committee note that though the proposal to incorporate
provisions enabling for provisional attachment of property in the
Customs as well as the Central Excise Acts is akin to the existing
provisions under the Income Tax Act, serious apprehensions and
misgivings have been expressed on this count. The apprehensions
expressed, particularly by the representatives of the Trade and
Industry include, the adverse affect the move may have on business
activities of manufacturing units and the possibility of harassment
in the hands of tax officials owing to enhanced powers.
60. The Committee’s questioning on the means by which such
concerns are to be addressed evoked the response from the Ministry
that administrative instructions would be issued to effectively address
the apprehensions expressed. As informed by the Ministry, the
administrative instructions would clearly stipulate that the
Commissioner of Customs/Excise would order attachment of property

24
only upon receipt of a report from the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant
Commissioner, which would be in the nature of ‘speaking order’
detailing the reasons, evidence, and justification for the provisional
attachment. Also, the value of the property attached would be equal
to the duty liability only; the possibility of attaching moveable
property would be considered only if the duty liability is not covered
by attaching the immovable property; and the personal properties of
Directors/Proprietors would not be provisionally attached on any
count. The Government have also expressed in clear terms that the
move ‘will not hamper the manufacturing activities’ and ‘the business
activities of the assessees will carry on in the normal fashion.’
61. The Committee recommend that apart from ensuring proper
usage of the provision, appropriate disciplinary action should be
initiated against such tax officials who may be found to exercise the
proposed powers frivolously and without sound reasons.
Clause 24 (Insertion of new section 114AA)
62. Clause 24 of the Bill reads as follows:
After section 114A of the Customs Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“114AA. Penalty for use of false and incorrect material.—if a person
knowingly or intentionally makes, signs or uses, or causes to be
made, signed or used, any declaration, statement or document
which is false or incorrect in any material particular, in the
transaction of any business for the purposes of this Act, shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding five times the value of goods.”
63. The information furnished by the Ministry states as follows on
the proposed provision:
“Section 114 provides for penalty for improper exportation of goods.
However, there have been instances where export was on paper
only and no goods had ever crossed the border. Such serious
manipulators could escape penal action even when no goods were
actually exported. The lacuna has an added dimension because of
various export incentive schemes. To provide for penalty in such
cases of false and incorrect declaration of material particulars and
for giving false statements, declarations, etc. for the purpose of
transaction of business under the Customs Act, it is proposed to
provide expressly the power to levy penalty up to 5 times the
value of goods. A new section 114 AA is proposed to be inserted
after section 114A.”

25
64. It was inter-alia expressed before the Committee by the
representatives of trade that the proposed provisions were very harsh,
which might lead to harassment of industries, by way of summoning
an importer to give a ‘false statement’ etc. Questioned on these
concerns, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:
“The enhanced penalty provision has been proposed considering
the serious frauds being committed as no goods are being exported
but papers are being created for availing the benefits under various
export promotion schemes. The apprehension that an importer can
be summoned under section 108 to give a statement that the
declaration of value made at the time of import was false etc., is
misplaced because person summoned under Section 108 are
required to state the truth upon any subject respecting which they
are being examined and to produce such documents and other
things as may be required in the inquiry. No person summoned
under Section 108 can be coerced into stating that which is not
corroborated by the documentary and other evidence in an offence
case.”
65. The Ministry also informed as under:
“The new Section 114AA has been proposed consequent to the
detection of several cases of fraudulent exports where the exports
were shown only on paper and no goods crossed the Indian border.
The enhanced penalty provision has been proposed considering
the serious frauds being committed as no goods are being exported,
but papers are being created for availing the number of benefits
under various export promotion schemes.”
66. The Committee observe that owing to the increased instances
of wilful fraudulent usage of export promotion schemes, the provision
for levying of penalty upto five times the value of goods has been
proposed. The proposal appears to be in the right direction as the
offences involve criminal intent which cannot be treated at par with
other instances of evasion of duty. The Committee, however, advise
the Government to monitor the implementation of the provision with
due diligence and care so as to ensure that it does not result in
undue harassment.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

26
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 14th July, 2005 from 1215 to
1320 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.S. Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part-I
(at 1030 hours)
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **

27
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **
Part-II
(1215 to 1320 hours)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar, Secretary
2. Shri K. Mohandas, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Berjinder Singh, Chairman & Spl. Secretary, CBDT
4. Shri M. Jayaraman, Chairman & Spl. Secretary , CBEC
5. Shri V .P . Singh, Member (P&V/RI&I), CBEC
6. Shri Kailash Sethi, Member (L&J/ST/Comp.), CBEC
7. Ms. Chitra Saha, Member CBEC
8. Shri A.P . Sudhir, Member, CBEC
9. Ms. M.H. Kherawala, Member (Legislation), CBDT
10. Shri Shibaji Das, Member, CBDT
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) briefed the Committee on the various provisions contained
in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked
clarificatory questions which were replied to by the representatives.
The Chairman, then, directed the representatives of the Ministry that
the information with regard to queries of the Members which were
not readily available with them might be furnished to the Committee
later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 6th September, 2005 from 1030 to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Murli Deora
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. S.P .M. Syed Khan
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

29
WITNESSES
Part I
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Dr.  Rajiv Kumar, Chief Economist
2. Shri K.S. Ghai, Senior Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55
of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on the provisions of the Taxation
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives that the information with regard to
queries of the Members which was not readily available with them
might be furnished to the  Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
W
ITNESSES
Part II
Non Official Experts
1. Shri Vijay Mathur, DGIT (Retd.)
2. Shri P .N. Mittal, Member (Retd.) CBDT
3. Shri A.N. Prasad, CCIT (Retd.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Non-official experts
to the sitting of the Committee and invite their attention to
the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the Non-official
experts on the provisions of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied

30
to by the Non-official experts. The Chairman, then, directed the experts
that the information with regard to queries of the Member which was
not readily available with them might be furnished to the Committee
later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

31
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 29 September, 2005 from 1100 to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Jairam Ramesh
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
10. Shri Amar Singh
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part-I
(1100 to 1130 hours)
2. ** ** ** **

32
Part-II
(at 1130 hours)
WITNESSES
1. Shri R. Krishnan, Advocate
2. Shri S. Sampath, Tax Consultant
2. The Chairman welcomed the Non-official experts to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. The Committee then
took oral evidence of the Non-official experts on the provisions of the
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the Non-official experts. The
Chairman, then, directed the experts that the information with regard
to queries of the Members which was not readily available with them
might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

33
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, 30 September, 2005 from 1100 to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part-I
(at 1130 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1. Shri R.N. Lakhotia, Senior Tax Consultant and Advocate (Direct
Taxes)

34
Taxindiaonline.com Pvt. Ltd. (Direct and Indirect Taxes)
2. Shri K. Vijay Kumar, Editor-in-Chief
3. Shri Shailendra Kumar, Managing Editor
4. Shri Shiva Kant Jha, Advocate, Supreme Court of India & Senior
Resource person
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Non-official experts
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to the
provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the Non-official
experts on the provisions of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied
to by the Non-official experts. The Chairman, then, directed the experts
that the information with regard to queries of the Members which
was not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-II
(at 1530 hours)
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

35
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 8 November, 2005 from 1030 hrs.
to 1200 hrs. and thereafter from 1200 to 1330 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Part I
(1030 hrs. to 1200 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **

36
Part II
(1200 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar — Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri M.S. Darda — Chairman, CBDT
3. Ms. M.H. Kherawala — Member (L) CBDT
4. Shri V .P . Singh — Member (CX) CBEC
5. Shri A.P . Sudhir — Member (Customs/RI & I)
CBEC
6. Ms. Kameshwari Subramanian — Joint Secretary (Customs)
CBEC
7. Shri Vinay Chhabra — Commissioner (Coord.)
CBEC
8. Mrs. Anita Kapur — Joint Secretary (TPL I)
CBDT
9. Shri Arbind Modi — Joint Secretary (TPL II)
CBDT
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the above
representatives on the provisions of the Taxation Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2005.
4. Thereafter the members raised queries which were replied to by
the witnesses. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written
replies to some of the queries on which information was not readily
available with them during the evidence.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

37
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 8th December, 2005 from 1500 to
1600 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. ** ** ** **
4. The Committee also considered and adopted the draft report on
the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 with minor modifications/
amendments as shown in the Annexure-II.

38
5. ** ** ** **
6. The Committee, thereafter authorised the Chairman to finalise
the Reports in the light of the amendments suggested as also to make
verbal and other consequential changes and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

39
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT
ON THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 8 DECEMBER, 2005]
Page 31, Para 60, Line 15
For That the move would not have any adverse affect on
the regular activity of the manufacturing industries
Substitute That the move ‘will not hamper the manufacturing
activities’ and ‘the business activities of the assessees
will carry on in the normal fashion’.
Page 34, Para 66, Lines 1-4
For The Committee observe that the proposal to introduce
the provision enabling for levy of penalty upto five times
the value of goods in cases involving willful
misrepresentation of material facts is owing to increased
instances of fraudulent usage of export promotion
schemes.
Substitute The Committee observe that owing to the increased
instances of willful fraudulent usage of export promotion
schemes, the provision for levying of penalty upto five
times the value of goods has been proposed.
Page 34, Para 66, Line 9
Delete of Corporate Houses.

40
As Intr oduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 74 of 2005
THE  TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962,
the Customs  Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944
and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Taxation
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
sections 2 to 16 (except sections 2, 7 and 11 to
16) shall be deemed to have come into force
on the 1st day of April, 2005.
CHAPTER II
D
IRECT T AXES
Income-Tax
2. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the
Income-tax Act), in clause (44), after the words
“powers of a Tax Recovery Officer”, the
following shall be inserted, namely:—
“and also to exercise or perform such
powers and functions which are conferred on,
or assigned to, an Assessing Officer under this
Act and which may be prescribed”.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2.
43 of 1961.

41
3. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2006,—
(a) after clause (23BBE), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:
“(23BBF) any income of the North-
Eastern Development Finance Corporation
Limited, being a company formed and
registered under the Companies Act, 1956:
Provided that in computing the total
income of the North-Eastern Development
Finance Corporation Limited, the amount
to the extent of—
(i) twenty per cent of the total
income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2006;
(ii) forty per cent of the total
income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2007;
(iii) sixty per cent of the total
income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2008;
(iv) eighty per cent of the total
income for assessment year beginning
on the 1st day of April, 2009;
(v) one hundred per cent of the
total income for assessment year
beginning on the 1st day of April, 2010
and any subsequent assessment year or
years,
shall be included in such total income;”;
(b) in clause (23C),—
(i) in the eighth proviso, for the words,
brackets and letters “notification issued by
the Central Government under sub-clause
(iv) or sub-clause (v) shall, at any one time,
have effect for such assessment year or
years, not exceeding three assessment
Amendment
of section
10.
1 of 1956.

42
years”, the words, brackets, figures and
letters “notification issued by the Central
Government under sub-clause (iv) or sub-
clause (v), before the date on which the
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005
receives the assent of the President, shall,
at any one time, have effect for such
assessment year or years, not exceeding
three assessment years” shall be substituted;
(ii) after the eighth proviso, the
following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:
“Provided also that where an
application under the first proviso is made
on or after the date on which the Taxation
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the
assent of the President, every notification
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) shall
be issued or approval under sub-clause (vi)
or sub-clause (via) shall be granted or an
order rejecting the application shall be
passed within the period of twelve months
from the end of the month in which such
application was received:
Provided also that where the total
income, of the fund or trust or institution
or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical
institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-
clause (via), without giving effect to the
provisions of the said sub-clauses, exceeds
the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to tax in any previous year, such
trust or institution or any university or
other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution shall get its
accounts audited in respect of that year by
an accountant as defined in the Explanation
below sub-section (2) of section 288 and
furnish along with the return of income for
the relevant assessment year, the report of

43
such audit in the prescribed form duly
signed and verified by such accountant and
setting forth such particulars as may be
prescribed:”.
4. In section 12A of the Income-tax Act, in
clause (b), for the words and figures “the
provisions of section 11 and section 12 exceeds
fifty-thousand rupees in any previous year”, the
words and figures “the provisions of section
11 and section 12 exceeds the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax
in any previous year” shall be substituted with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2006.
5. In the Income-tax Act, in section 35, in
sub-section (l), with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2006,—
(a) in clause (ii), for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that such association,
university, college or other institution for
the purposes of this clause—
(A) is for the time being approved, in
accordance with the guidelines, in the
manner and subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed; and
(B) such association, university, college
or other institution is specified as such, by
notification in the Official Gazette, by the
Central Government,”;
(b) in clause (iii), for the proviso, the
following proviso shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Provided that such university, college
or other institution for the purposes of this
clause—
(A) is for the time being approved, in
accordance with the guidelines, in the
Amendment
of section
12A.
Amendment
of section
35.

44
manner and subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed; and
(B) such university, college or other
institution is specified as such by
notification in the Official Gazette, by the
Central Government,”;
(c) in the second proviso, for the word
“authority”, the word “Government” shall
be substituted;
(d) in the third proviso, for the words,
brackets and letters “notification issued by
the Central Government under clause (ii)
or clause (iii) shall, at any time, have effect
for such assessment year or years, not
exceeding three asssessment years”, the
words, brackets, figures and letters
“notification issued, by the Central
Government under clause (ii) or clause (iii),
before the date on which the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the assent
of the President, shall, at any time, have
effect for such assessment year or years,
not exceeding three assessment years” shall
be substituted;
(e) after the third proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided also that where an
application under the first proviso is made
on or after the date on which the Taxation
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the
assent of the President, every notification
under clause (ii) or clause (iii) shall be
issued or an order rejecting the application
shall be passed within the period of twelve
months from the end of the month in
which such application was received by the
Central Government :”.

45
6. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, in
clause (a), in sub-clause (ia), with effect from
the 1st day of April, 2006,—
(a) after the words “commission or
brokerage,”, the words “rent, royalty,” shall
be inserted;
(b) in the Explanation, after clause (iv),
the following clauses shall be inserted at
the end, namely:—
‘(v) “rent” shall have the same
meaning as in clause (i) to the
Explanation to section 194-I;
(vi) “royalty” shall have the same
meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause
(vi) of sub-section (1) of section 9;’.
7. In section 40A of the Income-tax Act in
sub-sections (3) and (4), for the words “a
crossed cheque drawn on a bank or by a
crossed bank draft”, wherever they occur, the
words “an account payee cheque drawn on a
bank or account payee bank draft” shall be
substituted.
8. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in
sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause (v),—
(i) after the words, letters and figures
“after the 1st day of September, 2004”, the
words, letters and figures “but before the
1st day of April, 2006” shall be inserted
with effect form the 1st day of April, 2006;
(ii) in the proviso, after clause (d), the
following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(e) from any local authority as
defined in the Explanation to clause
(20) of section 10; or
Amendment
of section
40.
Amendment
of section
40A.
Amendment
of section
56.

46
(f) from any fund or foundation or
university or other educational
institution or hospital or other medical
institution or any trust or institution
referred to in clause (23C) of section
10; or
(g) from any trust or institution
registered under section 12AA.”;
(b) after clause (v) and the Explanation,
the following shall be inserted with effect
from the 1st day of April, 2007, namely:—
“(vi) where any sum of money, the
aggregate value of which exceeds fifty
thousand rupees, is received without
consideration, by an individual or a Hindu
undivided family, in any previous year
from any person or persons on or after the
1st day of April, 2006, the whole of the
aggregate value of such sum:
Provided that this clause shall not
apply to any sum of money received—
(a) form any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage
of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of
inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the
payer; or
(e) from any local authority as
defined in the Explanation to clause
(20) of section 10; or
(f) from any fund or foundation or
university or other educational
institution or hospital or other medical
institution or any trust or institution
referred to in clause (23C) of section
10; or

47
(g) from any trust or institution
registered under section 12AA.
Explanation.—For the purposes of
this clause, “relative” means—
(i) Spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the
individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse
of the individual;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the
parents of the individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or
descendant of the individual;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or
descendant of the spouse of the
individual;
(vii) spouse of the person referred
to in clauses (ii) to (vi).”.
9. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act, with
effect from the 1st day of April, 2006,—
(a) in sub-section (4C), in clause (e),—
(i) for the word, brackets and figures
“sub-clause (vi)”, the words, brackets and
figures, “sub-clause (iiiad) or sub-clause
(vi)” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word, brackets and figures
“sub-clause (via)”, the words, brackets and
figures, “sub-clause (iiiae) or sub-clause
(via)” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (4C), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
(4D) Every university, college or other
institution referred to in clause (ii) and
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35,
which is not required to furnish return of
Amendment
of section
139.

48
income or loss under any other provision
of this section, shall furnish the return in
respect of its income or loss in every
previous year and all the provisions of this
Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if it
were a return required to be furnished
under sub-section (1).”.
10.  In section 143 of the Income-tax Act,
in sub-section (3), after the proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, with effect
from the 1st day of April, 2006, namely:—
“Provided further that where the
Assessing Officer is satisfied that the
activities of the university, college or other
institution referred to in clause (ii) and
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35
are not being carried out in accordance with
all or any of the conditions subject to which
such university, college or other institution
was approved, he may , after giving a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed withdrawal to the
concerned university, college or other
institution, recommend to the Central
Government to withdraw the approval and
that Government may by order, withdraw
the approval and forward a copy of the
order to the concerned university, college
or other institution and the Assessing
Officer.”
11. In section 155 of the Income-tax Act,
after sub-section (11), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(11A) Where in the assessment for any
year, the deduction under section 10A or
section 10B or section 10BA has not been
allowed on the ground that such income
has not been received in convertible foreign
exchange in India, or having been received
in convertible foreign exchange outside
India, or having been converted into
Amendment
of section
143.
Amendment
of section
155.

49
convertible foreign exchange outside India,
has not been brought into India, by or on
behalf of the assessee with the approval of
the Reserve Bank of India or such other
authority as is authorised under any law
for the time being in force for regulating
payments and dealings in foreign exchange
and subsequently such income or part
thereof has been or is received in, or
brought into, India in the manner aforesaid,
the Assessing Officer shall amend the order
of assessment so as to allow deduction
under section 10A or section 10B or section
10BA, as the case may be, in respect of
such income or part thereof as is so
received in, or brought into, India, and the
provisions of section 154 shall, so far as
may be, apply thereto, and the period of
four years shall be reckoned from the end
of the previous year in which such income
is so received in, or brought into India.”.
12. In section 194-I of the Income-tax Act,
in the explanation, for clause (i), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(i) “rent” means any payment, by
whatever name called, under any lease,
sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement
or arrangement for the use of (either
separately or together) any,—
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory
building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building
(including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant; or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
Amendment
of section
194-I.

50
(h) fittings,
whether or not any or all of the above are
owned by the payee;’
13. In section 194J of the Income-tax Act,
in sub-section (l),—
(i) in clause (b), the word “or” shall be
inserted at the end;
(ii) after clause (b), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) royalty, or
(d) any sum referred to in clause (va)
of section 28,”;
(iii) in the first proviso, in clause (B),—
(a) in sub-clause (ii), for the words and
brackets “clause (b):”, the words and
brackets “clause (b), or” shall be
substituted;
(b) after sub-clause (ii), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iii) twenty thousand rupees, in
the case of royalty referred to in clause
(c), or
(iv) twenty thousand rupees, in the
case of sum referred to in clause (d):”;
(iii) in the Explanation, after clause (b),
the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ba) “royalty” shall have the same
meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause (vi)
of sub-section (1) of section 9;’.
14. In section 246A of the Income-tax Act,
in sub-section (1), after clause (j), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ja) an order of imposing or enhancing
penalty under sub-section (1A) of section
275;”.
Amendment
of section
194J.
Amendment
of section
246A.

51
15. In section 275 of the Income-tax Act,
after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) In a case where the relevant
assessment or other order is the subject-
matter of an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) under section 246 or section 246A
or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal
under section 253 or an appeal to the High
Court under section 260A or an appeal to
the Supreme Court under section 261 or
revision under section 263 or section 264
and an order imposing or enhancing or
reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping
the proceedings for the imposition of
penalty is passed before the order of the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate
Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme
Court is received by the Chief
Commissioner or the Commissioner or the
order of revision under section 263 or
section 264 is passed, an order imposing
or enhancing or reducing or cancelling
penalty or dropping the proceedings for the
imposition of penalty may be passed on
the basis of assessment as revised by giving
effect to such order of the Commissioner
(Appeals) or, the Appellate Tribunal or the
High court, or the Supreme Court or order
of revision under section 263 or section 264:
Provided that no order of imposing or
enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty
or dropping the proceedings for the
imposition of penalty shall be passed—
(a) unless the assessee has been
heard, or has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard;
(b) after the expiry of six months
from the end of the month in which
the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or
Amendment
of section
275.

52
the High Court or the Supreme Court
is received by the Chief Commissioner
or the Commissioner or the order of
revision under section 263 or section
264 is passed:
Provided further that the provisions of
sub-section (2) of section 274 shall apply in
respect of the order imposing or enhancing
or reducing penalty under this sub-
section.”.
16. In Income-tax Act, for section 288B, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“288B. Any amount payable, and the
amount of refund due, under the provisions
of this Act shall be rounded off to the
nearest multiple of ten rupees and for this
purpose any part of a rupee consisting of
paise shall be ignored and thereafter if such
amount is not a multiple of ten, then, if
the last figure in that amount is five or
more, the amount shall be increased to the
next higher amount which is a multiple of
ten and if the last figure is less than five
the amount shall be reduced to the next
lower amount which is a multiple of ten.”.
CHAPTER III
I
NDIRECT T AXES
Customs
17. In the Customs Act, 1962 (hereafter
referred to as the Customs Act), in section 17,
after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) Where any assessment done under
sub-section (2) is contrary to the claim of
the importer or exporter regarding
valuation of goods, classification, exemption
or concessions of duty availed consequent
to any notification therefor under this Act,
and in cases other than those where the
Substitution
of new
section for
section 288B.
Rounding
off amount
payable and
refund due.
Amendment
of section
17.
52 of 1962.

53
importer or the exporter, as the case may
be, confirms his acceptance of the said
assessment in writing, the proper officer
shall pass a speaking order within fifteen
days from the date of assessment of the
bill of entry or the shipping bill, as the
case may be”.
18. In section 18 of the Customs Act, after
sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The importer or exporter shall be
liable to pay interest, on any amount
payable to the Central Government,
consequent to the final assessment order
under sub-section (2), at the rate fixed by
the Central Government under section 28AB
from the first day of the month in which
the duty is provisionally assessed till the
date of payment thereof.
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), if any
refundable amount referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (2) is not refunded under that
sub-section within three months from the
date of assessment of duty finally, there
shall be paid an interest on such
unrefunded amount at such rate fixed by
the Central Government under section 27A
till the date of refund of such amount.
(5) The amount of duty refundable
under sub-section (2) and the interest under
sub-section (4), if any, shall, instead of being
credited to the Fund, be paid to the
importer or the exporter, as the case may
be, if such amount is relatable to—
(a) the duty and interest, if any,
paid on such duty paid by the
importer, or the exporter, as the case
may be, if he had not passed on the
incidence of such duty and interest, if
any, paid on such duty to any other
person;
Amendment
of section
18.

54
(b) the duty and interest, if any,
paid on such duty on imports made
by an individual for his personal use;
(c) the duty and interest, if any,
paid on such duty borne by the buyer,
if he had not passed on the incidence
of such duty and interest, if any, paid
on such duty to any other person;
(d) the export duty as specified in
sections 26;
(e) drawback of duty payable under
sections 74 and 75.”.
19. In section 28 of the Customs Act,—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) When any duty has not been
levied or has been short-levied or the
interest has not been charged or has been
part paid or the duty or interest has been
erroneously refunded by reason of collusion
or any wilful mis-statement or suppression
of facts by the importer or the exporter or
the agent or employee of the importer or
exporter, to whom a notice is served under
proviso to sub-section (1) by the proper
officer, may pay duty in full or in part as
may be accepted by him, and the interest
payable thereon under section 28AB and
penalty equal to twenty-five per cent, of
the duty specified in the notice or the duty
so accepted by such person within thirty
days of the receipt of the notice.”;
(b) to sub-section (2), the following
provisos shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that if such person has paid
the duty in full together with interest and
penalty under sub-section (1A), the
proceedings in respect of such person and
other persons to whom notice are served
Amendment
of section
28.

55
under sub-section (1) shall, without
prejudice to the provisions of sections 135,
135A and 140, be deemed to be conclusive
as to the matters stated therein:
Provided further that, if such person
has paid duty in part, interest and penalty
under sub-section (1A), the proper officer
shall determine the amount of duty or
interest not being in excess of the amount
partly due from such person.”.
20. After section 28B of the Customs Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“28BA. (1) Where, during the pendency
of any proceeding under section 28 or
section 28B, the proper officer is of the
opinion that for the purpose of protecting
the interests of revenue, it is necessary so
to do, he may, with the previous approval
of the Commissioner of Customs, by order
in writing, attach provisionally any property
belonging to the person on whom notice is
served under sub-section (1) of section 28
or sub-section (2) of section 28B, as the case
may be, in accordance with the rules made
in this behalf under section 142.
(2) Every such provisional attachment
shall cease to have effect after the expiry
of a period of six months from the date of
the order made under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner
of Customs may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, extend aforesaid period by such
further period or periods as he thinks fit,
so, however, that the total period of
extension shall not in any case exceed two
years:
Provided further that where an
application for settlement of case under
section 127B is made to the Settlement
Insertion of
new section
28BA.
Provisional
attachment
to protect
revenue in
certain
cases.

56
Commission, the period commencing from
the date on which such application is made
and ending with the date on which an
order under sub-section (1) of section 127C
is made shall be excluded from the period
specified in the preceding proviso.”.
21. In section 104 of the Customs Act, for
sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) If an officer of Customs
empowered in this behalf by general or
special order of the Commissioner of
Customs has reason to believe that any
person in India or within the Indian
customs waters has committed an offence
punishable under section 132 or section 133
or section 135 or section 135A or section
136, he may arrest such person and shall,
as soon as may be, inform him of the
grounds for such arrest.”
22. In section 108 of the Customs Act, for
sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Any gazetted officer of Customs
duly empowered by the Central
Government in this behalf, shall have
power to summon any person whose
attendance he considers necessary either to
give evidence or to produce a document
or any other thing in any inquiry which
such officer is making under this Act.”.
23. After section 110 of the Customs Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“110A. Any goods, documents or things
seized under section 110, may, pending the
order of the adjudicating officer, be released
to the owner on taking a bond from him
in the proper form with such security and
conditions as the Commissioner of Customs
may require.”.
Amendment
of section
104.
Amendment
of section
108.
Insertion of
new section
110A.
Provisional
release of
goods,
documents
and things
seized
pending
adjudication.

57
24. After section 114A of the Customs Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“114AA. If a person knowingly or
intentionally makes, signs or uses, or causes
to be made, signed or used, any
declaration, statement or document which
is false or incorrect in any material
particular, in the transaction of any business
for the purposes of this Act, shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding five times the
value of goods.”.
25. In section 124 of the Customs Act, in
clause (a), for the words “writing informing”,
the words “writing with the prior approval of
the officer of Customs not below the rank of a
Deputy Commissioner of Customs, informing”
shall be substituted.
26. In section 129D of the Customs Act, in
sub-section (2), for the words “such authority”,
the words “such authority or any officer of
Customs subordinate to him” shall be
substituted.
27. In section 132 of the Customs Act, for
the words “six months”, the words “two years”
shall be substituted.
28. In section 133 of the Customs Act, for
the words “six months”, the words “two years”
shall be substituted.
29. In section 137 of the Customs Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words and figures
“section 135”, the words, figures and letter
“section 135 or section 135A” shall be
substituted.
Insertion of
new section
114AA.
Penalty for
use of false
and
incorrect
material.
Amendment
of section
124.
Amendment
of section
129D.
Amendment
of section
132.
Amendment
of section
133.
Amendment
of section
137.

58
Insertion of
new section
154B.
Publication
of
information
respecting
persons in
certain
cases.
30. After section 154A of the Customs Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“154B. (1) If the Central Government is
of opinion that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest to publish the names
of any person and any other particulars
relating to any proceedings or prosecutions
under this Act in respect of such person, it
may cause to be published such names and
particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section
shall be made in relation to any penalty
imposed under this Act until the time for
presenting an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) under section 128 or the
Appellate Tribunal under section 129A, as
the case may be, has expired without an
appeal having been presented or the appeal,
if presented, has been disposed of.
Explanation —In the case of a firm,
company or other association of persons,
the names of the partners of the firm,
directors, managing agents, secretaries and
treasurers or managers of the company, or
the members of the association, as the case
may be, may also be published if, in the
opinion of the Central Government,
circumstances of the case justify it.”.
Customs tariff
31. In section 8B of the Customs Tariff Act,
1975, in the first proviso to sub-section (1), for
the words “all such countries”, the words
“developing countries each with less than three
per cent. import share” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
8B of Act
51 of 1975.

59
Excise
32. In section 11A of the Central Excise Act,
1944 (hereafter referred to as the Central Excise
Act),—
(a) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) When any duty of excise has not
been levied or paid or has been short-levied
or short paid or erroneously refunded, by
reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-
statement or suppression of facts, or
contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or the rules made thereunder with
intent to evade payment of duty, by such
person or his agent, to whom a notice is
served under proviso to sub-section (1) by
the Central Excise Officer, may pay duty
in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under
section 11AB and penalty equal to twenty-
five per cent of the duty specified in the
notice or the duty so accepted by such
person within thirty days of the receipt of
the notice.”;
(b) to sub-section (2), the following
provisos shall be added, namely:—
“Provided that if such person has
paid the duty in full together with,
interest and penalty under sub-section
(1A), the proceedings in respect of such
person and other persons to whom
notice are served under sub-section (1)
shall, without prejudice to the
provisions of sections 9, 9A and 9AA,
be deemed to be conclusive as to the
matters stated therein:
Provided further that, if such
person has paid duty in part, interest
and penalty under sub-section (1A), the
Central Excise Officer, shall determine
Amendment
of section
11A.1 of 1944.

60
the amount of duty or interest not
being in excess of the amount partly
due from such person.”.
33. After section 11DD of the Central Excise
Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11DDA. (1) Where, during the
pendency of any proceeding under section
11A or section 11D, the Central Excise
Officer is of the opinion that for the
purpose of protecting the interests of
revenue, it is necessary so to do, he may,
with the previous approval of the
Commissioner of Central Excise, by order
in writing, attach provisionally any property
belonging to the person on whom notice is
served under sub-section (1) of section 11A
or sub-section (2) of section 11D, as the case
may be, in accordance with the rules made
in this behalf under section 142 of the
Customs Act, 1962.
(2) Every such provisional attachment
shall cease to have effect after the expiry
of a period of six months from the date of
the order made under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Chief Commissioner
of Central Excise may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid
period by such further period or periods
as he thinks fit, so, however, that the total
period of extension shall not in any case
exceed two years:
Provided further that where an
application for settlement of case under
section 32E is made to the Settlement
Commission, the period commencing from
the date on which such application is made
and ending with the date on which an
order under sub-section (1) of section 32F
is made shall be excluded from the period
specified in the preceding proviso.”.
Insertion of
new section
11DDA.
Provisional
attachment
to protect
revenue in
certain
cases.
52 of 1962.

61
34. In section 35E of the Central Excise Act,
in sub-section (2), for the words “such
authority”, the words “such authority or any
Central Excise officer subordinate to him” shall
be substituted.
35. After section 37D of the Central Excise
Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“37E. (1) If the Central Government is
of opinion that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest to publish the names
of any person and any other particulars
relating to any proceedings or prosecutions
under this Act in respect of such person, it
may cause to be published such names and
particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section
shall be made in relation to any penalty
imposed under this Act until the time for
presenting an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) under section 35 or the Appellate
Tribunal under section 35B, as the case may
be, has expired without an appeal having
been presented or the appeal, if presented,
has been disposed of.
Explanation .—In the case of a firm,
company or other association of persons,
the names of the partners of the firm,
directors, managing agents, secretaries and
treasurers or managers of the company, or
the members of the association, as the case
may be, may also be published if, in the
opinion of the Central Government,
circumstances of the case justify it.”.
36. (1) In the Central Excise Rules, 2002,
made by the Central Government in exercise
of the powers conferred by section 37 of the
Central Excise Act, rule 16 thereof as published
in the Official Gazette vide notification of the
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue), No. G.S.R. 143(E),
Amendment
of section
35E.
Insertion of
new section
37E.
Publication
of
information
respecting
persons in
certain
cases.
Amendment
of rule 16
of the
Central
Excise
Rules, 2002.

62
dated the 1st March, 2002 shall stand amended
and shall be deemed to have been amended
retrospectively in the manner as specified in
column (2) of the Schedule for the period
specified in column (3) of that Schedule against
the rule specified in column (1) of that
Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any judgment, decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority, any action taken or
anything done or purported to have been taken
or done, at any time during the period
commencing on and from the 29th day of May,
2003 and ending with the 8th day of July, 2004
under the rules as amended by sub-section (1),
shall be deemed to be and always to have been,
for all the purposes, as validly and effectively
taken or done as if the amendment made by
sub-section (1) had been in force at all material
times.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the
Central Government shall have and shall be
deemed to have the power to make rules with
retrospective effect as if the Central Government
had the power to make rules under section 37
of the Central Excise Act, retrospectively, at all
material times.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that no act or omission on
the part of any person shall be punishable as
an offence, which would not have been so
punishable if this section had not come into
force.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
37. In section 25 of the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956, for the words and figures “under
section 19”, the words, brackets and figures “by
notification under sub-section (1) of section 24”
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
25 of Act
74 of 1956.

63
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 36)
Provisions of Amendment Period of
the Central effect of
Excise Rules, amendment
2002 to be
amended
12 3
Rule 16
of the
Central
Excise
Rules,
2002 as
published
vide
notification
No. G.S.R.
143(E),
dated the
1st March,
2002.
In the Central Excise
Rules, 2002, in rule 16,
after sub-rule (3), the
following provisos shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘Provided that for
the purpose of this
rule, “assessee” shall
include wire drawing
unit, which has cleared
the goods on payment
of an amount equal to
the duty at the rate
applicable to drawn
wire on the date of
removal and on the
value determined
under relevant
provisions of the Act
and the rules made
thereunder:
Provided further
that the amount paid
under the first proviso
shall be allowed as
CENVAT credit as if it
was duty paid by the
assessee who removes
the goods.’.
29th day of
May, 2003
to 8th day
of July, 2004
(both days
inclusive).

64
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Several suggestions on amendments to Direct Tax Laws and Indirect
Tax Laws have been received in the course of the current year and
after due consideration, some of these have been accepted. It is
proposed to take up these suggestions in this Bill, which will thereby
supplement the proposals made through the Finance Bill, 2005. The
Bill, inter alia, proposed to carry out certain amendments in the Income-
Tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff Act, 1975,
the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 with
the object of rationalizing and simplifying certain procedures, widening
of tax base and plugging loopholes leading to leakage of revenue.
2. The Bill seeks to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 so as to
streamline the approval and monitoring process for certain charitable
entities, scientific research associations, etc., prescribing filing of return
by certain charitable entities with aggregate annual receipts below one
crore rupees, requiring payment exceeding twenty thousand rupees by
way of an account payee cheque or account payee bank draft,
prescribing TDS on renting of plant and machinery, equipment, royalty
and non-compete fee and phased withdrawal of exemption to North-
Eastern Finance Development Corporation Limited over the next five
years. It is further proposed to exclude (from the previous year 2004-
2005) any sum received from a charitable entity or a local authority
without consideration from the ambit of ‘income from other sources’.
It is also proposed to aggregate the said sums received without
consideration (from the previous year 2006-2007) and to enhance the
existing limit of twenty-five thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees
for the purpose of inclusion under ‘income from other sources’. Certain
other amendments such as rounding off of demands or refunds to the
nearest multiple of ten rupees, empowering the Tax Recovery Officer
to exercise limited powers of the Assessing Officer, allowing for revision
of penalty orders on receipt of appellate orders regarding assessment,
etc., are also proposed to be carried out in the Income-tax Act.
3. The Bill also seeks to carry out certain amendments in the
Customs Act, 1962, Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and Central Excise Act,
1944 with inter alia facilitates voluntary payment of tax dues so as to
provide a mechanism for resolving disputes at the earliest, to facilitate
recovery of amount due as revenue to the Government and to
incorporate certain measures to curb evasion of Customs and Central
Excise duties.

65
4. The Bill also seeks to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 so
as to expeditiously and smoothly resolve inter-State disputes, regarding
levy of Central Sales Tax by the State Governments by ensuring that
all pending proceedings are transferred to the Authority notified under
sub-section (1) of section 24 of the said Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses
explain the various provisions of the Bill.
New Delhi; P . CHIDAMBARAM.
The 9th May, 2005.

66
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 AND
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. J. No. 4/TLA/3/2005-TPL, dated the 9th May,
2005 from Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 recommends under Article 117(1)
and (3) and 274(1) of the Constitution of India, introduction and
consideration of the above Bill by the Lok Sabha.

67
Notes on clauses
Income-tax
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax Act
relating to definitions.
The existing provisions contained in clause (44) of the said section
provides that “Tax Recovery Officer” means any Income-tax Officer
who may be authorised by the Chief  Commissioner or Commissioner,
by general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers of a Tax
Recovery Officer.
It is proposed to amend the said clause so as to provide that the
Tax Recovery Officer may also exercise or perform such powers and
functions which are conferred on, or assigned to, an Assessing Officer
under the Income-tax Act and which may be prescribed.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives the assent of the President.
Clause 3 seeks to amend section 10 of the Income tax Act relating
to incomes which shall not be included in total income.
Under the existing provision contained in section 10 of the Income-
tax Act, any income falling within the various clauses of that section
shall not be included in computing the total income of a previous
year of any person.
It is proposed to insert a new clause (23BBE) in section 10 so as
to provide that any income of the North-Eastern Development Finance
Corporation Limited, a company formed and registered under the
Companies Act, 1956, shall not be included in computing its total
income. It is further provided that the income of the North-Eastern
Development Finance Limited shall be included in the total income to
the extent of the percentage of its total income specified in the proposed
clause (23BBE).
Under the existing provisions contained in the eighth proviso to
clause (23C) of section 10, any notification issued by the Central
Government under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) of the said clause
(23C), shall, at any one time, have effect for any assessment year or

68
years not exceeding three assessment years including an assessment
year or years commencing before the date on which such notification
is issued.
It is proposed to amend the eighth proviso to clause (23C) of the
said section so as to provide that where the notification is issued
under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) of said clause (23C) before the
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the
President, such notification shall continue to be effective for a period
of three assessment years including an assessment year or years not
exceeding three assessment years including an assessment year or years
not exceeding three assessment years commencing before the date on
which such notification is issued.
Under the existing provisions contained in the first proviso to clause
(23C) of section 10, the fund or trust or institution or any university
or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause
(vi) or sub-clause (via) of said clause (23C) shall make an application
in the prescribed form and in the manner to the prescribed authority
for the purpose of grant of exemption under those sub-clauses.
However, no time limit has been provided for grant of approval or
issue of notification under the said sub-clauses.
It is proposed to insert ninth proviso after the eighth proviso so
as to provide that where any application for issue of notification or
grant of approval under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause
(vi) or sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) is filed on or after the date on
which this Bill receives the assent of the President, every such
notification shall be issued or order granting approval or order rejecting
the application shall be passed before the expiry of twelve months
from the end of the month in which the application was received.
Under the existing provisions contained in second proviso of clause
(23C), the Central Government or the prescribed authority before
notifying or approving the entities referred to in sub-clause (iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (via) may call for such documents including
audited annual accounts. However, there is no stipulation for getting
their accounts audited by an accountant or furnishing the audit report
along with the return of income.
It is further proposed to insert tenth proviso after the ninth proviso
as so inserted so as to provide that where the total income of the
fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution referred to in

69
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via),
without giving effect to the provisions of the said sub-clauses of clause
(23C), exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax in
any previous year, such trust or institution or university or other
educational institution or hospital or other medical institution shall
get its accounts audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation
below sub-section (2) of section 288 and furnish along with the return
of income for the relevant assessment year, the audited accounts and
the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified
by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be
prescribed.
These amendments will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and
will, accordingly, apply to assessment year 2006-2007 and subsequent
years.
Clause 4 seeks to amend section 12A of the Income-tax Act relating
to conditions as to registration of trusts, etc.
Under the existing provisions contained in section 12A of the
Income-tax Act, where the total income of the trust or institution as
computed under that Act without giving effect to the provisions of
sections 11 and 12 exceeds fifty thousand rupees in any previous year,
the accounts of the trust or institution for that year shall be audited
and such audit report shall be furnished along with the return of
income.
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to provide that the
accounts of the trust or institution for that year shall be audited and
such audit report shall be furnished along with the return of income
if the total income of such trust or institution exceeds the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax in any previous year.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and
will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007
and subsequent years.
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 35 of the Income-tax Act relating
to expenditure on scientific research.
Under the existing provisions contained in the proviso to clause
(ii) and the proviso to clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the
Income-tax Act, the Central Government grants the approval to an
association, university, college or other institution. These provisions do
not provide for the manner, guidelines and the conditions subject to
which approval is required to be granted.

70
It is proposed to amend the proviso to clause (ii) and the proviso
to clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 so as to empower the
Central Board of Direct Taxes to lay down, by rules, the manner in
which an association, university, college or other institution is to be
granted approval and the guidelines and conditions to be fulfilled for
grant of such approval by the Central Government.
Under the second proviso to the aforesaid sub-section (1), the
Central Government before granting approval may call for any
documents or information and may also make such inquiries as it
may deem necessary. Under the third proviso to the aforesaid sub-
section (1), the approval granted at any one time has effect for three
assessment years.
It is proposed to amend the second proviso to the said sub-section
(1) so as to provide that the Central Government may make such
inquiries as it may deem necessary . It is further proposed to amend
the third proviso to the said sub-section (1) so as to provide that there
would be no requirement for renewal of the approval where the
approval is granted before the date on which the Bill receives assent
of the President, such approval granted before that date shall remain
effective for the period for which the approval was granted. It is also
proposed to provide for disposing the application for approval within
twelve months of receipt of the same.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006
and will, accordingly apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-07
and subsequent years.
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 40 of the Income-tax Act relating
to amounts not deductible.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-clause (ia) of clause
(a) of section 40, non-deduction of tax on payment of interest,
commission or brokerage, fees for professional services or fees for
technical services, or amounts payable to a contractor or sub-contractor,
results in the disallowance of the sum, in the computation of income
of the payer, on which tax is required to be deducted under Chapter
XVII-B.
It is proposed to amend sub-clause (ia) of clause (a) of section 40
so as to extend the provisions thereof to payments of royalty and rent.
It is also proposed to provide for the definition of the terms “royalty”
and “rent” in the explanation to the sub-clause.

71
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and
will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007
and subsequent years.
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 40A of the Income-tax Act relating
to expenses or payments not deductible in certain circumstances.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (3) and sub-
section (4) of section 40A, it is provided that any payment exceeding
twenty thousand rupees not made by way of a crossed cheque or
crossed bank draft shall attract a disallowance to the extent of twenty
per cent of such sum, in the computation of income of the payer.
It is proposed to amend sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) so as
to provide that a disallowance to the extent of twenty per cent of the
sum of payment shall be made where any payment exceeding the
limit of twenty thousand rupees is made otherwise than by an account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft.
These amendments will take effect form the date on which the Bill
receives assent of the President.
Clause 8 seeks to amend section 56 of the Income-tax Act relating
to income from other sources.
Under the existing provision contained in clause (v) of sub-section
(2) of section 56 of the Income-tax Act, where any sum of money
exceeding twenty five thousand rupees is received by an individual or
a Hindu undivided family without consideration from any person on
or after the 1st of September, 2004, the whole of such sum is included
in the total income in the hands of the recipient. As per the proviso
to the said clause, this clause shall not apply to any sum of money
received form any relative or on the occasion of the marriage of the
individual or under a will or by way of inheritance or in contemplation
of the death of the payer.
It is proposed to amend the proviso to clause (v) of sub-section
(2) of section 56 so as to provide that this clause shall not apply to
any sum of money received from any local authority as defined in the
Explanation to clause (20) of section 10 or from any fund or foundation
or university or other educational institution or hospital or other
medical institution or any trust or institution referred to in clause
(23C) of section 10 or from any trust or institution registered under
section 12AA.

72
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from the 1st day
of April, 2005 and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment
year 2005-2006 and subsequent years.
It is further proposed to amend clause (v) of sub-section (2) of
section 56 so as to provide that the said clause shall be applicable to
any sum of money exceeding twenty five thousand rupees received
by an individual or Hindu undivided family without consideration
from any person before the 1st day of April, 2006.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and
will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-2007
and subsequent years.
It is also proposed to insert a new clause (vi) after clause (v) of
sub-section (2) of section 56 so as to provide that where any sum of
money, the aggregate value of which exceeds fifty thousand rupees, is
received without consideration by an individual or a Hindu undivided
family in any previous year from any person or persons on or after
the 1st day of April, 2006, the whole of the aggregate value of such
sum shall be included in the total income.
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2007 and
will, accordingly, apply to assessment years 2007-2008 and subsequent
years.
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 139 of the Income-tax Act relating
to return of income.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-clause (e) of clause
(4C) of section 139 of the Income-tax Act, every fund or institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution referred to in sub-
clause (v) or any university or other educational institution referred to
in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or other medical institution referred
to in sub-clause (via) shall furnish their return of income if the total
income without giving effect to the provisions of section 10 exceeds
the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax.
It is proposed to amend the said sub-clause (e) of clause (4C) of
section 139 so as to provide that any university or other educational
institution referred to in sub-clause (iiiad) or any hospital or other
medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iiiae) of clause (23C) of
section 10 shall furnish their return of income if their total income
without giving effect to the provisions of section 10 exceeds the
maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax.

73
This amendment will take effect from 1st day of April, 2006 and
will, accordingly, apply in relation tot he assessment year 2006-2007
and subsequent assessment years.
Sub-clause (b) of the said clause seeks to insert sub-section (4D)
requiring a university, college or other institution referred to in clause
(ii) and clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 to furnish return of
income.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006
and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-
2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 143 of the Income-tax Act relating
to assessment.
It is proposed to insert a proviso after the first proviso in sub-
section (3) of section 143 to provide that during the course of
assessment proceedings the assessing officer should satisfy himself
regarding the activities of the university, college or other institution
whether these are being carried out in accordance with all or any of
the guidelines and conditions subject to which approval was granted
and may recommend to the Central Government to withdraw the
approval.
This amendment will take effect from the 1st day of April, 2006
and will, accordingly, apply in relation to the assessment year 2006-
2007 and subsequent years.
Clause 11 seeks to amend section 155 of the Income-tax Act relating
to other amendments.
The existing provisions of section 155, inter alia,  provide for
rectification of an assessment order wherein in deduction under section
80HHC, 80HHD, 80HHE, etc., has not been allowed on the ground
that export income has not been received in convertible foreign
exchange in India, or having been received in convertible foreign
exchange outside India, has not been brought into India, by  or on
behalf of the assessee before completion of assessment and such income
is subsequently brought into India with the approval of the Reserve
Bank of India or such other competent authority within the prescribed
time.

74
It is proposed to insert a new sub-section (11A) in the said section
so as to provide that the Assessing Officer shall amend the order of
assessment to allow deduction under section 10A or section 10B or
section 10BA, as the case may be, in respect of export income or part
thereof, which is received in, or brought into, India with the approval
of the Reserve Bank of India or such other competent authority within
the prescribed time. It is also proposed that the provisions of section
154 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, and the period of four
years for rectification of assessment shall be reckoned from the end of
the previous year in which such income is so received in, or brought
into, India.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives the assent of the President.
Clause 12 seeks to amend section 194-I of the Income-tax Act
relating to tax deduction at source on rent.
Under the existing provisions contained in section 194-I, tax is
required to be deducted at source on payment of rent. The term “rent”
has been defined in the Explanation to the said section to, inter alia,
mean payment for use of any building (including factory building)
together with furniture, fittings and the land appurtenant thereto
whether or not such building is owned by the payee.
It is proposed to amend the definition of “rent” in the Explanation
to section 194-I so as to provide that the provisions of the said section
are applicable whether the items are rented separately or together. It
is also proposed to expand the list of items by including machinery,
plant and equipment. This section is proposed to be made applicable
whether or not nay or all of the items are owned by the payee.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives assent of the President.
Clause 13 seeks to amend section 194J of the Income-tax Act relating
to fees for professional or technical services.
Under the existing provisions contained in sub-section (1), tax is
required to be deducted at source on any payment of a sum to a
resident exceeding twenty thousand rupees by way of fees for
professional services or fees for technical services at the rate of five
per cent of such sum.

75
It is proposed to amend sub-section (1) of section 194J so as to
include “royalty” and “any sum referred to in clause (va) of section
28” for applicability of the provisions of the said sub-section. The
term “royalty” is proposed to be defined in the explanation to the
section.
These amendments will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives assent of the President.
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 246A of the Income-tax Act
relating to appealable orders before Commissioner (Appeals).
The existing provision of sub-section (1) of said section provides
a list of orders against which an appeal may be filed to the
Commissioner (Appeals) by an assessee who is aggrieved by any of
the orders mentioned therein.
It is proposed to amend the said sub-section so as to provide that
an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) may also be filed against an
order imposing or enhancing penalty under sub-section (1A) of section
275.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives the assent of the President.
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 275 of the Income-tax Act relating
to bar of limitation for imposing penalties.
Under the existing provisions contained in the proviso to the clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of said section, in a case where the relevant
assessment or other order is the subject matter of an appeal to the
Commissioner (Appeals), and he passes the order on or after 1st June,
2003 disposing of such appeal, an order imposing penalty shall be
passed before the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings
in the course of which action for imposition of penalty has been
initiated, are completed or within one year from the end of the financial
year in which order of Commissioner (Appeals) is received. Further,
under the existing provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of said section, in a case where the relevant assessment or other order
is the subject matter of revision under section 263 or section 264, the
penalty order shall be passed before the expiry of six months from the
end of the month in which such order of revision is passed.

76
It is proposed to amend the said section so as to provide that in
a case where the relevant assessment or other is the subject matter of
an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 246 or section
246A or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under section 253 or an
appeal to the High Court under section 260A or an appeal to the
Supreme Court under section 261 or revision under section 263 or
section 264 and an order imposing or enhancing or reducing or
cancelling penalty or dropping the proceedings for the imposition of
penalty is passed before the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or
the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court is
received by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner or the order
of revision under section 263 or section 264 is passed, an order
imposing or enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping
the proceedings for the imposition of penalty may be passed on the
basis of assessment as revised by giving effect to such order of the
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court
or the Supreme Court or order of revision under section 263 or section
264. It is further proposed to provide that no order of imposing or
enhancing or reducing or cancelling penalty or dropping the
proceedings for the imposition of penalty shall be passed after the
expirty of six months from the end of the month in which the order
of the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal or  the High
Court or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner or
the Commissioner or the order of revision under section 263 or
section 264 is passed.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives the assent of the President.
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 288B of the Income-tax Act
relating to rounding off of tax, etc.
The existing provisions of the said section provides that the amount
of tax (including tax deductible at source or payable in advance),
interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, and the amount of
refund due, under the provisions of the Income-tax Act shall be
rounded off to the nearest rupee.
It is proposed to substitute the said section by a new section so
as to provide that any amount payable, and the amount of refund
due, under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to the

77
nearest multiple of ten rupees and for this purpose any part of a
rupees consisting of paise shall be ignored and thereafter if such
amount is not a multiple of ten, then, if the last figure in that amount
is five or more, the amount shall be increased to the next higher
amount which is a multiple of ten and if the last figure is less than
five the amount shall be reduced to the next lower amount which is
a multiple of ten.
This amendment will take effect from the date on which the Bill
receives the assent of the President.
Customs
Clause 17 seeks to insert sub-section (5) in section 17 of the Customs
Act, 1962 to provide for a speaking order within fifteen days from the
date of assessment of a bill of entry or a shipping bill in the event the
assessing officer is of a view contrary to the claim of the importer or
exporter regarding valuation of goods, classification, exemption or
concessions of duty availed consequent to any notification under the
Act.
Clause 18 seeks to insert sub-section (3), sub-section (4) and sub-
section (5) to section 18 of the Customs Act, 1962 to provide for a
mechanism to regularize the payments of duty short levied and interest
thereon and duties that are to be refunded on finalisation of a
provisional assessment.
Clause 19 seeks to—
(i) insert sub-section (1A) and provisos to sub-section (2) in
section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962 so as to provide an option for
voluntary payment within thirty days of receipt of a notice by an
importer or exporter or any other person who has been issued
with the show cause notice for evasion of duty on suppression of
facts and wilful mis-statement or for by reason of collusion under
the proviso to sub-section (1).
(ii) envisage a reduced amount of penalty at the rate of twenty-
five per cent of the duty specified in the notice, to avail, the
option, such person may pay the duty specified in the said notice
either in full along with interest and penalty at the rate of twenty-
five per cent, of the duty paid or a part thereof along with interest
and penalty at the rate of twenty-five per cent, of the duty so
accepted and paid.

78
(iii) The scheme also envisages termination of proceedings
against the co-noticee if any, to the proceeding in the event of
payment of duty in full along with interest and twenty five per
cent of duty is paid as penalty within thirty days of receipt of the
notice.
Clause 20 seeks to insert a new section 28BA in the Customs Act,
1962 to provide for provisional attachment of property belonging to a
person to whom a notice is served under sub-section (1) of section 28
or sub-section (2) of section 28BA to protect the interest of revenue in
certain cases.
Clause 21 seeks to amend section 104 of the Customs Act, 1962 to
include within its ambit the power to arrest a person who has
committed an offence punishable under section 132 or 133 or 135A or
136.
Clause 22 seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 108 of the
Customs Act, 1962 to empower the Central Government to designate
a gazetted officer of Customs to be empowered under the Act for the
purpose of summoning any person whose attendance he considers
necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or any
other thing in any inquiry under the Act.
Clause 23 seeks to insert a new section 110A in the Customs Act,
1962 to facilitate provisional release of goods, documents and things
seized pending adjudication.
Clause 24 seeks to insert a new section 114AA in the Customs Act,
1962 to provide for penalty for use of false and incorrect material,
declaration, statement, etc., in the transaction of any business for the
purpose of the Act.
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 124 of the Customs Act, 1962 to
provide for prior approval of the officer of a rank not below that of
a Deputy Commissioner of Customs before issuing a show cause notice
proposing for confiscation of seized goods under the Act.
Clause 26   proposes to amend sub-section (2) of section 129D of
the Customs Act to facilitate an officer other than the adjudicating
authority to file an appeal before  the Commissioner (Appeals) or the
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.

79
Clause 27 proposes to amend section 132 of the Customs Act, 1962
to enhance the maximum punishment from six months to two years
in cases, where a declaration, document, statement, etc., containing
false and incorrect information material particular is produced in the
transaction of business under the Act.
Clause 28 seeks to amend section 133 of the Customs Act to enhance
the maximum punishment of imprisonment from six months to two
years in cases of obstruction to the customs officers while performing
their duties.
Clause 29 of the Customs Act, 1962 seeks to amend sub-section (1)
of section 137 to provide for prior sanction for prosecution of offences
under section 135A in relation to preparations.
Clause 30 seeks to insert a new section 154B in the Customs Act,
which empowers the Central Government to publish the names and
other particular information relating to any proceedings or prosecutions
under the Act in respect of any person as the Central Government
may think fit. Sub-section (2) provides that no publication shall be
made in relation to any penalty imposed under the Act if the time of
presenting an appeal before the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Tribunal
has expired without an appeal having been presented or has been
disposed of. It is also provided to publish the names of directors,
managing agents, secretaries, treasurers or managers of the company
or the partners of a firm.
Customs Tariff
Clause 31 seeks to amend the first proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 8B of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 to remove the ambiguity
concerning exemption from an application of safeguard duty for
developing countries with a view to align with corresponding provision
under Article 9.1 of WTO Agreement of Safeguard.
Excise
Clause 32 seeks to—
(i) insert sub-section (1A) and provisos to sub-section (2) in
section 11A of the Central Excise Act, so as to provide an option
for voluntary payment within thirty days of receipt of a notice by
a producer, manufacturer or any other person who has been issued
with the show cause notice for evasion of duty on account of
fraud, suppression of facts and wilful misstatement or for erroneous
refund under the proviso to sub-section (1).

80
(ii) envisage a reduced amount of penalty at twenty-five per
cent. of the duty specified in the notice. To avail the option such
person may pay the duty specified in the said notice either in full
along with interest and penalty at the rate of twenty-five per cent.,
of the duty paid or a part thereof along with interest and penalty
at twenty five-per cent, of the duty so accepted and paid. The
scheme also envisages termination of proceedings against the co-
noticee if any, to the proceeding in the event of payment of duty
in full alongwith interest and twenty-five per cent. of duty is paid
as penalty within thirty days of receipt of the notice.
Clause 33 seeks to insert a new section 11DDA in the Central
Excise Act, 1944 to provide for provisional attachment of property
belonging to a person to whom a notice is served under sub-section
(1) of 11A or sub-section (2) of 11D to protect revenue in certain cases.
Clause 34 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 35E of the
Central Excise Act, 1944 to facilitate an officer other than the
adjudicating authority to file an appeal before the Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
Clause 35 seeks to insert a new section 37E in the Central Excise
Act to provide for publication of information relating to any
proceedings or prosecutions under the Act in respect of such person
as the Central Government may think fit. Sub-section (2) categorically
prescribes that no publication shall be made in relation to any penalty
imposed under the act until the time of presenting an appeal, before
the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Tribunal, has been expired without
an appeal having been presented or has been disposed of. It is also
provided to publish the names of directors, managing agents,
secretaries, treasurers or managers of the company or the partners of
a firm.
Clause 36 seeks insert two provisos in sub-rule (3) of rule 16 of the
Central Excise Rules, 2002 retrospectively for the period from 29th day
of May 2003 and ending with 8th day of July, 2004 to declare
independent wire drawing units as “assessee” to resolve multiple
proceedings and also to redress the grievances of discrimination against
wire drawing units. The process of “wire drawing” from “wire rods”
has been held as not amounting to manufacture by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, the benefit of credit of duty availed by the manufacturers
was withdrawn on 29.5.2003 by a circular issued by the Board.
However, certain manufacturers continued to pay duty and to pass on

81
the credit to the ultimate buyer for further manufacture. By an
amendment vide section 89 of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004, note 10
was inserted in Section XV of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 to
declare the said process as ‘manufacture’.
Miscellaneous
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 25 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 to provide for transfer of proceedings relating to inter-State
disputes falling under section 6A read with section 9 of the said Act
pending before an appellate authority of a State or the Union territory
to the Authority notified under section, sub-section (j) of section 24 of
the said Act.

82
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the Income-tax
Act so as to provide that the Tax Recovery Officer may also exercise
or perform such powers and functions which are conferred on, or
assigned to, an Assessing Officer. The proposed amendment empowers
the Central baord of Direct Taxes to Prescribe, by rules, such powers
and functions to be exercised by the Tax Recovery Officer.
2. Item (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert
two new provisos after the eighth proviso in clause (23C) of section
10 of the Income-tax Act relating to incomes not included in the total
income. In the tenth proviso as so inserted after the ninth proviso, it
is proposed that where the total income of the fund or trust or
institution or any university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or
sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), without giving
effect tot he provisions of the said sub-clauses of clause (23C) of section
10, exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax in
any previous year, such trust or institution or university or other
educational institution or hospital or other medical institution shall
get its accounts audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation
below sub-section (2) of section 288 and furnish along with the return
of income for the relevant assessment year, the audited accounts and
the report of such audit in the prescribed form. This proviso confers
power upon the Central Board of Direct Taxes to notify, by rules made
by it, the form in which such report of audit is to be furnished along
with the return of income and the particulars which such report shall
contain.
3. Sub-clause (a) of clause 5 seeks to empower the Central Board
of Direct Taxes to prescribe the guidelines, the manner and the
conditions subject to which approval is to be granted to an association
university, college or other institution under clause (ii) of sub-section
(1) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act. Sub-clause (b) of clause 5
seeks to empower the Central Board of Direct Taxes to prescribe the
guidelines, the manner and the conditions subject to which approval
is to be granted to a university, college or other institution under
clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance
with the aforesaid provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure or
detail and it is not practical to provide for them in the Bill itself.
5. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal
character.

83
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE I NCOME-TAX A CT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* * * * *
(44) “Tax Recovery Officer” means any
Income-tax Officer who may be authorised by
the Chief Commissioner or Commission, by
general or special order in writing, to exercise
the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer;
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
I
NCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF
TOTAL I NCOME
10. In computing the total income of a
previous year of any person, any income falling
within any of the following clauses shall not
be included—
* * * * *
(23C) any income received by any person
on behalf of—
(i) the Prime Minister’s National relief
Fund; or
(ii) the Prime Minister’s Fund
(Promotion of Folk Art); or
(iii) the Prime Minister‘s Aid to
Students Fund; or
(iiia) the National Foundation for
Communal Harmony; or
Definitions.
Income not
included in
total
income.

84
(iiiab) any university or other
educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes
of profit, and which is wholly or
substantially financed by the Government;
or
(iiiac) any hospital or other institution
for the reception and treatment of persons
suffering from illness or mental
defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence
or persons requiring medical attention or
rehabilitation, existing solely for
philanthropic purposes and not for
purposes of profit, and which is wholly or
substantially financed the Government; or
(iiiad) any university or other
educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes
of profit if the aggregate annual receipts of
such university or educational institution do
not exceed the amount of annual receipts
as may be prescribed; or
(iiiae) any hospital or other institution
for the reception and treatment of persons
suffering from illness or mental
defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence
or of persons requiring medical attention
or rehabilitation, existing solely for
philanthropic purposes and not for
purposes of profit, if the aggregate annual
receipts of such hospital or institution do
not exceed the amount of annual receipts
as may be prescribed; or
(iv) any other fund or institution
established for charitable purposes which
may be notified by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette, having regard to the
objects of the fund or institution and its
importance throughout India or throughout
any State or States; or

85
(v) any trust (including any other legal
obligation) or institution wholly for public
religious purposes of wholly for public
religious and charitable purposes, which
may be notified by the Central Government
in Official Gazette, having regard to the
manner in which the affairs of the trust or
institution are administered and supervised
for ensuring that the income accruing
thereto is properly applied for the objects
thereof;
(vi) any university or other educational
institution existing solely for educational
purposes and not for purposes of profit,
other than those mentioned in sub-clause
(iiiab) or sub-clause (iiiad) and which may
be approved by the prescribed authority;
or
(via) any hospital or other institution
for the reception and treatment of persons
suffering from illness or mental
defectiveness or for the reception and
treatment of persons during convalescence
or of persons requiring medical attention
or rehabilitation, existing solely for
philanthropic purposes of profit, other than
those mentioned in sub-clause (iiiac) or sub-
clause (iiiae) and which may be approved
by the prescribed authority:
Provided that the fund or trust or
institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution referred to in sub-clause
(iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-
clause (via) shall  make an application in the
prescribed form and manner to the prescribed
authority for the purposes of grant of the
exemption, or continuance thereof, under sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or
sub-clause (via):

86
Provided further that the Central
Government, before notifying the fund or trust
or institution, or the prescribed authority , before
approving any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical
institution, under sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause
(v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via), may
call for such documents (including audited
annual accounts) or information from the fund
or trust or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution, as the case may be, as it
thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself about
the genuineness of the activities of the fund or
trust or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution, as the case may be, and
the Central Government or the prescribed
authority, as the case may be, may also make
such inquiries as it deems necessary in this
behalf:
Provided also that the fund or trust or
institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv)
or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause
(via)—
(a) applies  its income, or accumulates
it for application, wholly and exclusively
to the objects for which it is establishment
and in a case where more than fifteen per
cent. of its income is accumulated on or
after the 1st day of April, 2003, the period
of the accumulation of the amount
exceeding fifteen per cent. of its income
shall in no case exceed five years; and
(b) does not invest or deposit its fund,
other than—
(i) any assets held by the funds,
trust or institution or any university or
other educational institution or any

87
hospital or other medical institution
where such assets form part of the
corpus of the fund, trust or institution
or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other
medical institutions as on the 1st day
of June, 1973;
(ia) any asset, being equity shares
of a public company, held by any
university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other
medical institution where such assets
form part of the corpus of any
university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other
medical institution as on the 1st day of
June, 1998;
(ii) any assets (being debentures
issued by, or on behalf of, any company
or corporation), acquired by the fund,
trust or institution or any university or
other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution
before the 1st day of March, 1983;
(iii) any accretion to the shares,
forming part of the corpus mentioned
in sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ia), by
way of bonus shares allotted to the
fund, trust or institution or any
university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other
medical institution;
(iv) voluntary contribution received
and maintained in the form of jewellery,
furniture or any other article as the
Board may , by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify ,
for any period during the previous year
otherwise than in any one or more of the forms
or modes specified in the sub-section (5) of
section 11:

88
Provided also that the exemption under
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) shall not be
denied in relation to any funds invested or
deposited before the 1st day of April, 1989,
otherwise than in any one or more of the forms
or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section
11 if such funds do not continue to remain so
invested or deposited after the 30th day of
March, 1993:
Provided also that the exemption under
sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) shall not be
denied in relation to any funds invested or
deposited before the 1st day of June, 1998,
otherwise than in any one or more of the forms
or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section
11 if such funds do not continue to remain so
invested or deposited after the 30th day of
March, 2001:
Provided also that the exemption under
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause
(vi) or sub-clause (via) shall not denied in
relation to voluntary contribution, other than
voluntary contribution in cash or voluntary
contribution of the nature referred to in clause
(b) of the third proviso to this sub-clause,
subject tot he condition that such voluntary
contribution is not held by the trust or
institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution, otherwise than in any one
or more of the forms or modes specified in
sub-section (5) of section 11, after the expiry of
one year from the end of the previous year in
which such asset is acquired or the 31st day of
March, 1992, whichever is later:
Provided also that nothing contained in
sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause
(vi) or sub-clause (via) shall apply in relation
to any income of the fund or trust or institution
or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical
institution, being profits and gains of business,

89
unless the business is incidental to the
attainment of its objectives and separate books
of account are maintained by it in respect of
such business:
Provided also that any notification issued
by the Central Government under sub-clause
(iv) or sub-clause (v) shall, at any one time,
have effect for such assessment year of years,
not exceeding three assessment years (including
an assessment year or years commencing before
the date on which such notification is issued
as may be specified in the notification:
Provided also that any amount of donation
received by the fund or institution in terms of
clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 80G in
respect of which accounts of income and
expenditure have not been rendered to the
authority prescribed under clause (v) of sub-
section (5C) of that section, in the manner
specified in that clause, or which has been
utilized for purposes other than providing relief
to the victims of earthquake in Gujarat or
which remains unutilised in terms of sub-
section (5C) of section 80G and not transferred
to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund
on or before the 31st day of March, 2004 shall
be deemed to be the income of the previous
year and shall accordingly by charged to tax:
Provided also that where the fund or trust
or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other
medical institution referred to in sub-clause (iv)
or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause
(via) does not apply its income during the year
of receipt and accumulates it, any payment or
credit out of such accumulation to any trust or
institution registered under section 12AA or to
any fund or trust or institution or any
university or other educational institution or
any hospital or other medical institution
referred to in sub-clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)
or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause (via) shall not

90
be treated as application of income to the
objects for which such fund or trust or
institution or university or educational
institution or hospital or other medical
institution, as the case may be, is established:
Provided also that where the fund or
institution referred to in sub-clause (iv) or trust
or institution referred to in sub-clause (v) is
notified by the Central Government or any
university or other educational institution
referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital or
other medical institution referred to in sub-
clause (via), is approved by the prescribed
authority and subsequently that Government or
the prescribed authority is satisfied that—
(i) such fund or institution or trust or
any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical
institution has not—
(A) applied its income in
accordance with the provisions
contained in clause (a) of the third
proviso; or
(B) invested or deposited its funds
in accordance with the provisions
contained in clause (b) of the third
proviso; or
(ii) the activities of such fund or
institution or trust or any university or
other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution—
(A) are not genuine; or
(B) are not being carried out in
accordance with all or any of the
conditions subject to which it was
notified or approved,
it may, at any time after giving a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the

91
proposed action to the concerned fund or
institution or trust or any university or other
educational institution or  any hospital or other
medical institution, rescind the notification or,
by order, withdraw the approval, as the case
may be, and forward a copy of the order
rescinding the notification or withdrawing the
approval to such fund or institution or trust or
any university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution and
to the Assessing Officer;
12A. The provisions of section 11 and
section 12 shall  not apply in relations to the
income of any trust or institution unless the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(b) where the total income of the trust
or institution as computed under this Act
without giving effect to the provisions of
section 11 and section 12 exceeds fifty
thousand rupees in any previous year, the
accounts of the trust or institution for that
year have been audited by an accountant
as defined in the Explanation below  sub-
section (2) of section 288 and the person in
receipt of the income furnishes along with
the return of income for the relevant
assessment year the report of such audit in
the prescribed form duly signed and
verified by such accountant and setting
forth such particulars as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
35. (i) In respect of expenditure on scientific
research, the following deductions shall be
allowed—
* * * * *
(ii) an amount equal to one and one-
fourth times of any sum paid a scientific
research association which has as its object
the undertaking of scientific research or to
a university, college or other institution to
be used for scientific research:
Conditions
as to regis-
tration of
trusts, etc.
Expenditure
on scientific
research.

92
Provided that such association,
university, college or institution is for the
time being approved for the purposes of
this clause by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;
(iii) an amount equal to one and one-
forth times of any sum paid to a university,
college or other institution to be used for
research in special science or statistical
research:
Provided that such university, college
or institution is for the time being approved
for the purposes of this clause by the
Central Government by notification in the
Official gazette;
(iv) in respect of any expenditure of a
capital nature on scientific research related
to the business carried on by the assessee,
such deduction as may be admissible under
the provisions of sub-section (2):
Provided that the scientific research
association, university, college or other
institution referred to in clause (ii) or clause
(iii) shall make an application in the
prescribed form and manner to the Central
Government for the purpose of grant of
approval, or continuance thereof, under
clause (ii) or, as the case may be, clause
(iii):
Provided further that the Central
Government may, before granting approval
under clause (ii) or clause (iii), call for such
documents (including audited annual
accounts) or information from the scientific
research association, university, college or
other institution as it thinks necessary in
order to satisfy itself about the genuineness
of the activities of the scientific research
association, university, college or other
institution and that authority may also

93
make such inquiries as it may deem
necessary in this behalf:
Provided that any notification issued by
the Central Government under clause (ii)
or clause (iii) shall, at any one time, have
effect for such assessment year or years,
not exceeding three assessment years
(including an assessment year or years
commencing before the date on which such
notification is issued) as may be specified
in the notification.
* * * * *
40. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in sections 30 to 38, the following
amounts shall not be deducted in computing
the income  chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession”—
(a) in the case of any assessee—
* * * * *
(ia) any interest, commission or
brokerage, fees for professional services or
fees for technical services payable to a
resident, or amounts payable to a contractor
or sub-contractor, being resident, for
carrying out any work (including supply
of labour for carrying out any work), on
which tax is deductible at source under
chapter XVII-B and such texts has not been
deducted or, after deduction, has not been
paid during the previous year, or in the
subsequent year before the expiry of the
time prescribed under sub-section (1) of
section 200:
Provided that where in respect of any
such sum, tax has been deducted in any
subsequent year or, has been deducted in
the previous year but paid in any
subsequent year after the expiry of the time
prescribed under sub-section (1) of
Amounts
not
deductible.

94
section 200, such sum shall be allowed as
a deduction in computing the income of
the previous year in which such tax has
been paid.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
sub-clause,—
(i) “commission or brokerage” shall
have the same meaning as in clause (i)
of the Explanation to section 194H;
(ii) “fees for technical services” shall
have the same meaning as in
Explanation  2 to clause (vii) of sub-
section (1) of section 9;
(iii) “professional services“ shall
have the same meaning as in clause (a)
of the Explanation to section 194J;
(iv) “work” shall have the same
meaning as in Explanation III to section
194C;
* * * * *
40A. (1) The provisions of this section shall
have effect notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other provision of
this Act relating to the computation of income
under the head “Profits and gains of business
or profession”.
(2) (a) Where the assessee incurs any
expenditure in respect of which payment has
been or is to be made to any person referred
to in clause (b) of this sub-section, and the
Assessing Officer is of opinion that such
expenditure in excessive or unreasonable having
regard to the fair market value of the goods,
services of facilities for which the payment is
made or the legitimate needs of the business
or profession of the assessee or the benefit
derived by or accruing to him therefrom, so
much of the expenditure as is so considered
Expenses or
payments
not
deductible
in certain
circumstances.

95
by him to be excessive or unreasonable shall
not be allowed as a deduction.
(b) The persons referred to in clause (a)
are the following, namely:—
(i) where the assessee any relative of the
is an individual assessee;
(ii) where the assessee any director of the
is a company, firm, company, partner of
association of persons the firm, or
or Hindu undivided member of the
family association or
family, or any
relative of such
director, partner or
member;
(iii) any individual who has substantial
interest in the business or profession of the
assessee, or any relative of such individual;
(iv) a company, firm, association of
persons or Hindu undivided family having
a substantial interest in the business or
profession of the assessee or any director,
partner or member of such company, firm,
association or family, or any relative of such
director, partner or member;
(v) a company, firm, association of
persons or Hindu undivided family of
which a director, partner or member, as the
case may be, has a substantial interest in
the business or profession of the assessee,
or any director, partner or member of such
company, firm, association or family or any
relative of such director, partner or member;
(vi) any person who carries on a
business or profession,—
(A) where the assessee being an
individual, or any relative of such assessee,
has a substantial interest in the business or
profession of that persons; or

96
(B) where the assessee being a company,
firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided
family, or any director of such company, partner
of such firm or member of the association or
family, or any relative of such director, partner
or member, has a substantial interest in the
business or profession of that person.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-
section, a person shall be deemed to have a
substantial interest in a business or profession,
if,—
(a) in a case where the business or
profession is carried on by a company, such
person is, at any time during the previous
year, the beneficial owner of shares (not
being shares entitled to a fixed rate of
dividend whether with or without a right
to participate in profits) carrying not less
than twenty per cent of the voting power;
and
(b) in any other case, such person is,
at any time during the previous year
beneficially entitled to not less than twenty
per cent of the profits of such business or
profession.
(3) Where the assessee incurs any
expenditure in respect of which payment is
made, after such date (not being later than the
31st day of March, 1969) and may be specified
in this behalf by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette, in a sum
exceeding twenty thousand rupees otherwise
than by a crossed cheque drawn on a bank or
by a crossed bank draft, twenty per cent of
such expenditure shall not be allowed as a
deduction:
Provided that where an allowance has been
made in the assessment for any year not being
an assessment year commencing prior to the
1st day of April, 1969, in respect of any liability

97
incurred by the assessee for any expenditure
and subsequently during any previous year the
assessee makes any payment in respect thereof
in a sum exceeding twenty thousand rupees
otherwise than by a crossed cheque drawn on
a bank or by a crossed bank draft, the
allowance originally made shall be deemed to
have been wrongly made and the Assessing
Officer may recompute the total income of the
assessee for the previous year in which such
liability was incurred and make the necessary
amendment, and the provisions of section 154
shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the
period of four years specified in sub-section
(7) of that section being reckoned from the end
of the assessment year next following the
previous year in which the payment was so
made:
Provided further that no disallowance
under this sub-section shall be made where any
payment in a sum exceeding twenty thousand
rupees is made otherwise than by a crossed
cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank
draft, in such cases and under such
circumstances as may be prescribed, having
regard to the nature and extent of banking
facilities available, considerations of business
expediency and other relevant factors.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or in
any contract, where any payment in respect of
any expenditure has to be made by a crossed
cheque drawn on a bank or by a crossed bank
draft in order that such expenditure may not
be disallowed as a deduction under sub-section
(3), then the payment may be made by such
cheque or draft, and where the payment is so
made or tendered, no person shall be allowed
to raise, in any suit or other proceeding, a plea
based on the ground that the payment was not
made or tendered in cash or in any other
manner.
* * * * *

98
(7) (a) Subject to the provisions of clause
(b), no deduction shall be allowed in respect
of any provision (whether called as such or by
any other name) made by the assessee for the
payment of gratuity to his employees on their
retirement or on termination of their
employment for any reason.
(b) Nothing in clause (a) shall apply in
relation to any provision made by the assessee
for the purposes of payment of a sum by way
of any contribution towards an approved
gratuity fund, or for the purpose of payment
of any gratuity, that has become payable during
the previous year.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that where any provision
made by the assessee for the payment of
gratuity to his employees on their retirement
or termination of their employment for any
reason has been allowed as a deduction in
computing the income of the assessee for any
assessment year, any sum paid out of such
provision by way of contribution towards an
approved gratuity fund or by way of gratuity
to any employee shall not be allowed as a
deduction in computing the income of the
assessee of the previous year in which the sum
is so paid.
* * * * *
(9) No deduction shall be allowed in respect
of any sum paid by the assessee as an employer
towards the setting up or formation of, or as
contribution to, any fund, trust, company,
association of persons, body of individuals,
society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or other institution for
any purpose, except where such sum is so paid,
for the purposes and to the extent provided by
or under clause (iv) or clause (v) of sub-section
(1) of section 36, or as required by or under
any other law for the time being in force.
21 of 1860.

99
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (9), where the Assessing Officer is
satisfied that the fund, trust, company,
association of persons, body of individuals,
society or other institution referred to in that
sub-section has, before the 1st day of March,
1984, bona fide laid out or expended any
expenditure (not being in the nature of capital
expenditure) wholly and exclusively for the
welfare of the employees of the assessee
referred to in sub-section (9) out of the sum
referred to in that sub-section, the  amount of
such expenditure shall, in case no deduction
has been allowed to the assessee in respect of
such sum and subject to the other provisions
of this Act, be deducted in computing the
income referred to in section 28 of the assessee
of the previous year in which such expenditure
is so laid out or expended, as if such
expenditure had been laid out or expended by
the assessee.
(11) Where the assessee has, before the 1st
day of March, 1984, paid any sum to any fund,
trust, company , association of persons, body of
individuals, society or other institution referred
to in sub-section (9), then, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law or in any
instrument, he shall be entitled—
(i) to claim that so much of the amount
paid by him as has not been laid out or
expended by such fund, trust, company,
association of persons, body of individuals,
society or other institution (such amount being
hereinafter referred to as the unutilized amount)
be repaid to him, and where any claim is so
made, the unutilized amount shall be repaid,
as soon as may be, to him;
(ii) to claim that any asset, being land,
building, machinery, plant or furniture acquired
or constructed by the fund, trust, company,
association of persons, body of individuals,
society or other institution out of the sum paid

100
by the assessee, be transferred to him, and
where any claim is so made, such asset shall
be transferred, as soon as may be, to him.
* * * * *
56. (1) * * * * *
(2) in particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the provisions of sub-section
(1), the following incomes, shall be chargeable
to income-tax under the head “Income from
other sources”, namely:—
(i) dividends;
(ia) income referred to in sub-clause
(viii) of clause (24) of section 2;
(ib) income referred to in sub-clause (ix)
of clause (24) of section 2;
(ic) income referred to in sub-clause (x)
of clause (24) of section 2, if such income
is not chargeable to income-tax under the
head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”;
(id) income by way of interest on
securities, if the income is not chargeable
to income-tax under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”;
(ii) income from machinery, plant or
furniture belonging to the assessee and let
on hire, if the income is not chargeable to
income-tax under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”;
(iii) where an assessee lets on hire
machinery, plant or furniture belonging to
him and also buildings, and the letting of
the buildings is inseparable from the letting
of the said machinery, plant or furniture,
the income from such letting, if it is not
chargeable to income-tax under the head
“Profits and gains of business or
profession”;
Income
from other
sources.

101
(iv) income referred to in sub-clause (xi)
of clause (24) of section 2, if such income
is not chargeable to income-tax under the
head “Profits and gains of business or
profession” or under the head “Salaries”.
(v) where any sum of money exceeding
twenty-five thousand rupees is received
without consideration by an individual or
a Hindu undivided family from any person
on or after the 1st day of September, 2004,
the whole of such sum:
Provided that this clause shall not apply to
any sum of money received—
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of
the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of
inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the
payer.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
clause, “relative” means—
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of
the individual;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the
parents of the individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant
of the individual;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant
of the spouse of the individual;
(vii) spouse of the persons referred to
in clause (ii) to (vi).
* * * * *

102
Chapter XIV
Procedure for Assessment
139. (1) * * * * *
(4C) Every—
(a) scientific research association
referred to in clause (21) of section 10;
(b) news agency referred to in clause
(22B) of section 10;
(c) association or institution referred to
in clause (23A) of section 10;
(d) institution referred to in clause (23B)
of section 10;
(e) fund or institution referred to in
sub-clause (iv) or trust or institution
referred to in sub-clause (v) or any
university or other educational institution
referred to in sub-clause (vi) or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in
sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section
10;
(f) trade union referred to in sub-clause
(a) or association referred to in sub-clause
(b) of clause (24) of section 10,
shall, if the total income in respect of which
such scientific research association, news agency,
association or institution, fund or trust or
university or other educational institution or
any hospital or other medical institution or
trade union is assessable, without giving effect
to the provisions of section 10, exceeds the
maximum amount which is not chargeable to
income-tax, furnish a return of such income of
the previous year in the prescribed form and
verified in the prescribed manner and setting
forth such other particulars as may be
prescribed and all the provisions of this Act
shall, so far as may be, apply as if it were a
Return of
income.

103
return required to be furnished under sub-
section (1).
* * * * *
143. (1) * * * * *
(3) On the day specified in the notice,—
(i) issued under clause (i) of sub-section
(2), or as soon afterwards as may be, after
hearing such evidence and after taking into
account such particulars as the assessee
may produce, the Assessing Officer shall,
by an order in writing, allow or reject the
claim or claims specified in such notice and
make an assessment determining the total
income or loss accordingly, and determine
the sum payable by the assessee on the
basis of such assessment;
(ii) issued under clause (ii) of sub-
section (2), or as soon afterwards as may
be, after hearing such evidence as the
assessee may produce and such other
evidence as the Assessing Officer may
require on specified points, and after taking
into account all relevant material which he
has gathered, the Assessing Officer shall,
by an order in writing, make an assessment
of the total income or loss of the assessee,
and determine the sum payable by him or
refund of any amount due to him on the
basis of such assessment:
Provided that in the case of a—
(a) scientific research association
referred to in clause (21) of section 10;
(b) news agency referred to in clause
(23B) of section 10;
(c) association or institution referred to
in clause (23A) of section 10;
(d) institution referred to in clause (23B)
of section 10;
Assessment.

104
(e) fund or institution referred to in sub-
clause (iv) or trust or institution referred to in
sub-clause (v) or any university or other
educational institution referred to in sub-clause
(vi) or any hospital or other medical institution
referred to in sub-clause (via) of clause (23C)
of section 10,
which is required to furnish the return of
income under sub-section (4C) of section 139,
no order making an assessment of the total
income or loss of such scientific research
association, news agency, association or
institution or fund or trust or university or
other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution, shall be made by the
Assessing officer, without giving effect to the
provisions of section 10, unless—
(i) the Assessing Officer has intimated
the Central Government or the prescribed
authority the contravention of the
provisions of clause (21) or clause (22B) or
clause (23A) or clause (23B) or sub-clause
(iv) or sub-clause (v) or sub-clause (vi) or
sub-clause (via) of clause (23C) of section
10, as the case may be, by such scientific
research association, news agency,
association or institution or fund or trust
or university or other educational institution
or any hospital or other medical institution,
where in his view such contravention has
taken place; and
(ii) the approval granted to such
scientific research association or other
association or institution or university or
other educational institution or hospital or
other medical institution has been
withdrawn or notification issued in respect
of such news agency or fund or trust or
institution has been rescinded.
* * * * *

105
194I. Any person, not being an individual
or a Hindu undivided family, who is
responsible for paying to a resident any
income by way of rent, shall, at the time of
credit of such income to the account of the
payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash
or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any
other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct
income-tax thereon at the rate of—
(a) fifteen per cent, if the payee is an
individual or a Hindu undivided family;
and
(b) twenty per cent in other case:
Provided that no deduction shall be made
under this section where the amount of such
income or, as the case may be, the aggregate
of the amounts of such income credited or paid
or likely to be credited or paid during the
financial year by the aforesaid person to the
account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed
one hundred and twenty thousand rupees:
Provided further that an individual or a
Hindu undivided family, whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or
profession carried on by him exceed the
monetary limits specified under clause (a) or
clause (b) of section 44AB during the financial
year immediately preceding the financial year
in which such income by way of rent is
credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct
income-tax under this section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section—
(i) “rent” means any payment, by
whatever name called, under any lease,
sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement
or arrangement for the use of any land or
any building (including factory building),
together with furniture, fittings and the
land appurtenant thereto, whether or not
such building is owned by the payee;
Rent.

106
(ii) where any income is credited to any
account, whether called “Suspense account”
or by any other name, in the books of
account of the person liable to pay such
income, such crediting shall be deemed to
be credited of such income to the account
of the payee and the provisions of this
section shall apply accordingly.
194J. (1) Any person, not being an
individual or a Hindu undivided family, who
is responsible for paying to a resident any sum
by way of—
(a) fees for professional services, or
(b) fees for technical services,
shall, at the time of credit of such sum to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment
thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft
or by any other mode, whichever is earlier,
deduct an amount equal to five per cent. of
such sum as income-tax on income comprised
therein:
Provided that no deduction shall be made
under this section—
(A) from any sums as aforesaid credited
or paid before the 1st day of July, 1995; or
(B) where the amount of such sum or,
as the case may be, the aggregate of the
amounts of such sums credited or paid or
likely to be credited or paid during the
financial year by the aforesaid person to
the account of, or to, the payee, does not
exceed—
(i) twenty thousand rupees, if the
case of fees for professional services
referred to in clause (a), or
(ii) twenty thousand rupees, in the
case of fees for technical services
referred to in clause (b):
Fees for
professional
or technical
services.

107
Provided further that an individual or a
Hindu undivided family, whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or
profession carried on by him exceed the
monetary limits specified under clause (a) or
clause (b) of section 44AB during the financial
year immediately preceding the financial year
in which such sum by way of fees for
professional services or technical services is
credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct
income-tax under this section:
Provided also that no individual or a Hindu
undivided family referred to in the second
proviso shall be liable to deduct income-tax on
the sum by way of fees for professional services
in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively
for personal purposes of such individual or any
member of Hindu undivided family.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “professional services” means
services rendered by a person in the course
of carrying on legal, medical, engineering
or architectural procession or the profession
of accountancy or technical consultancy or
interior decoration or advertising or such
other profession as is notified by the Board
for the purposes of section 44AA or of this
section;
(b) “fees for technical services” shall
have the same meaning as in Explanation 2
to clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section
9;
(c) where any sum referred to in sub-
section (1) is credited to any account,
whether called “suspense account” or by
any other name, in the books of account of
the person liable to pay such sum, such
crediting shall be deemed to be credit of
such sum to the account of the payee and
the provisions of this section shall apply
accordingly.

108
288B. The amount of tax (including tax
deductible at source or payable in advance),
interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable,
and the amount of refund due, under the
provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to
the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where
such amount contained a part of a rupee
consisting of paise then, if such part is fifty
paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupee
and if such part is less than fifty paise it shall
be ignored.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE C USTOMS A CT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
* * * * *
28. (1) * * * * *
(2) The proper officer, after considering the
representation, if any, made by the person on
whom notice is served under sub-section (1),
shall determine the amount of duty or interest
due from such person (not being in excess of
the amount specified in the notice) and
thereupon such person shall pay the amount
so determined.
* * * * *
104. (1) If an officer of customs empowered
in this behalf by general or special order of
the Commissioner of customs has reason to
believe that any person in India or within the
Indian customs waters has been guilty of an
offence punishable under section 135, he may
arrest such person and shall, as soon as may
be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.
* * * * *
108. (1) Any gazetted officer of customs
shall have power to summons any person
whose attendance he considers necessary either
to give evidence or to produce a document or
any other thing in any inquiry which such
Rounding
off of tax,
etc.
Notice for
payment of
duties,
interest, etc.
Power to
arrest.
Power to
summons
persons to
give
evidence
and
produce
documents.

109
officer is making in connection with the
smuggling of any goods.
* * * * *
124. No order confiscating any goods or
imposing any penalty on any person shall be
made under this Chapter unless the owner of
the goods or such person—
(a) is given a notice in writing
informing him of the grounds on which it
is proposed to confiscate the goods or to
impose a penalty;
(b) is given an opportunity of making
a representation in writing within such
reasonable time as may be specified in the
notice against the grounds of confiscation
or imposition of penalty mentioned therein;
and
(c) is given reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter:
Provided that the notice referred to in
clause (a) and the representation referred
to in clause (b) may, at the request of the
person concerned be oral.
* * * * *
129D. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Commissioner of Customs may, of
his own motion, call for and examine the record
of any proceeding in which an adjudicating
authority subordinate to him has passed any
decision or order under this Act for the purpose
of satisfying himself as to the legality or
propriety of any such decision or order and
may, by order, direct such authority to apply
to the Commissioner (Appeals) for the
determination of such points arising out of the
decision or order as may be specified by the
Commissioner of Customs in his order.
* * * * *
Issue of
show cause
notice
before
confiscation
of goods,
etc.
Powers of
Board or
Commissioner
of Customs
to pass
certain
orders.

110
CHAPTER XVI
OFFENCES AND P ROSECUTIONS
132. Whoever makes signs or uses, or
causes to be made, signed or used, any
declaration, statement or document in the
transaction of any business relating to the
customs, knowing or having reason to believe
that such declaration, statement or document
is false in any material particular, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with
both.
133. If any person intentionally obstructs
any officer of customs in the exercise of any
powers conferred under this Act, such person
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, or with both.
* * * * *
137. (1) No court shall take cognizance of
any offence under section 132, section 133,
section 134 or section 135, except with the
previous sanction of the commissioner of
Customs.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE C USTOMS T ARIFF A CT, 1975
(51 OF 1975)
* * * * *
8B. (1) If the Central Government, after
conducting such enquiry as it deems fit, is
satisfied that any article is imported into India
in such increased quantities and under such
conditions so as to cause or threatening to cause
serious injury to domestic industry, then, it may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, impose
a safeguard duty on that article:
False
declaration,
false
documents,
etc.
Obstruction
of officer of
customs.
Cognizance
of offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to impose
safeguard
duty.

111
Provided that no such duty shall be
imposed on an article originating from a
developing country so long as the share of
imports of that article from that country does
not exceed three percent or where the article is
originating from more than one developing
countries, then, so long as the aggregate of the
imports from all such countries taken together
does not exceed nine per cent of the total
imports of that article into India:
Provided further that the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, exempt such quantity of any article as
it may specify in the notification, when
imported from any country or territory into
India, from payment of the whole or part of
the safeguard duty leviable thereon.
(2) The Central Government may, pending
the determination under sub-section (1), impose
a provisional safeguard duty under this sub-
section on the basis of a preliminary
determination that increased imports have
caused or threatened to cause serious injury to
a domestic industry:
Provided that where, on final
determination, the Central Government is of the
opinion that increased imports have not caused
or threatened to cause serious injury to a
domestic industry, it shall refund the duty so
collected:
Provided further that the provisional
safeguard duty shall not remain in force for
more than two hundred days from the date on
which it was imposed.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), a notification
issued under sub-section (1) or any safeguard
duty imposed under sub-section (2), unless
specifically made applicable in such notification
or such imposition, as the case may be, shall

112
not apply to articles imported by a hundred
per cent. export-oriented undertaking or a unit
in a free trade zone or in a special economic
zone.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, the expressions “hundred per cent.
export-oriented undertaking”, “free trade zone”
and “special economic zone” shall have the
meanings assigned to them in Explanation 2 to
sub-section (1) of section 3 of Central Excise
Act, 1944.
(3) The duty chargeable under this section
shall be in addition to any other duty imposed
under this Act or under any other law for the
time being in force.
(4) The duty imposed under this section
shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to have effect
on the expiry of four years from the date of
such imposition:
Provided that if the Central Government is
of the opinion that the domestic industry has
taken measures to adjust to such injury or
threat thereof and it is necessary that the
safeguard duty should continue to be imposed,
it may extend the period of such imposition:
Provided further that in no case the
safeguard duty shall continue to be imposed
beyond a period of ten years from the date on
which such duty was first imposed.
(5) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purposes of this section, and without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,
such rules may provide for the manner in
which articles liable for safeguard duty may
be identified and for the manner in which the
causes of serious injury or causes of threat of
serious injury in relation to such articles may
be determined and for the assessment and
collection of such safeguard duty.
1 of 1944.

113
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “developing country” means a
country notified by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette for the purposes of
this section;
(b) “domestic industry” means the
producers—
(i) as a whole of the like article or
a directly competitive article in India;
or
(ii) whose collective output of the
like article or a directly competitive
article in India constitutes a major share
of the total production of the said
article in India;
(c) “serious injury” means an injury
causing significant overall impairment in
the position of a domestic industry;
(d) ‘threat of serious injury” means a
clear and imminent danger of serious injury.
(7) Every notification issued under this
section shall, as soon as may be after it is
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE C ENTRAL E XCISE A CT, 1944
(1 OF 1944)
* * * * *
11A (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Excise Officer shall, after
considering the representation, if any, made by
the person on whom notice is served under
sub-section (1), determine the amount of duty
of excise due from such person (not being in
Recovery of
duties not
levied or
not paid or
short levied
or short-
paid or
erroneously
refunded.

114
excess of the amount specified in the notice)
and thereupon such person shall pay the
amount so determined.
* * * * *
35E. (1)* * * * *
(2) The Commissioner of Central Excise
may, of his own motion, call for and examine
the record of any proceeding in which an
adjudicating authority subordinate to him has
passed any decision or order under this Act
for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the
legality or propriety of any such decision or
order and may, by order, direct such authority
to apply to the Commissioner (appeals) for the
determination of such points arising out of the
decision or order as may be specified by the
Commissioner of Central Excise in his order.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE C ENTRAL S ALES T AX A T, 1956
(74 OF 1956)
* * * * *
25. On and from the date when the
Authority is constituted under section 19, every
appeal arising out of the provisions contained
in this Chapter—
(i) which is pending immediately before
the constitution of such Authority before
the appellate authority constituted under
the general sales tax law of a State or of
the Union territory, as the case may be; or
(ii) which would have been required to
be taken before such Appellate Authority ,
shall stand transferred to such authority on
the date on which it is established.
* * * * *
Powers of
Board or
commission
of Central
Excise to
pass certain
orders.
Transfer of
pending
proceedings.

115
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Income tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962,
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944
and the Central Sales  Tax Act, 1956
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)