LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE
 ON FINANCE
(2005-06)
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Standing
Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Company Affairs]
THIRTY–SECOND REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
32


THIRTY–SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Company Affairs]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)


COF No. 32
Price : Rs. 14.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Tenth Edition) and Printed by S. Narayan & Sons,
B-88, Okhla Indl. Area, Phase-II, New Delhi-20.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF THE  COMMITTEE ................................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (iv)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies .................................................... 17
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .............................................................. 20
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 27
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 19
December, 2005 ............................................................................... 28
APPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the
Standing Committee on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
Company Affairs ............................................................................. 30

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE —2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K. S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R. P. Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha

(iv)
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S. P. M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P. K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S. B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T. G. Chandrashekhar — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Thirty
Second Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya
Sabha on 20th April, 2005. The Government furnished the replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations on 12 July, 2005. The draft Action
Taken Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on
Finance at their sitting held on 19 December, 2005.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI;
19 December, 2005
28 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)
MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in their Twentieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Company Affairs which was presented to
Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 April, 2005.
2. The Report contained eight recommendations. Action taken
notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4 and 5
(Total 5) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation Nos. 7
(Total 1) (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 6 and 8
(Total 2)  (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
(Total Nil) (Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

2
VANISHING COMPANIES
Recommendation SI. No. 6 (Para Nos. 51 and 52)
5. On the issue of “Vanishing Companies”, the Committee were
deeply anguished to note that not much was being done to address
investors’ grievances and save gullible investors from falling into the
trap of “vanishing companies”. Instances of investors continuing to be
duped by capital market swindlers were heard of as a matter of routine.
The Committee observed that the exercise of identifying “vanishing
companies” was undertaken by SEBI in the years 1998, 1999 and 2000.
Apart from this endeavour of SEBI, the Committee noted that the Ministry
of Company Affairs had not undertaken any serious exercise to maintain
a continuously updated database of “vanishing companies”. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government should take
suitable measures to identify the “vanishing companies”, debar the
promoters/directors of such companies permanently, so as to eliminate
any chances of them surfacing again and also ensure that the guilty
were punished under the due process of law. While the Committee noted
that the Government had launched prosecutions against “vanishing
companies” under the Companies Act as well as Indian Penal Code,
they felt that a lot more needs to be done. The Committee felt that unless
the regulators got serious about their investigations and found ways to
ensure that investors got back their money, the concept of investor
protection would remain meaningless.
6. The Committee also recommended that the Government should
take concrete measures to establish the veracity of Promoters and Directors
of companies, inclusive of their capacity to raise funds at the time of
their registration. They also felt that apart from ensuring penal action,
details of Promoters/Directors of vanishing companies need to be widely
publicized through newspapers and other media, which could contribute
to protecting investors’ interest.
7. The Government, in their action taken reply, have stated as
follows:
“The functions of SEBI under Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992 include protecting the interest of the investors in securities
and to promote the development of securities market by such measures
as it thinks fit. In pursuance of these responsibilities, following the 1992
stock market scam, SEBI had identified, by October, 2000, 229 companies,
which came out with IPOs during the period 1992-1998, as vanishing.

3
For identifying a company as vanished following Criteria has been
adopted:
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC
respectively for a period of 2 years;
(ii) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange from
the company for a long time;
(iii) No office of the company is located at the mentioned registered
office address at the time of Stock Exchange inspection.
All the conditions laid down have to be met for treating a company
as vanishing and companies satisfying one or more but not all conditions
may not be considered as vanishing.
A Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC), co-chaired by
Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA) and Chairman, SEBI was
set up in March, 1999 to settle the policy issues regarding the delinquent
companies/promoters and to monitor the progress in regard to action
against vanishing companies. The CMC is assisted by four Task Forces
one each corresponding to a Region falling under the jurisdiction of four
Regional Directors of Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA). Other members
of these Task Forces are representatives of SEBI, Regional Stock Exchange
and concerned Registrars of Companies. The main responsibility of these
Task Forces is to identify the companies which have disappeared, or
which have misutilised funds mobilised from the investors, and to
suggest/take appropriate action in terms of Companies Act or SEBI Act
or any other law applicable.
Following steps had been taken/ are being taken by the Ministry
against the vanishing companies and its promoters/ directors under the
relevant provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and under the Indian
Penal Code:
(i) Prosecutions have been filed under Sections 62/63,68 and 628
of the Companies Act, 1956 against vanishing companies for
misstatement in prospectus/ fraudulently inducing persons
to invest money/ false statement made in the offer documents
etc.
(ii) Prosecutions filed under the Companies Act, 1956 for non-
filing of statutory returns;
(iii) FIRs have been Filed/Registered under the Indian Penal Code
against the companies and its promoters/Directors of
vanishing companies.

4
(iv) Petitions have also been filed with the Company Law Board
under Sections 397/398/402/408 read with Section 406 of the
Companies Act, 1956 in respect of two selected vanishing
companies to disgorge the properties/monies fraudulently
obtained by promoters/Directors of these two vanishing
companies.
(v) The recommendations of the Expert Committee set up by the
Ministry to advise the Government on the new Company Law,
with regard to protecting the interest of the investors shall be
examined in the Ministry from the point of view of providing a
legal framework for safeguarding investor’s interest.
(vi) Details of Vanishing Companies and their Promoters/Directors
are already available on the Website of the Ministry
(www.dca.nic.in).
(vii) Ministry is also examining feasibility of taking appropriate
action against the Chartered Accountants (CAs) associated
with public issue of securities made by Vanishing Companies,
which had larger issue size (Rs. 10 crores or above).
CMC in its 14th meeting, held on 18.03.2005, had, inter alia , taken
following decisions:
(i) That the concerned Task Forces should continue to review the
working of Vanishing Companies, which had been deleted from
the list very closely for the next few years with a view to keeping
a close watch so that, such companies do not indulge in
fraudulent activities again.
(ii) The committee had decided that the Task Forces should
scrutinize IPOs which came during 1998-2001. Task Forces
are also scrutinizing the list of companies sent by one of the
Investors Association namely Midas Touch Investor
Association.
Hon’ble Minister of Company Affairs launched a new Website
http: //www.watchoutinvestors.com on 9.11.2004. This website has been
created by Prime Investors Protection Association and League, with
financial assistance from the Investor Education and Protection Fund,
help the investors to protect themselves from unscrupulous promoters,

5
companies and entities. This website is a national web- based registry
covering entities including companies, intermediaries and, wherever
available, persons associated with such entities, who have been indicted
for an economic default and/or for non-compliance of laws/guidelines.
It enables investors to do a free, fast and user-friendly search on such
entities/persons before making any new investments and for
continuously reviewing their existing portfolio vis-a vis  such entities.
This website also marks a step on the part of the Ministry in promoting
investor protection through various means including investor awareness
and education.
SEBI has invoked powers granted to it under Section11/Section 11
B of the SEBI Act, 1992 and has issued orders against the vanishing
companies and their promoters/Directors prohibiting them from
associating in any way with the capital market activities. This order also
prohibits them from dealing in securities and from accessing the capital
market for a period of 5 years, which is the maximum permissible under
the SEBI regulation. SEBI has debarred 100 companies and 378 Directors.
The Ministry of Company Affairs has set up in August, 2004 a
Monitoring Committee (MC) for closely monitoring all cases of
prosecutions launched under the Companies Act, 1956 and FIRs filed/
registered under the Indian Penal Code against vanishing companies
and their Directors. This Committee is co-chaired by Secretary, Ministry
of Company Affairs and Chairman, SEBI and includes senior officials of
various State Governments and the Commissioner of Police, Delhi or his
representative.
The Committee has met twice so far. The last meeting of MC was
held on 02.05.2005. Committee decided to take steps to closely monitor
the progress of action by regular exchange of information between the
Police authorities and the Registrar of Companies at the State level. State
authorities were further asked to nominate Nodal Officers for this purpose
to make coordination better and more effective association with the
Registrar of Companies.
The latest position regarding Region-wise cumulative action taken
against vanishing companies, their Directors/Promoters, is given below:

6
So far 21 directors promoters have been arrested by the Police
authorities in the State of Gujarat.
8. The Government in their reply, have also stated as follows:
“Government is committed to protecting the interests of investors.
The Expert Committee set up by the Ministry of Company Affairs to
advise the Government on the new Company Law has submitted its
report on 31st May, 2005. The recommendations of the Committee
with regard to establishing veracity of promoters and directors of
companies including for protection of interest of investors will be
examined in the Ministry from the point of view of providing a legal
framework for safeguarding investor’s interest. Implementation of
MCA 21 and use of digital signatures would reinforce the addresses,
veracity of promoters directors with a view to check this phenomena
of Vanishing Companies. Further, in order to check the fly by night
or frivolous companies from registration, sub-sections (3) & (4) of
Section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 were inserted in the Act
through Companies (Amendment) Act, 2000 which came into effect
from 13.12.2000. According to this amendment, every private and
public company shall have to bring in liquid minimum paid up
capital of one lakh rupees and five lakh rupees respectively at the
Northern Western Eastern Southern Total
Region Region Region Region
Number of vanishing 17 49 14 34 114
companies
Number of companies 27 48 11 31 107
against which prosecut-
ions filed under Sections
62/63, 68 & 628 of the
Companies Act, 1956
Number of companies 16 47 11 20 94
against which prosecut-
ions filed for, non-filing
of statutory returns
Number of companies 16 42 14 28 100
where FIRs filed.
Number of companies 9 41 13 24 87
where FIRs registered

7
time of incorporation itself. The above amendment was brought out
on the basis of the past experience that companies with small capital
base were registered and raised public issues and then they become
untraceable causing considerable damage to the investor
community. Separately, Securities and Exchange Board of India has
amended the SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines
to enforce higher disclosure requirements pertaining to promoters
of companies.
Details of Vanishing Companies and their promoters/directors are
already available on the Website of the Ministry (www.dca.nic.in).
Action is being taken for publishing the details of vanishing
companies through print media.”
9. The Committee are constrained to point out that the attempts
made by the Task Forces constituted to identify the number of
‘Vanishing Companies’ in addition to the 229 originally identified by
the SEBI have not been detailed in the action taken reply. From the
reply, the Committee also find that the number of Vanishing Companies
have declined from 229, identified in 2000 to 114 in 2005. The reasons
for this reduction have also not been detailed in the action taken reply.
In the circumstances the Committee believe that the Government have
not taken care to address the Central concern expressed by the
Committee with regard to Vanishing Companies. It is commonly known
that scores of companies are duping investors by fraudulently
misutilising the funds mobilised and disappearing overnight. The
Committee feel that it is essential to keep a strict tab on companies by
ensuring their whereabouts as well as by ascertaining the details of
the Promoters/Directors at the stage of registration itself. Punitive
action must be taken against those companies which do not intimate
changes in address etc., within the stipulated time-frame of 30 days.
10.  The Committee further note that the Government have
chosen to release the names of companies, intermediaries etc., indicted
for economic offences and/or for non-compliance of law/guidelines on
the newly launched website. The Committee, however, emphasize on
the need for ensuring that the data base on erring companies, inclusive
of ‘Vanishing Companies’ is continuously monitored and updated. The
Committee also desire that the Government should ensure that
adequate safeguards are provided so that a defaulting company is
penalised and ‘Vanishing Companies’ do not resurface or resume
operations under a different name or guise.

8
INSPECTION OF COMPANIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7th, Para Nos. 66 and 67)
11. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry towards
computerization under the MCA-21 e-governance Project, the Committee
noted with concern the explanation of the Government regarding the number
of inspections. The Committee observed that the number of inspections done
have gone up from 109 in 2003-04 to 197 till February 2005. However, when
compared to the number of companies operating as on date i.e. 6,52,000, it
was just a miniscule number. The Committee were dismayed to note that the
Ministry envisaged to conduct inspection of only 0.2% of the companies
during the current year. In this regard, the Committee were reminded of their
recommendation of the previous year wherein they had expressed serious
concern that the number of inspections were coming down year after year
and had deplored the casual approach of the Government towards
inspections. It seemed that the Government had become content with only
marginal increase in the number of inspections to be conducted this year.
The Committee found that their concerns regarding lesser inspections over
the years had not been adequately addressed to by the Government for not
taking any strong measures to rectify this problem. The Committee noted
that this was despite the fact that inspection of companies was the primary
responsibility of the Ministry’s field organization and it was the most
significant job entrusted to the Ministry.
12. The Committee were given to understand that the lesser number
of inspections being carried out was a result of inadequate staff strength
with the Government and after implementation of MCA-21
e-governance Project, some surplus staff would be available who would be
transferred to the inspection wings. The Committee also noted that the cadre
review Committee of the Indian Company Law Service had submitted its
report and its recommendations were under examination. They had also
been informed that the Shardul Shroff Committee on outsourcing the routine
inspections under Section 209A was going to submit the report shortly. The
Committee had recommended that the recommendations made by this
Committee should be examined expeditiously and suitable steps should be
taken to augment the staff strength of the Ministry apart from training those
staff who were rendered surplus after the implementation of MCA-21 e-
Governance Project.
13. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“It is respectfully submitted that given the large number of registered
companies, effective enforcement by inspections may not be feasible if

9
based on numbers derived as a percentage of the total number of
companies. Under such a system, presuming that even if one per cent of
the companies are inspected every year, the next turn for further
inspection of a company would come only after 100 years, which would
not have the desired deterrent effect.
Inspections of companies are required to be taken up based on
reasonable belief that there is wrongdoing or non-compliance of law by
the management of a particular company. Other reasons may be
complaints from the public investors or on the published record of the
company. The use of powers to inspect is intended to enable external
intervention to guide companies towards compliance of law as also to
detect and penalize cases of wrongdoing for deterrent effect. Measures
have been taken to make inspection activity effective for improved
enforcement of law.
As a first step, the overall inspection activity has been increased. 197
inspections were carried out in 2004-05 as compared to 107 in the previous
year. In the current financial year i.e. 1st of April, 2005 to 20th June, 2005,
approximately 80 inspection reports have already been received which
is higher than the number received in similar period in the previous year.
Further, the Ministry has ordered more than 24 investigations, which are
being carried out through officers of SFIO. Efforts are being made to
improve quality of inspection. Revised guidelines for technical scrutiny
and inspections by ROCs have already been issued. The inspection
manual is also being revised. The scrutiny and an analysis of inspection
reports has been intensified and monitoring of prosecutions taken up.
The Expert Committee on company law headed by Dr. J. J. Irani also went
into various aspects related to inspections and investigations after
considering the views of the Shardul Shroff Committee and has made its
recommendations which are presently under consideration of the Govt.
The Ministry has appointed another committee headed by Shri O. P.
Vaish to consider ways and means of making prosecution more effective.
Report of this committee is awaited.
The number of officers available for the inspection wing of the Ministry
will increase once the total computerization of the Ministry’s functions,
especially, ROC office, under the project MCA-21, is completed and
thereby number of inspections conducted will increase.”
14. The Government in their action taken reply have also stated as
under:
“The report by Shri Shardul Shroff, convener of the Expert Group (on
Inspections & Penalties) was discussed in the Expert Committee on

10
Company Law (under Chairmanship of Dr. J. J. Irani) set up by
Ministry of Company Affairs to make recommendations for revising
the Companies Act, 1956. Various issues raised by Shri Shroff Expert
Group were discussed in detail in Dr. Irani Committee and have
been addressed in the report of the Irani Committee submitted to the
Government on 31.5.2005. The report has been placed on website of
the Ministry (‘’http://www.dca.nic.in’’) for general information.
The cadre review examination is at final stage and the
recommendations/report of the Ministry will be submitted to the
DOPT soon. The inspection staff is presently deployed only in the
Headquarter and the offices of RDs. It is being considered in the
Cadre Review that inspection staff should be deployed with each
ROC as well.”
15. The Committee understand that the guidelines for technical
scrutiny and inspection by the Registrar of Companies (ROCs) have
been revised and issued. Other measures taken or contemplated
towards strengthening the inspection activity of companies include,
intensifying the analysis of inspection reports and revision of the
inspection manual. The Committee desire to be apprised of the details
of the initiatives taken, or proposed to be taken, and their effectiveness
in improving the quality of inspection of companies.
16. As per the Government’s reply, inspection of companies is
required to be taken up mainly on account of reasonable belief that
there was wrongdoing or non-compliance of law by the management
of a particular company. The Committee nevertheless, are of the view
that it would be essential to increase the number of inspections as
well, which could be on the basis of random selection of companies.
17. The Committee understand from the reply that the O. P. Vaish
Committee has been appointed specifically to consider the ways and
means of making prosecution more effective. As strengthening of the
prosecution process is of utmost importance, the Committee desire
that the report of the Committee be expedited and also considered by
the Government with a view to make prosecution more effective.
18. The Committee further reiterate their earlier
recommendation on expediting the computerisation of the Ministry’s
functions under the MCA 21 programme and cadre review examination
as these initiatives would enable in increasing the number of officers
available for deployment in the ‘Inspection Wing’ of the Ministry.

11
FILING OF STATUTORY RETURNS BY THE COMPANIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8th, Para No. 74)
19. The Committee lamented that 50% of the companies were not
filing statutory returns and no concrete action was being taken against
such companies by the Ministry. The Committee were of the opinion that
this situation was no longer acceptable and needed to be changed. The
Committee recommended evolving an effective means of identifying non-
operating companies and also publish details of such companies through
the print/electronic media. The Committee noted with concern that the
present provisions did not act as a sufficient deterrent on the companies
that delayed or did not file the statutory annual returns. The Committee
noted that the Government had gone for a computerization exercise that
would provide distinctive identification number to facilitate filing of
annual returns. They, therefore, suggested that inconsistencies in filing
of annual returns should be met with stringent penalties.
20. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The Government had set up an Expert Committee headed by Dr. J.
J. Irani to advise the Government on comprehensive revision of the
Companies Act, 1956. The Committee has since submitted its report
to the Government on 31-05-2005. The report has been placed on
website of the Ministry (http://www.dca.nic.in) for general
information. The report is under examination in this Ministry.
In the meantime, the Government has already issued a Scheme called
Simplified Exit Scheme 2005, which is in operation from 1st February
2005 to 31st July 2005. Under the scheme, the companies, which are
either not functioning or not intending to continue, have been given
an opportunity to exit and get their names struck off from the Register
of Registrar of Companies. To make the scheme successful, the
Ministry has also made wide publicity through local as well as
national dailies advertising the features of scheme and to familiarize
the promoters. After the scheme, necessary penal action will be
initiated against the defaulting companies/promoters/directors for
non-filing” of statutory returns in pursuance with the SES-2005.
After the period of the scheme is over, with exit of defunct companies,
it is expected that the proportion of companies filing statutory
returns will increase. Government would take necessary means to
address the situation by making suitable legislative changes.

12
Further the action to improve the filing of documents by Companies
is being taken incorporating the following:—
(a) Taking assistance from professional bodies and institutes such
as ICAI to motivate professionals such as Chartered
Accountants/Company Secretaries, advising the companies
to improve compliance.
(b) Coordination and action with SEBI, Banking Division and
Income Tax Department to ensure that the filing made before
various authorities are consistent with the filings made before
ROC and that such authorities based their statutory action on
the data filed by companies with ROC’s.
(c) Improvement of fiscal infrastructure to enable efficiency
operation in the office of ROCs to enable prompt filing of
documents by companies.
(d) Publicity of names of defaulting companies on the website of
the Ministry/ROCs, etc.”
21. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply is silent
or evasive on the main concern expressed on the need for evolving an
effective means of identifying non-operating companies, publishing
details of such companies in the print/electronic media, and ensuring
punitive action for inconsistencies in filing of annual returns. From the
reply, it is evident that the Government seems to be only hoping that
the proportion of companies filing their statutory returns would increase
following the conclusion of the Simplified Exit Scheme, 2005, which
inter alia gives an opportunity to companies, that are either not
functioning or do not intend to continue to function, an opportunity to
have their names struck off from the Register maintained by the
Registrar of Companies. In view of the fact that as of now, 50% of the
companies are not filing their statutory returns and no concrete action
is being taken against the erring companies, the Committee reiterate
their recommendation on the need for evolving an effective means of
identifying the erring Companies and ensuring punitive action against
them. The Committee also desire to be kept apprised of the concrete
measures taken or proposed to be taken in this direction, which include,
legislative changes proposed or contemplated to address the situation.
The computerisation of the process of filing of annual returns by
providing a distinctive identification number to the companies may
also be intensified.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 6)
The Committee note with serious concern that certain discrepancies
have crept in the figures supplied in Demands for Grants for the years
2004-2005 and 2005-2006. The explanation given by the Ministry that
such inconsistencies would be avoided in future through the system of
reconciliation with the Principal Accounts Office at regular intervals do
not convince the Committee. This reconciliation exercise should have
been completed well in advance of supplying figures in Parliamentary
papers. They are of the view that the Government should take utmost
care while furnishing the figures before Parliament. They expect that
such discrepancies will not occur in future.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance
so that such discrepancies do not reoccur.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 10)
The Committee are concerned to note that budgetary allocations
were made by the Ministry with a casual approach due to which it had
allowed a large sum of Rs. 1.6 crore allocated at BE stage which was
retained even at RE stage, to be surrendered. When the accommodation
was not available, the Ministry should have changed the allocations at
RE stage but it did not do so and allowed the allocations to be
surrendered. The Committee recommend the Government to come out
with realistic Budgetary Estimates so that there is minimum gap between
BE, RE and Actuals.
Reply of the Government
The budget provision under OE for 2004-05 allocated to SFIO was
Rs. 1.60 crores, which was provided for regular contingent expenditure
including renovation of space for the Head Office and expenditure for
the regional office at Mumbai.

14
While the expenditure relating to regular various contingent
expenditure and for the renovation of 2nd wing of this office could be
made as expected, the expenditure for the establishment of regional office
at Mumbai and other related expenditure could not be utilized as the
accommodation which was to be arranged by the Ministry of Company
Affairs could not materialize till the finalisation of last year’s budget.
Thus, the unutilized amount under OE head could be surrendered only
at the final stage of review of budget expenditure for 2004-2005. The
details of sanctioned budget, actual expenditure incurred by SFIO and
amount surrendered under OE Head for the financial year 2004-05 are
as follows:
(Rs. in crores)
Amount Sanctioned Actual Expenditure Amount Surrendered
1.60 1.16 0.44
The observations of the Standing Committee in this regard have
been noted for compliance in future.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 21)
The Committee note that SFIO which was intended to be a
specialized agency, investigating cases of frauds involving large sum of
money in excess of Rs. 50 crore and the interests of large section of the
people is currently looking into 26 cases. They have been informed that
within a period of two years, since SFIO came into being this number has
increased from initial five or six references to 26 at present. They are
given to understand that SFIO has to work within the ambit of the
Companies Act, the procedures are long drawn and it has no powers
similar to the ones like institutions enjoyed in other countries. The
Committee were, however, informed that since this organization is very
new, the Government will after gaining some experience further deliberate
on improving the efficacy of this institution including conferring it with
statutory status. Given the important nature of the functions which the
SFIO is supposed to discharge, the Committee-desire that suitable
measures be taken to further strengthen it.
Reply of the Government
The issue of giving adequate power and reach to SFIO and role of
SFIO were also deliberated by the Expert Committee headed by Dr. J. J.

15
Irani (the ‘Irani Committee’) which was set up by the Ministry of Company
Affairs on 2/12/2004 to make recommendations on corporate law. In its
report submitted on 31
st May, 2005, that Committee inter-alia , has
recommended the need to have a separate legislation for SFIO.
Recommendations of the Committee are under consideration of the
Government. The observations of the Committee to strengthen SFIO are
taken note of.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 30)
The Committee take note that the Competition Act, 2002 which was
to replace the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1959 could
not be made operational because of legal challenges in the Supreme Court
of India. They have been informed that the Apex Court has given its
judgment on 20.01.2005 with some observations in regard to issue of
separation of powers. The representatives of the Ministry have stated
that the amended Bill on the lines of suggestions made by Supreme Court
would be tabled in the Monsoon Session, 2005. The Committee are of the
view that this progressive legislation has already been delayed on
account of legal tangles which could have been avoided, had the Ministry
taken this aspect into account before its passing by both the Houses of
Parliament. There should not be further delay in bringing conformity
amendments. They expect that the Government would come forward
with necessary legislation in the Monsoon Session, 2005 and get it
enacted within the same session.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has prepared certain proposals for amendment to the
Competition Act, 2002 keeping in view the judgment of the Supreme
Court dated 20.01.2005 in the matter of Brahm Dutt Vs. Union of India.
The process of consultations and approvals on these proposals has
been initiated. Once necessary approvals are received, the Ministry would
introduce proposals for amendment of the Competition Act, 2002
expeditiously.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

16
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 39)
The Committee take note of the fact that Investor Education and
Protection Fund (IEPF) has to its credit a whopping sum of about Rs. 352
crore upto 31.12.2004 and about Rs. 100 crores is added every year to the
fund. This huge amount comes mainly from four sources, namely, share
application money, debentures, unpaid dividends and unclaimed
deposits. They are given to understand that this amount is credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India and a budgetary allocation is made by
the Parliament every year to run the activities under IEPF. In this way the
Ministry contributes more funds to the Consolidated Fund of India than
getting from it. They are dismayed to note that such huge amount of
money deposited by the companies is not being utilized for the object
under which it has been constituted. They have been informed by the
Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs that the Ministry is making a
proposal saying that funds could be considered to be kept as interest
bearing deposit which should flow back to them in the form of each
years budget for taking up these activities. The Committee are in total
agreement with this proposal and want that Government should clear
this proposal as and when received.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of this Ministry that the IEPF should be considered to
be kept as an interest bearing deposit is being taken up with the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division).
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 66)
While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry towards
computerization under the MCA-21 e-governance Project, the Committee
note with concern the explanation of the Government regarding the
number of inspections. The Committee observe that the number of
inspections done have gone up from 109 in 2003-04 to 197 till February
2005. However, when compared to the number of companies operating
as on date i.e. 6,52,000, it is just a miniscule number. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the Ministry envisages to conduct inspection of
only 0.2% of the companies during the current year. In this regard, the
Committee is reminded of their recommendation of the previous year
wherein they have expressed serious concern that the number of
inspections were coming down year after year and have deplored the
casual approach of the Government towards inspections. It seems that
the Government have become content with only marginal increase in the
number of inspections to be conducted this year. The Committee finds
that their concerns regarding lesser inspections over the years have not
been adequately addressed to the Government and the Ministry is not
taking any strong measures to rectify this problem. The Committee note
that this is despite the fact that inspection of companies are the primary
responsibility of the Ministry’s field organization and it is the most
significant job entrusted to the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
It is respectfully submitted that given the large number of registered
companies, effective enforcement by inspections may not be feasible if
based on numbers derived as a percentage of the total number of
companies. Under such a system, presuming that even if one per cent of
the companies are inspected every year, the next turn for further
inspection of a company would come only after 100 years, which would
not have the desired deterrent effect.
Inspections of companies are required to be taken up based on
reasonable belief that there is wrong doing or non-compliance of law by
the management of a particular company. Other reasons may be

18
complaints from the public investors or on the published record of the
company. The use of powers to inspect is intended to enable external
intervention to guide companies towards compliance of law as also to
detect and penalize cases of wrong doing for deterrent effect. Measures
have been taken to make inspection activity effective for improved
enforcement of law.
As a first step, the overall inspection activity has been increased.
197 inspections were carried out in 2004-05 as compared to 107 in the
previous year. In the current financial year i.e. 1st of April 2005 to 20th
June 2005, approximately 80 inspection reports have already been received
which is higher than the number received in similar period in the previous
year. Further, the Ministry has ordered more than 24 investigations,
which are being carried out through officers of SFIO. Efforts are being
made to improve quality of inspection. Revised guidelines for technical
scrutiny and inspections by ROCs have already been issued. The
inspection manual is also being revised. The scrutiny and an analysis of
inspection reports has been intensified and monitoring of prosecutions
taken up. The Expert Committee on company law headed by Dr. J. J. lrani
also went into various aspects related to inspections and investigations
after considering the views of the Shardul Shroff Committee and has
made its recommendations which are presently under consideration of
the Govt. The Ministry has appointed another committee headed by
Shri O. P. Vaish to consider ways and means of making prosecution
more effective. Report of this committee is awaited.
The number of officers available for the inspection wing of the
Ministry will increase once the total computerization of the Ministry’s
functions, especially, RoC office, under the project MCA-21, is completed
and thereby number of inspections conducted will increase.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 67)
The Committee are given to understand that the lesser number of
inspections being carried out is a result of inadequate staff strength with
the Government and after implementation of MCA-21 e-governance
Project, some surplus staff would be available who would be transferred
to the inspection wings. The Committee also note that the cadre review
Committee of the Indian Company Law Service has submitted its report
and its recommendations are under examination. They have also been
informed that the Shardul Shroff Committee on outsourcing the routine
inspections under Section 209 A is going to made by this Committee

19
should be examined expeditiously and suitable steps should be taken to
augment the staff strength of the Ministry apart from training those staff
who are rendered surplus after the implementation of MCA-21
e-Governance Project.
Reply of the Government
The report by Shri Shardul Shroff, Convener of the Expert Group
(on Inspections & Penalties) was discussed in the Expert Committee on
Company Law (under Chairmanship of Dr. J. J. Irani) set up by Ministry
of Company Affairs to make recommendations for revising the Companies
Act, 1956. Various issues raised by Shri Shroff Expert Group were
discussed in detail in Dr. Irani Committee and have been addressed in
the report of the Irani Committee submitted to the Government on
31.5.2005. The report has been placed on website of the Ministry (‘’http:/
/www.dca.nic.in’’) for general information. The cadre review
examination is at final stage and the recommendations/report of the
Ministry will be submitted to the DOPT soon. The inspection staff is
presently deployed only in the Headquarter and the offices of RDs. It is
being considered in the Cadre Review that inspection staff should be
deployed with each ROC as well.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

20
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 51)
“The Committee are deeply anguished to note that not much is being
done to address investors’ grievances and save gullible investors from
falling into the trap of “vanishing companies”. Instances of investors
continuing to be duped by capital market swindlers are heard of as a
matter of routine. The Committee observe that the exercise of identifying
“vanishing companies” was undertaken by SEBI in the year 1998, 1999
and 2000. Apart from this endeavour of SEBI, the Committee note that
the Ministry of Company Affair have not undertaken any serious exercise
to maintain a continuously updated database of “vanishing companies”.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should take
suitable measures to identify the “vanishing companies”, debar the
promoters/directors of such companies permanently, so as to eliminate
any chances of them surfacing again and also ensure that the guilty are
punished under the due process of law. While the Committee note that
the Government have launched prosecutions against “vanishing
companies” under the Companies Act as well as Indian Penal Code,
they feel that a lot more needs to be done. The Committee feel that unless
the regulators get serious about their investigations and find ways to
ensure that investors get back their money, the concept of investor
protection will remain meaningless.
Reply of the Government
The functions of SEBI under Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 include protecting the interest of the investors in securities
and to promote the development of securities market by such measures
as it thinks fit. In pursuance of these responsibilities, following the 1992
stock market scam, SEBI had identified, by October 2000, 229 companies,
which came out with IPOs during the period 1992-1998, as vanishing.
For identifying a company as vanished following criteria has been
adopted:
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC
respectively for a period of 2 years;

21
(ii) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange from the
company for a long time;
(iii) No office of the company is located at the mentioned registered
office address at too time of Stock Exchange inspection.
All the conditions laid down have to be met for treating a company as
vanishing and companies satisfying one or more but not all conditions may
not be considered as vanishing.
A Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC), co-chaired by
Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA) and Chairman, SEBI was set
up in March, 1999 to settle the policy issues regarding the delinquent
companies/promoters and to monitor the progress in regard to action against
vanishing companies. The CMC is assisted by four Task Forces one each
corresponding to a Region falling under the jurisdiction of four Regional
Directors of Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA). Other members of these Task
Forces are representatives of SEBI, Regional Stock Exchange and concerned
Registrars of Companies. The main responsibility of these Task Forces is to
identify the companies which have disappeared, or which have misutilised
funds mobilised from the investors, and to suggest/take appropriate action in
terms of Companies Act or SEBI Act or any other law applicable.
Following steps had been taken/ are being taken by the Ministry against
the vanishing companies and its promoters/ directors under the relevant
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and under the Indian Penal Code:
(i) Prosecutions have been filed under Sections 62/63,68 and 628 of
the Companies Act, 1956 against vanishing companies for
misstatement in prospectus/ fraudulently inducing persons to
invest money/ false statement made in the offer documents etc.
(ii) Prosecutions filed under the Companies Act, 1956 for non-filing
of statutory returns;
(iii) FIRs have been Filed/ Registered under the Indian Penal Code
against the companies and its promoters/Directors of vanishing
companies.
(iv) Petitions have also been filed with the Company Law Board under
Sections 397/398/402/408 read with Section 406 of the Companies
Act, 1956 in respect of two selected vanishing companies to disgorge
the properties/monies fraudulently obtained by promoters/
Directors of these two Vanishing Companies.
(v) The recommendations of the Expert Committee set up by the
Ministry to advise the Government on the new Company Law,

22
with regards to protecting the interest of the investors shall be
examined in the Ministry from the point of view of providing a
legal framework for safeguarding investor’s interest.
(vi) Details of Vanishing Companies and their promoters/directors
are already available on the Website of the Ministry
(www.dca.nic.in).
(vii) Ministry is also examining feasibility of taking appropriate action
against the Chartered Accountants (CAs) associated with public
issue of securities made by Vanishing Companies, which had
larger issue size (Rs. 10 crores or above).
CMC in its 14th meeting, held on 18.03.2005, had, inter alia , taken
following decisions:
(i) That the concerned Task Forces should continue to review the
working of Vanishing Companies, which had been deleted from
the list very closely for the next few years with a view to keeping a
close watch so that, such companies do not indulge in fraudulent
activities again.
(ii) The Committee had decided that the Task Forces should scrutinize
IPOs which came during 1998-2001. Task Forces are also
scrutinizing the list of companies sent by one of the Investors
Association namely Midas Touch Investor Association.
Hon’ble Minister of Company Affairs launched a new Website ‘’http:/
/www.watchoutinvestors.com’’ on 9.11.2004. This website has been created
by Prime Investors Protection Association and League, with financial
assistance from the Investor Education and Protection Fund, help the investors
to protect themselves from unscrupulous promoters, companies and entities.
This website is a national web-based registry covering entities including
companies, intermediaries and, wherever available, persons associated with
such entities, who have been indicted for an economic default and/or for
non-compliance of laws/guidelines. It enables investors to do a free, fast
and user-friendly search on such entities/persons before making any new
investments and for continuously reviewing their existing portfolio vis-a vis
such entities. This website also marks a step on the part of the Ministry in
promoting investor protection through various means including investor
awareness and education.
SEBI has invoked powers granted to it under Section11/Section 11 B of
the SEBI Act, 1992 and has issued orders against the Vanishing Companies
and their promoters/Directors prohibiting them from associating in any
way with the capital market activities. This order also prohibits them from

23
dealing in securities and from accessing the capital market for a period of 5
years, which is the maximum permissible under the SEBI regulation. SEBI
has debarred 100 companies and 378 Directors.
The Ministry of Company Affairs has set up in August, 2004 a
Monitoring Committee (MC) for closely monitoring all cases of prosecutions
launched under the Companies Act, 1956 and FIRs filed/registered under
the Indian Penal Code against Vanishing Companies and their Directors.
This Committee is co-chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs and
Chairman, SEBI and includes senior officials of various State Governments
and the Commissioner of Police, Delhi or his representative.
The Committee has met twice so far. The last meeting of MC was held on
02.05.2005. Committee decided to take steps to closely monitor the progress of
action by regular exchange of information between the Police authorities and
the Registrar of Companies at the State level. State authorities were further
asked to nominate Nodal Officers for this purpose to make coordination better
and more effective association with the Registrar of Companies.
The latest position regarding Region-wise cumulative action taken
against Vanishing Companies, their Directors/Promoters, is given below:
Northern Western Eastern Southern Total
Region Region Region Region
Number of vanishing 17 49 14 34 114
companies
Number of companies 17 48 11 31 107
against which
prosecutions filed under
Sections 62/63, 68 &
628 of the Companies
Act, 1956
Number of companies 16 47 11 20 94
against which
prosecutions filed for
non-filing of statutory
returns
Number of companies 16 42 14 28 100
where FIRs filed.
Number of companies 9 41 13 24 87
where FIRs registered
So far 21 directors/ promoters have been arrested by the Police
authorities in the State of Gujarat.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

24
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 52)
The Committee also recommend that Government should take
concrete measures to establish the veracity of promoters and directors of
companies, inclusive of their capacity to raise funds at the time of their
registration. They also feel that apart from ensuring penal action, details
of promoters/directors of vanishing companies need to be widely
publicized through newspapers and other media, which could contribute
to protecting investors’ interest.
Reply of the Government
Government is committed to protecting the interests of investors.
The Expert Committee set up by the Ministry of Company Affairs to advise
the Government on the new Company Law has submitted its report on
31
st May, 2005. The recommendations of the Committee with regard to
establishing veracity of promoters and directors of companies including
for protection of interest of investors will be examined in the Ministry
from the point of view of providing a legal framework for safeguarding
investor’s interest. Implementation of MCA 21 and use of digital
signatures would reinforce the addresses, veracity of promoters/ directors
with a view to check this phenomena of Vanishing Companies. Further,
in order to check the fly by night or frivolous companies from registration,
sub-sections (3) & (4) of Section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 were inserted
in the Act through Companies (Amendment) Act, 2000 which came into
effect from 13.12.2000. According to this amendment, every private and
public company shall have to bring in liquid minimum paid up capital
of one lakh rupees and five lakh rupees respectively at the time of
incorporation itself. The above amendment was brought out on the basis
of the past experience that companies with small capital base were
registered and raised public issues and then they become untraceable
causing considerable damage to the investor community. Separately,
Securities and Exchange Board of India has amended the SEBI (Disclosure
and Investor Protection) Guidelines to enforce higher disclosure
requirements pertaining to promoters of companies.
Details of Vanishing Companies and their promoters/directors are
already available on the Website of the Ministry (www.dca.nic.in). Action
is being taken for publishing the details of vanishing companies through
print media.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

25
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 74)
The Committee lament that 50% of the companies are not filing
statutory returns and no concrete action is being taken against such
companies by the Ministry. The Committee are of the opinion that this
situation is no longer acceptable and needs to be changed. The Committee
recommend evolving an effective means of identifying non-operating
companies and also publish details of such companies through the print/
electronic media. The Committee note with concern that the present
provisions do not act as a sufficient deterrent on the companies that
delay or do not file the statutory annual returns. The Committee note
that the Government has gone for a computerization exercise that would
provide distinctive identification number to facilitate filing of annual
returns. They, therefore, suggest that inconsistencies in filing of annual
returns should be met with stringent penalties.
Reply of the Government
The Government had set up an Expert Committee headed by
Dr. J. J. Irani to advise the Government on comprehensive revision of the
Companies Act, 1956. The Committee has since submitted its report to
the Government on 31-05-2005. The report has been placed on website of
the Ministry (http://www.dca.nic.in) for general information. The report
is under examination in this Ministry.
In the meantime, the Government has already issued a Scheme called
Simplified Exit Scheme 2005, which is in operation from 1st February
2005 to 31st July 2005. Under the scheme, the companies, which are
either not functioning or not intending to continue, have been given an
opportunity to exit and get their names struck off from the Register of
Registrar of Companies. To make the scheme successful, the Ministry
has also made wide publicity through local as well as national dailies
advertising the features of scheme and to familiarize the promoters. After
the scheme, necessary penal action will be initiated against the defaulting
companies/promoters/directors for non-filing of statutory returns in
pursuance with the SES–2005. After the period of the scheme is over,
with exit of defunct companies, it is expected that the proportion of
companies filing statutory returns will increase. Government would take
necessary means to address the situation by making suitable legislative
changes.

26
Further the action to improve the filing of documents by Companies
is being taken incorporating the following:—
(a) Taking assistance from professional bodies and institutes such
as ICAI to motivate professionals such as Chartered
Accountants/Company Secretaries, advising the companies
to improve compliance.
(b) Coordination and action with SEBI, Banking Division and
Income Tax Department to ensure that the filing made before
various authorities are consistent with the filings made before
ROC and that such authorities based their statutory action on
the data filed by companies with ROC’s.
(c) Improvement of fiscal infrastructure to enable efficiency
operation in the office of ROCs to enable prompt filing of
documents by companies.
(d) Publicity of names of defaulting companies on the website of
the Ministry/ROCs, etc.
G-20018/5/2005-BGT

27
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
NEW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927(Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

28
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2005 from 1500
 to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P. K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S. B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

29
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then considered the draft reports on (i) Action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure
and Disinvestment), (ii) Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Planning and (iii)
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
4. The Committee adopted the draft action taken reports
mentioned above without any modification/amendment.
5. *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** ***
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
and to make verbal and other consequential changes and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

30
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-06) OF THE MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
Total % of
Total
(i) Total Number of recommendations 8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 5 62.50%
have been accepted by the Government:
(Vide Recommendation at SI. Nos. 1,2, 3,4 & 5)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 1 12.50%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:
(Vide Recommendation at SI. No. 7)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 2 25%
of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 6 & 8)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect Nil Nil
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: