STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of
the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation]
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
48

FORTY–EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Statistics &
Programme Implementation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14 December, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14 December, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 48
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ................................................................................ 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies .................. 13
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ........ 14
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited ................................... 18
ANNEXURE
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
7th December, 2006 .......................................................................... 19
II. Action Taken Report ......................................................................... 21
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-ninth Report of the
Standing Committee on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Statistics &
Programme Implementation ............................................................. 38

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2006-2007
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
*12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. V enkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Mangani Lai Mandal
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Vacant
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been authorized by
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Forty-Eighth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007)
of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation.
2. The Thirty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 22 May, 2006. The Government furnished the written replies indicating action taken
on all the recommendations on 3 August, 2006 and 10 November, 2006. The Draft
Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held
on 7 December, 2006.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the
Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
11 December, 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by
Government on the recommendations contained in their Thirty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
22 May, 2006.
2. The Report contained five recommendations. Action taken notes have been
received from the Government in respect of all the five recommendations contained in
the Report. These have been analysed and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 2 (Para Nos. 21-22) & 3 (Para Nos. 33-35)
(Total 2) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Nil (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. No. 1 (Para Nos. 14-15), 4 (Para No. 48) & 5 (Para No. 49)
(Total 3) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final reply of the
Government is still awaited:
Nil (Chapter V)
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by Government on some of
their recommendations.
Recommendation No. 1 (Para Nos. 14-15)
Modernisation of Statistical System in India
(India Statistical Strengthening Project)
4. The Committee had, in their fourth and nineteenth report on the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation of the

2
years 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively taken note of the fact that Tier II which was
the actual implementation phase of the India Statistical Strengthening Project was
dependent on the results of Tier I of the project. The Committee had, therefore,
emphasized on the need to ensure that the project schedules were strictly adhered
to. From the information furnished by the Government, the Committee noted that
the work on building the Concept Paper on Tier-ll of the India Statistical Strengthening
Project which was dependent on the broad results of implementation of Tier-I of
the project has been hampered. While the work on developing the ‘Concept Paper’ for
Tier-ll in respect of components relating to ‘Creation and Maintenance of Business
Register’ and ‘Improvement of Service Sector Statistics’ had commenced, the
development of the ‘Concept Paper’ on the remaining three components could not
be initiated viz. identifying specific requirements for strengthening the State Statistical
Branches Bureaus, assessment of the survey capabilities of the private sector and
all India Statistical network. The delay in formulating the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier II
of the project has been owing to the non-availability of the broad results/achievements
relating to implementation of the three components as part of the Tier-I programme of
the project.
5. The Committee, therefore, once again emphasized on ensuring that all
efforts were made to see that the work on the remaining components of Tier I of the
India Statistical Strengthening Project was completed as per the laid down schedules
so that Tier-ll of the project takes off without further delay. They also wished to be
apprised of the progress made in this direction at quarterly intervals.
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:
“With a view to ensuring that the remaining components of Tier-I of the
India Statistical Strengthening Project are completed as early as feasible,
implementation of its different components is being regularly monitored by the
Task Forces and Review Missions of the World Bank, besides periodical review
by senior officers.
Tier-I of the components on Creation and maintenance of the Business Register
has been completed. Tier-I of the components on Improvement of Service Sector
Statistics and Assessment of Survey Capabilities of Private Sector is at
advance stage of completion. There has been some delay in completion of
Tier-I of the component on Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus due to
delay in submission of reports of phase-l of the Tier I of the component by
the consultants. The component on Establishment of All India Statistical
Network has been de-linked from World Bank project.
Necessary action for preparation of the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-ll is also being
simultaneously initiated in consultation with the World Bank so as to ensure that
the project is completed as per the revised schedule. We are also having elaborate

3
discussions and review of the up to date progress with the World Bank Mission
scheduled in the first week of September, 2006.”
7. On the specifics of the discussions that the Ministry may have had with the
representatives of the World Bank on aspects relating to implementing the India Statistical
Strengthening Project, the Government vide their reply dated 10 November, 2006
informed as under:
“A World Bank Mission comprising Mr. Grahm Eele, Sr. Statistician of the World
Bank and Mr. Deepak Das Gupta, Ms. Farah Zahir and Ms. Arpita Chakraborty
(officers from Delhi Office of the World Bank), visited Central Statistical
Organization to review the progress of the ongoing India Statistical Strengthening
Project (ISSP).
The following issues were discussed for further action:
(i) The work relating to Tier-1 of the component ‘Strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus’ may be completed as per the time frame by end of
December, 2006.
(ii) A concept paper for Tier-ll of the ISSP may be prepared at the earliest and
sent to the Planning Commission for approval. After approval, the same
may be sent to the World Bank (WB) through Department of Economic
Affairs (DEA). This will enable WB to put ISSP in their programme. The
concept paper may be prepared giving key issues, basic objectives, brief
outline of the project and costing of the project.
(iii) Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus may be taken up in phased
manner. 6 to 7 areas may be taken up in all States every year so that
the project may be completed in a span of five years. DG & CEO, NSSO
indicated that it would be better to phase out activities rather than States.
There should be no discrimination amongst the States in initiating the
Tier-ll of the project. Since the time frame of ISSP matches with the
11th Five Year Plan, efforts may be made to monitor the project in such
a way that the entire process is completed within the 11th Five Year Plan.
(iv) The following projects may be considered for inclusion in Tier-ll.
1. Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus
2. Improvement of Service Sector Statistics
3. Strengthening of capacity of the MOS& PI to manage the project
4. Statistical Audit/Quality Control”.
8. The Committee are constrained to note that instead of addressing the
main concern expressed by them on the need for assessing the reasons for the
frequent and inordinate delays being witnessed in implementing the core

4
components of Tier I of the India Statistical Strengthening Project, the reply of the
Government merely recounts aspects relating to the project monitoring role played
by the officers of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and
the task force of the external aiding agency, the World Bank. From the information
furnished in the reply on the current status of the India Statistical Strengthening
Project , the Committee cannot help inferring that no serious effort seems to
have been made to assess and evaluate the reasons for the significant and
continued slippages in adhering to the time lines for implementing the
core components of Tier I of the Project, the broad results of which are to form the
basis for proceeding to the actual implementation phase of this Project for
modernizing the statistical system in the country. For instance, three of the
four components of Tier I of the Project pertaining to strengthening the State
Statistical Bureaus’ , improvement of service sector statistics’ and ‘survey
capabilities of private sector’, which were to be completed by May/June, 2006
as per the revised implementation schedule remain to be executed. Inordinate delays
and frequent rescheduling of the time-lines for implementing the Project are,
in the opinion of the Committee, indicative of serious deficiencies in the project
planning and monitoring processes. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
comprehensive evaluation of the entire gamut of issues pertaining to the planning
and implementation aspects of the India Statistical Strengthening Project be carried
out with a view to identifying the lacunae and drawbacks in the planning process
and taking appropriate remedial measures. They also wish to be apprised of the
action taken in this direction as well as the ground level progress in implementing
the Project at three monthly intervals.
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 48)
Project Monitoring Division
9. The Committee noted from the information furnished by the Government
that of the 683 projects on the monitor of the Ministry, 77 projects had
witnessed time as well as cost overruns. While the time overrun witnessed in the
implementation of the projects stretches from 2 to 253 months, the resultant cost
escalation had been to the extent of 90.7%. Though the cost overrun in regard to
implementing projects as informed to have gone down from 67.6% in the 1990s
to 18.1% in the period, April-September, 2005 it was also brought to light that the
precarious position of the manpower structure in the Infrastructure Project Monitoring
Division (IPMD) had diluted the efficiency of the project monitoring task to a significant
extent. Bringing down time and cost overruns in implementing projects was by
itself expected to contribute to as much as 2% of the GDP. The Committee, therefore
emphasized on ensuring that sustained and focused attention be given to implement
adequate measures for minimizing the cost and time escalations in project
implementation.

5
10. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:—
“Action is being taken to fill up the existing vacancies of Deputy Advisers and
also to revise the existing recruitment rules for eligible Deputy Advisers to be
absorbed in this Ministry.”
11. The reply of the Government is silent on the observation made by the
Committee in the report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry on the
need for initiating appropriate measures for minimizing cost and time escalations
in implementing projects. The Committee had also, by taking note of the submission
made by the Ministry about the precarious position of the manpower structure in
the Infrastructure Project Monitoring Division (IPMD) having significantly diluted
the efficiency of the project monitoring role, emphasized on taking appropriate
measures for filling up the vacant posts in the Division. The related details have
not been furnished in the action taken reply. The Committee reiterate the need for
initiating and implementing viable measures for reducing time and cost escalations
in project implementation, the benefits on account of which are expected to add as
much as 2% to the GDP. The Committee also desire to be apprised of details of the
measures initiated for filling up the vacant posts of Deputy Advisors in the Project
Monitoring Division as well as the revisions carried out or contemplated in the
recruitment rules for overcoming the problem of manpower shortage.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 49)
Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS)
12. Implementation of the Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS)
which was perceived to be a major initiative towards ensuring effective monitoring of
project implementation had, as pointed out in the earlier reports of the Committee
witnessed repeated episodes of delays. The Committee were informed that as per the
revised schedule of implementation, the system was set to be operationalised by July,
2006. However, as per the Outcome Budget, 2006-07, the project was likely to become
operative only by September 2006. The Committee took strong exception to the frequent
shifting of the time schedule for operationalising the OCMS project. They expected that
no effort would be spared in ensuring that the project was made operational definitely
by September, 2006 and any proposal for extension beyond this could be intimated to
the Committee along with sufficient reasons for the same.
13. In regard to the current status of the On-line Computerized Monitoring
System, the Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, informed as under:
“Efforts are being made to operationalise On-line Computerised Monitoring
System (OCMS). However, the software developer i.e. The Energy Research
Institute (TERI) has not been able to demonstrate the efficacy of the software
till-date. In the meantime, Ministry is also on look-out for hiring two system

6
programmers/Network administrators to take charge of the software being
developed by TERI and assist this Ministry in day to day monitoring work. Trial
of the software on the hardware Platform is being conducted in the middle of
August 2006.”
14. Asked to furnish updated details of the current status of the Project, the
Ministry, vide their reply dated 10th November, 2006 informed as follows:—
“The Energy Research Institute (TERI) has demonstrated the software
developed by them for On-line Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) only
in the month of August, 2006. Subsequently, parallel Flash Report for the
month of June, 2006 has been brought out through OCMS and compared with
Flash Report brought out by National Informatics Centre (NIC). Similarly, the
Quarterly Project Implementation Status Report (QPISR) for the quarter ending
June, 2006 has been brought out through OCMS. Discrepancies have been
noticed and it has been communicated to TERI, for remedial measures. These
glitches have to be attended to by TERI before carrying out a similar exercise for
July 2006, August, 2006 and September, 2006.
This exercise will be carried out in respect of Flash Reports for the months
of July 2006, August, 2006 and September, 2006 and also QPISR for the
quarter ending September, 2006 before finally operationalising the OCMS.
After three or four successive reports without flaws are generated, then
only monitoring of the projects would be switched over to the OCMS. The
software which is complex and new, is to be checked thoroughly. To ensure
that the reports generated are accurate, some more time for testing is required.
The entire process is likely to be completed by end February, 2007.
Parallelly, in September, 2006 and October, 2006 training programmes to the
user agencies to familiarize them with the OCMS, have been conducted. We
would be communicating project code numbers to the PSUs for web-based
entry of project data. For smooth functioning of OCMS a system programmer
has also been hired through NICSI.”
15. The Committee note with serious concern that inspite of repeated
postponement of the implementation schedule, the On-line Computerised
Monitoring System (OCMS) is yet to be made operational. While, at the stage
of examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry (2006-07), the Committee
were informed that the project would be made operational by June 2006, as per
the projections of the Outcome Budget (2006-07), the project was to be completed
for operationalisation by September, 2006. From the information now furnished
in the Action Taken reply, the Committee note that the efficacy of the software
developed by the Consultant for enabling online monitoring of project

7
implementation is yet to be demonstrated and the remedial processes that
mainly relate to overcoming the technical glitches being faced would be overcome
by February, 2007. The Committee expect that no effort would be spared in
ensuring that the technical glitches in operationalising the project are overcome
and exercises relating to conducting training programmes etc. are completed so as
to ensure that the project is made fully operational by February, 2007. The
Committee also wish to be kept apprised of the progress made in this direction.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Paragraph No. 21)
From the information furnished, the Committee note that the current series of
PCI (UNME) is based on the Family Living Survey (FLS) data collected during
1982-83. As such, the consumption basket of the current series of CPI(UNME) needs
to be revised. What the Committee find to be particularly worrisome to note in this
regard is that owing to lack of field officers, the Family Living Survey could not
be undertaken. Consequently the Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) had to recommend
continuing with the current series of CPI (UNME) for some more time. The Committee
understands that the recruitment process for filling up the vacant posts of the
Field Officer is underway. The Committee expect that the Family Living Survey will
be undertaken immediately upon completion of the recruitment process so as to enable
the revision of CPI(UNME) series.
Reply of the Government
The proposal to revise the existing series of CPI(UNME) (Base 1984-85) has
been under consideration of the Ministry for a long time. However, it got postponed due
to lack of adequate resources to carry out the Family Living Survey (FLS), which is the
basis of the revision exercise. The initial proposal to create required no. of plan posts in
FOD was turned down. At the instance of the Min. of Finance, the feasibility of engaging
a private agency for the FLS was also explored. However, no private agency with proven
credibility could be identified which could take up such a large-scale survey
simultaneously in different parts of the country.
NSSO was requested to accommodate the proposed FLS in its regular programmes
of Socio Economic Survey. The proposal was discussed in the 88th meeting of the
Governing Council, NSSO (Feb., 2004) wherein it was tentatively decided to dovetail
the FLS with field work of the 62nd round of NSS.
However, due to large no. of vacancies in the grade of Investigators in FOD, FLS
could not be launched along with the NSS 62nd round. Meanwhile, arrangement was
made to fill up those vacancies on contract basis till regular officials are available through
the SSC.
A Working Group was constituted by Governing Council for NSSO, under the
Chairmanship of Prof. B.B. Bhattacharya, Vice-Chancellor, JNU for giving technical

9
guidance for the FLS, Market Survey etc. The Group, however, stressed the urgent need
for compilation of comprehensive CPI(Urban) and CPI(Rural) at national level. The
Working Group resolved that in view of the limited use of CPI(UNME), it would be
ideal to go in for construction of CPI(U) series instead of revising the existing
CPI(UNME) series.
The above views of the Working Group was placed before the 44th meeting of
the TAC on SPCL (Dec. 2005). In view of severe resource constraints, it was realized
that it would not be feasible to introduce the proposed CPI(Urban) series along with
revision exercise of CPI(UNME). Considering the limited use of CPI(UNME), it was
decided that the existing series of CPI(UNME) might be continued without revision for
some more time and all efforts may be made to compile CPI(U). In this context following
decisions were taken.
(i) The resources proposed to be utilized for revision of CPI(UNME) may be
used for compilation of CPI(Urban).
(ii) Existing series of CPI(UNME) may be continued for some more time without
revision till CPI(U) series gets stabilized.
In view of the above recommendations of TAC, the training of the field staff of
NSSO (FOD) on market Survey for compilation of CPI(U) has been completed recently
and the survey work is likely to start shortly by NSSO(FOD) by utilizing the available
resources including the field officials expected to join shortly against the vacant posts
in FOD. These posts which are being filled now are not additional posts made available
to FOD, instead these are vacant posts out of the sanctioned strength of FOD which
were laying vacant. In view of above and as already informed, there is no need of a fresh
FLS now for revision of the current series of CPI(UNME). As such the proposal of
revising existing series of CPI (UNME) has been abandoned altogether.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
O.M. NO.G-20017/3/2006-B&F dated 3.8.2006]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2, Paragraph No. 22)
The Committee had, in their 31st Action Taken Report inter alia observed that
the Government had failed to furnish details of the measures initiated to ensure early
completion of the work on formulating the new series of WPI and switching over to
the Producer Price Index (PPI). From the details now furnished, the Committee note
that in regard to revising the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), the major task of collecting
the price information for the product basket of the new series applicable from
April, 2000 onwards remain to be executed. As regards the work pertaining to
construction of the Producer Price Index (PPI) for commodity sectors, the Committee
note that the Working Group concerned has commenced with the work on addressing
the related conceptual, analytical and technical issues. With regard to the new series of
CPI (IW) on base 2001=100, the Committee note that the Tariff Advisory Committee
(TAC) had at its meeting held in February 2001, decided to release the new series. The

10
Committee expect that every possible effort is made to ensure that the work on revising
the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is executed within a pre-determined time frame. The
Committee also desire that the new series of CPI (IW) on base, 2001=100, which is
stated to be ready and under submission to Ministry of Labour, be released by the
Ministry at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Compilation of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is the responsibility of the Office
of Economic Adviser, Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The present WPI series is
with the base 1993-94=100. A Working Group was constituted in December, 2003 for
revision of current series of WPI under the chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member,
Planning Commission which has decided to select 2000-01 as the base year for the
new series of the PWI. The Working Group constituted four Sub groups on (i) Agricultural
Commodities, (ii) Manufactured Items, (iii) Unorganized/Unregistered sector and
(iv) Analytical and other related issues. The Sub Group on ‘Manufactured items &
related matters’ and ‘Unorganized/Unregistered Sector’ have submitted their reports.
The other two reports are in the final stages of submission.
To collect price information for the product basket since April 2000 onwards
from source agencies, the following steps have been taken. Chief Secretaries of State
Governments/UTs were requested to nominate Nodal Officers for assisting and
coordinating among other things the task of price collection. 21 States/UTs have already
nominated their Nodal Officers. Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion in a
meeting held with the representatives of the State Governments on 13.03.2006 also
urged the State governments to extend cooperation in the matter. Interactive sessions/
workshops/campaigns with industry/trade associations at important cities in different
States were held. So far workshops at Chandigarh, Lucknow, Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal,
Kochi, Hyderabad and Mumbai have been held.
The construction of Producer Price Index (PPI) would largely depend on the
final recommendations of the Working Group set up for revision of current series of
WPI to 2000-01=100 as base. The Working Group has already begun work on the
conceptual, analytical and technical issues relating to construction of a Producer Price
Index for commodity sectors.
The Labour Bureau Shimla under the M/O Labour has already released the new
series of CPI(IW) on base 2001=100 on 9th March 2006 with effect from index pertaining
to January 2006.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/3/2006-B&F dated 3.8.2006]
Recommendation (Serial No.3, Paragraph No. 33)
The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) is expected to play a pivotal role in
coordinating with the various Ministries and Departments of the Central Government,

11
State Governments and other Statistical agencies for enabling maintenance of quality
standards of core statistics relating to sectors of the agriculture, livestock, health, industry,
housing, education, labour, road, transport etc. and to make such data available to
economists, Planning Commission and others concerned for usages for the benefit of
the country as a whole. The Committee, however, feels constrained to note that the
Ministry have, in one of the replies perceived their role in this regard to be merely of
advisory nature.
Reply of the Government
CSO is expected to play a pivotal role in maintaining the quality of core statistics
as emanating from different Ministries/Departments at the Central level as well as the
State Statistical Bureaus. CSO is vested with an Advisory Role for the activities as
identified in the above paragraph. CSO interacts regularly with the Central and State
Statistical Organisations on all matters concerning the development and quality of the
Statistics through Working Groups, Technical Advisory Committees, Standing
Committee, etc. at the Central level and the Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organizations at the State levels. These interactions have proved effective in maintaining
uniformity in statistics and quality of data. The National Statistical Commission has
been set up to look into these aspects.
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Paragraph No. 34)
The Committee also note that the Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organisations (CSSO) and Chief Secretaries of the States/Union Territories held in
October, 2004 had made a detailed analysis of issues relating inter alia to agriculture
and livestock statistics, social statistics, health and family welfare statistics and economic
census. The Conference had, inter alia, identified areas of weaknesses in compiling
quality data and suggested remedial measures for overcoming the problems. The
Committee, however, note with concern that the Ministry do not have ready information
on the follow up action taken on implementation of the recommendations made by the
Conference. As per the assurance given, the Committee expects the Government to
process the related information on the progress made in implementing the
recommendations and apprise them of the facts relating thereto at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The follow-up action required on the recommendations made by the Conference
of Central and State Statistical Organizations held in October 2004 have been examined
in consultation with the State Governments and other Central Ministries. A copy of the
report is enclosed as Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/3/2006-B&F dated 3.8.2006]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3, Paragraph No. 35)
For enabling effective interaction between the Central and State Governments
for addressing issues relating to the quality of statistical data, the Committee had, in

12
their Nineteenth Report, recommended that the Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organisation (CSSO) be held at annual intervals. This was agreed to by the Government.
The Committee, however, feel seriously concerned to note that the practice of convening
the conference annually is not being adhered to. The Committee reiterates the need for
invariably holding the Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisations at annual
intervals.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee has been carefully noted by the Ministry. The
Ministry would like to inform that the next conference of Central and State Statistical
Organisations is being scheduled to be held on 7th and 8th September 2006 at Hyderabad
and that would be followed up by Annual conferences, for which a Standing Committee
has been constituted.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/3/2006-B&F dated 3.8.2006]

13
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
– NIL –

14
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, Para Nos. 14 & 15)
The Committee had, in their fourth and nineteenth reports on the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation of the years
2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively taken note of the fact that Tier-II which was the
actual implementation phase of the India Statistical Strengthening Project was
dependent on the results of Tier-I of the project. The Committee had, therefore,
emphasized on the need to ensure that the project schedules were strictly adhered
to. From the information furnished, the Committee note that the work on building
the Concept Paper on Tier-ll of the India Statistical Strengthening Project which
is dependent on the broad results implementation of Tier-I of the project has been
hampered. While the work on developing the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-ll in respect
of components relating to ‘Creation and Maintenance of Business Register’ and
‘Improvement of Service Sector Statistics’ has been initiated, the development of
the ‘Concept Paper’ on the remaining three components could not be initiated viz.
identifying specific requirements for strengthening the State Statistical Branches
Bureaus, assessment of the survey capabilities of the private sector and all India
Statistical network. The delay in formulating the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-II of
the project has been owing to the non- availability of the broad results/achievements
relating to implementation of the three components as part of the Tier-I programme of
the project.
The Committee, therefore, re-emphasize on ensuring that all efforts are made
to see that the work on the remaining components of Tier-I of the India Statistical
Strengthening Project are completed as per the laid down schedules so that Tier-ll of
the project takes off without further delay. They also wish to be apprised quarterly of
the progress made in this direction.
Reply of the Government
With a view to ensuring that the remaining components of Tier-I of the India
Statistical Strengthening Project are completed as early as feasible, implementation
of its different components is being regularly monitored by the Task Forces and
Review Missions of the World Bank, besides periodical review by senior officers.

15
Tier-I of the components on Creation and maintenance of the Business Register
has been completed. Tier-I of the components on Improvement of Service Sector Statistics
and Assessment of Survey Capabilities of Private Sector is at advance stage of completion.
There has been some delay in completion of Tier-I of the component on Strengthening
of State Statistical Bureaus due to delay in submission of reports of phase-I of the
Tier-I of the component by the consultants. The component on Establishment of All
India Statistical Network has been de-linked from World Bank project.
Necessary action for preparation of the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-II is also being
simultaneously initiated in consultation with the World Bank so as to ensure that the
project is completed as per the revised schedule. We are also having elaborate discussions
and review of the up to date progress with the World Bank Mission scheduled in the
first week of September, 2006.
A World Bank Mission comprising Mr. Grahm Eele, Sr. Statistician of the World
Bank and Mr. Deepak Das Gupta, Ms. Farah Zahir and Ms. Arpita Chakraborty (officers
from Delhi Office of the World Bank), visited Central Statistical Organization to review
the progress of the ongoing India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP).
The following issues were discussed for further action:
(i) The work relating to Tier-I of the component “Strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus’ may be completed as per the time frame by end of
December, 2006.
(ii) A concept paper for Tier-II of the ISSP may be prepared at the earliest and
sent to the Planning Commission for approval. After approval, the same
may be sent to the World Bank (WB) through Department of Economic
Affairs (DEA). This will enable WB to put ISSP in their programme. The
concept paper may be prepared giving key issues, basic objectives, brief
outline of the project and costing of the project.
(iii) Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus may be taken up in phased manner.
6 to 7 areas may be taken up in all States every year so that the project may
be completed in a span of five years. DG & CEO, NSSO indicated that it
would be better to phase out activities rather than States. There should be no
discrimination amongst the States in initiating the Tier-II of the project. Since
the time frame of ISSP matches with the 11th Five Year Plan, efforts may be
made to monitor the project in such a way that the entire process is completed
within the 11th Five Year Plan.
(iv) The following projects may be considered for inclusion in Tier-II.
1. Strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus
2. Improvement of Service Sector Statistics
3. Strengthening of capacity of the MOS& PI to manage the project
4. Statistical Audit/Quality Control.

16
Recommendation (Serial No. 4, Para No. 48)
The Committee note from the information furnished that of the 683 projects on
the monitor of the Ministry, 77 projects have witnessed time as well as cost overruns.
While the time overrun witnessed in the implementation of the projects stretches from
2 to 253 months, the resultant cost escalation has been to the extent of 90.7%. Though
the cost overrun in regard to implementing projects is stated to have gone down from
67.6% in the 1990s to 18.1% in the period, April-September, 2005 it has also been
brought to light that the precarious position of the manpower structure in the Infrastructure
Project Monitoring Division (IPMD) has diluted the efficiency of the project monitoring
task to a significant extent. Bringing down time and cost overruns in implementing
projects is by itself expected to contribute to as much as 2% of the GDP. The Committee,
therefore again emphasise on ensuring that sustained and focussed attention be given to
implement adequate measures for minimizing the cost and time escalations in project
implementation.
Reply of the Government
Action is being taken to fill up the existing vacancies of Deputy Advisers and
also to revise the existing recruitment rules for eligible Deputy Advisers to be absorbed
in this Ministry.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/3/2006-B&F dated 3.8.2006]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5, Para No. 49)
The Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) which is perceived to be
a major initiative towards ensuring effective monitoring of project implementation has
itself, as pointed out in the earlier reports of the Committee witnessed repeated episodes
of delays. As per the information furnished to the Committee, the system is now set to
be operationalised by July, 2006. However, as per the outcome Budget, 2006-07, the
project is likely to become operative only by September 2006. The Committee take
strong exception to the frequent shifting of the time schedule for operationalising the
OCMS project. They expect that no effort would be spared in ensuring that the project
is made operational definitely by September, 2006 and any proposal for extension beyond
that will be intimated to the Committee along with sufficient reasons for the same.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made to operationalise On-line Computerised Monitoring System
(OCMS). However, the software developer i.e. The Energy Research Institute (TERI)
has not been able to demonstrate the efficacy of the software till-date. In the meantime,
Ministry is also on look-out for hiring two system programmers/Network administrators
to take charge of the software being developed by TERI and assist this Ministry in day
to day monitoring work. Trial of the software on the hardware Platform is being conducted
in the middle of August 2006.

17
The Energy Research Institute (TERI) has demonstrated the software developed
by them for On-line Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) only in the month of
August, 2006. Subsequently, parallel Flash Report for the month of June, 2006 has been
brought out through OCMS and compared with Flash Report brought out by National
Informatics Centre (NIC). Similarly, the Quarterly Project Implementation Status Report
(QPISR) for the quarter ending June, 2006 has been brought out through OCMS.
Discrepancies have been noticed and it has been communicated to TERI, for remedial
measures. These glitches have to be attended to by TERI before carrying out a similar
exercise for July 2006, August, 2006 and September, 2006.
This exercise will be carried out in respect of Flash Reports for the months of
July 2006, August, 2006 and September, 2006 and also QPISR for the quarter ending
September, 2006 before finally operationalising the OCMS. After three or four successive
reports without flaws are generated, then only monitoring of the projects would be
switched over to the OCMS. The software which is complex and new, is to be checked
thoroughly. To ensure that the reports generated are accurate, some more time for testing
is required. The entire process is likely to be completed by end February, 2007.
Parallelly, in September, 2006 and October, 2006 training programmes to the
user agencies to familiarize them with the OCMS, have been conducted. We would be
communicated project code numbers to the PSUs for web-based entry of project data.
For smooth functioning of OCMS a system programme has also been hired through
NICSI.

18
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AW AITED
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
11 December, 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

19
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 7 December, 2006 from 1500 to 1610 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
7. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Lakshman Seth
10. Shri A.R. Shaheen
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.
3. ** ** ** ** **

20
4. The Committee, then took up for consideration the draft report on action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 39th
Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
5. ** ** ** ** **
6. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft report on action taken
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 39th Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Minstry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation without any modification/amendment.
7. ** ** ** ** **
8. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light of
suggestions received from the Members and also make consequential verbal changes
and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 11 December, 2006.

ANNEXURE II
ACTION TAKEN REPORT
Follow-up Action taken on the Implementation of the Recommendations of the
13th Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisations held during
4-6th October, 2004, at New Delhi.
1. Agriculture and Livestock Statistics
12
Recommendation (i) Remote sensing technology and data available from the
improvement of Crop Statistics Scheme should be used
for improving the reliability of crop production estimates.
Response The States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka and
Rajasthan are using with different experience the Remote
Sensing Technique to estimate crop production. Gujarat
has also initiated action to collect the estimates of area
shown under various crops using remote sensing
techniques. The Bureau of West Bengal has made two
attempts to use remote sensing data for estimating area
under crops. The results were found widely different. Thus,
Standing Technical Committee (STC) has dropped further
attempt to use remote sensing data for the purpose of
estimating area under tea crop. In Haryana Timely
Reporting Scheme are more close, reliable and accurate
as compared to the estimates provided by Remote Sensing
Technology.
Recommendation (ii) All efforts should be taken by the States to minimize the
divergence between the Final Estimates and Fully Revised
Estimates of crop production. The Conference noted that
some of the States have already achieved the status of
almost no variation.
Response The States of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, Orissa, Rajasthan, West Bengal, reported that there
is no substantial divergence with regard to final estimates
and fully revised estimates. Some States like Gujarat &
Kerala have taken up necessary action to minimize the
divergence.
21

22
Recommendations (iii) Results of crop cutting experiments conducted under
(iii & iv) the General Crop Estimation Surveys should not be mixed
up with the results of the crop cutting experiments
conducted under the crop insurance scheme. This
recommendation may be taken up with concerned agencies
in the Ministry of Agriculture.
(iv) Since it will be difficult to find resources and develop
organizational capacity to conduct a very large number of
crop cutting experiments for estimating yield rates at local
level, the alternate methodology developed by the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute by using small area
estimation techniques may be adopted for insurance
purposes. It will have the advantage of having only one
estimate of crop production at the state level based on
general crop estimation surveys. The Ministry of
Agriculture should issue the necessary guidelines giving
the methodology.
Response The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC),
Ministry of Agriculture, while issuing operational
modalities relating to National Agricultural Insurance
Scheme (NAIS) desired that the State Departments plan
and conduct requisite number of Crop Cutting Experiments
(CCEs) for all notified crops in the notified insurance units
in order to assess the crop yield. The State Governments/
UTs Administration will maintain a single series of CCEs
for both crop production and crop insurance. The minimum
number of CCEs required was also laid down at Taluka/
Tehsil/Block level, Mandal/Phirka level and at Gram
Panchayat level.
Implementation of this recommendation necessitated a
large number of crop cutting experiments for all notified
crops for insurance, thus creating financial and manpower
problems and adversely affecting the work of General Crop
Estimation Survey in the States. This necessitated conduct
of special studies by Indian Agricultural Statistical
Research Institute (IASRI), New Delhi, to develop
appropriate small area estimation techniques for this
purpose.
This issue was also considered in the National
Workshop on Agricultural Statistics held on July 2005
12

23
wherein a presentation was made by IASRI, suggesting
that Synthetic Method involving crop cut approach and
farmers’ appraisal need to be tried engaging unemployed
youth in the villages as this method is found to be cheaper
and more accurate giving low standard error. The Ministry
of Agriculture has requested the State Governments to take
initiative to implement the approach suggested by the
IASRI. Methodology on small area statistics developed
by IASRI has also been made available to the State
Governments in November 2005.
Recommendation (v) In the case of Orissa, crop estimates in respect of 13 crops
are worked out by the Directorate of Economics and
Statistics by following standard methodologies while the
estimates in respect of the remaining 17 crops are prepared
by the Department of Agriculture without following
statistically sound methodologies. The Directorate of
Statistics and Economics should be, therefore, made
responsible for the estimation of crop production in respect
of all the 30 crops.
Response No action on this has been initiated by DES. The DES of
Orissa has been advised to take up this matter with State
Agriculture Department.
Recommendation (vi) The Patwaris and the supervisors above him need to be
mandated to accord the highest priority to the work of
girdawari. However, the recommendation for basing the
estimates on the enumeration of 20 per cent villages under
TRS needs to be further examined in view of the variations
between final estimates and fully revised estimates.
Response The responses received from the States are indicated
bellow:—
1. Rajasthan: Necessary instructions have been issued
from time to time for according highest priority to the
work of Girdawari by the Board of Revenue.
2. Haryana: To obtain reliable estimates of area under
principal crops, Girdawari is conducted on priority basis
in 20% randomly selected villages under Timely Reporting
Scheme (TRS). The estimates of total production of
principal crops are covered by crop cutting experiments
survey immediately after harvest to obtain differential
12

24
estimates of irrigated and non-irregulated and high yielding
varieties of principal crops. To bring improvement and
timeliness in the crop enumeration work by creating
awareness and introducing intensive supervision of
girdawari by revenue staff.
3. Gujarat: Under TRS, 3661 villages (that is,
20 percent of total 18306 villages) are selected for basing
the estimates of major crops in Gujarat and the reports on
area sown are sent to Government of India. It has been
noticed that the village level reports are not received in
time by the Directorate of Agriculture. Necessary action
is taken by Directorate of Agriculture to draw the attention
of Taluka / District /State authority in this regard.
4. Kerala: The field work is done by Investigators with
the effective supervision of statistical Inspectors, Taluk
Statistical Officers & District level Officers.
2. Social Statistics
Recommendation (i) Data on a number of variables relevant for local area
development planning do exist at the village level with
different source agencies like Auxiliary Nurse Midwives
(ANM) and Anganwadi workers. However, a mechanism
has to be evolved for consolidating the data sets available
from these sources, verifying the reliability and
aggregating them at Block and District levels under the
technical co-ordination of the District Statistical offices.
Appropriate data transmission mechanisms from the
village to block, district, state and national levels also need
to be evolved.
Response A High Level Committee under the chairmanship of Prof.
Abhijit Sen, Member Planning Commission is looking into
this matter.
Recommendation (ii) The S tate Governments should evolve appropriate co-
ordination mechanisms and strengthen the statistical
machinery at the district and lower levels by providing
the necessary computer facilities and manpower
Response The States of Gujarat, Karnataka, and U.P. have already
provided Computer facilities at District level for
strengthening the statistical machinery.  The Ministry of
12

25
Statistics and Programme Implementation, is currently
undertaking a study under the World Bank assisted India
Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) for strengthening
the State Statistical Bureaus and the statistical system.
Recommendation (iii) The line Ministries/Departments in the State Governments
must compile the relevant indicators on Millennium
Development Goals and the Directorates of Economics
and Statistics (DES) should provide the necessary technical
guidance.
Response The Directorates of Economics and Statistics Haryana
Karnataka, Kerala, and U.P. are providing technical
guidance for compilation of relevant indicators on
Millennium Development Goals. In For Andhra Pradesh,
the Centre for Economic and Social Studies (CESS)
compiles the MDG and HDR reports.
Recommendation (iv) The State Government agencies should make special
efforts to compile data on indicators for which any specific
sources are presently not available.
Response This recommendation has been brought to the notice of
all the State Statistical Bureaus for implementation.
Positive response has been received from Haryana,
Rajasthan and UP.
Recommendation (v) The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) should prepare
the necessary guidelines and organize training courses for
the compilation of indicators and preparation of
millennium development reports.
Response The Central Statistical Organisation has brought out the
first Millennium Development Goals, India Country
Report, 2005. This has been circulated to the State
Governments. State Govt. may prepare State level reports
on the model set by the Central Govt.
3. Health and Family Welfare Statistics
Recommendation (i) The statistical machinery in the States for compiling health
and family welfare statistics is generally weak in most of
the States and as such the same has to be adequately
strengthened. There are also several agencies dealing with
health statistics. A single agency need to be designated to
co-ordinate all statistical activities.
12

26
Response CBHI reported that three Regional Workshops were held
in Kolkata, Bangalore and New Delhi during 2002-04 for
improving & strengthening Health Information System
(HIS) of States/UTs in which all DHS of States/UTs
participated. CBHI has written to all States/UTs to
nominate State/District Nodal officers. At present, all
States/UTs have identified nodal officers who are
responsible for timely compilation/transmission of health
data of States/UTs to the center relating to Health and
Family Welfare Statistics.
Recommendation(ii) In most of the States, the DES is not involved in any way
in the compilation of health and family welfare statistics.
The DES in each State has to be, therefore, declared as
the nodal agency for statistical co-ordination and standard
setting, wherever it has already not been done. Further,
appropriate co-ordination mechanisms including
setting-up high-level coordination committees and creation
of a common statistical cadre should be instituted.
Response Responses received from States are as follows:—
1. Andhra Pradesh:– The Technical Committee at
state level should be formed with Health and
Family Welfare Departments and personnel to decide
and improve the Health statistics. Recently MMR
pilot study is being taken and figures are under
finalisation.
2. Haryana:– Civil Registration System is one of the
major activities of the State Bureau of Health
Intelligence. Besides implementation of registration
of Births & Deaths (RBD) Act and Haryana RBD
Rules compilation of Birth & Death data is also being
done in this branch. An inter Departmental
Coordination Committee has been constituted under
this system. Economic and Statistical Adviser, Govt.
of Haryana has been considered as one of the member
of the Committee. So far as creation of common
statistical cadre is concerned, it is to be considered
by the ESA.
3. Rajasthan:– The statistical cell, involved in
compilation of health and family welfare statistics in
the Health and FW Department has been created with
common Statistical Cadre.
12

27
4. Karnataka:– Directorate of Economics and Statistics
is the nodal statistical agency in the State. Common
statistical cadre is in existence in the State for over
three decades.
5. Kerala:– Directorate of Economics and Statistics is
very much involved in the compilation of Health
Statistics by deploying a wing in the Department of
Health Services besides compiling Vital Statistics by
the Directorate of Economics and Statistics.
6. Uttar Pradesh:– Statistics relating to Health and
Family welfare are collected through Economic and
Statistics Division. State Planning has been requested
to declare Economic and Statistics Division as a Nodal
agency. Efforts are being made to formulate a common
Statistical cadre in the State.
Recommendation (iii) The diver gence in statistics released by the concerned
health departments at the State level with the figures
obtained by aggregating district level statistics need to be
reconciled.
Response The CBHI has informed that State/District Nodal Officer
are responsible for aggregation and reconciliation of all
Health & Family Welfare statistical data  relating to States/
UTs.
In the States of Haryana, Kerala, and Rajasthan, the
statistics released by Health and Family Welfare
Department at State level are being reconciled with figures
obtained by aggregated district level statistics. However,
Karnataka has stated that the matter has been addressed
to Directorate of Health.
Recommendation (iv) The concerned Health Departments in the States need to
be advised by both the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare of the Central Government and the State
Government to take the technical assistance of DES in
compiling health and family welfare statistics.
Response CBHI has written to all States/UTs to implement these
recommendations. As an outcome all States/UTs have
nominated State/Distt. nodal officers who are responsible
for timely compilation/transmission of improved health
data of States/UTs to central level maintaining its quality.
12

28
Recommendation (v) The District Statistical Offices under the DES should be
suitably strengthened and made responsible for providing
technical assistance and consolidation of statistics from
all the line Departments including health authorities.
Response In the States of Haryana, Kerala, and Rajasthan the District
Statistical Offices are providing technical assistance and
consolidation of statistics including health statistics. No
State has commented on the strengthening of District
Statistical offices.
4. Index of Industrial Production
Recommendation (i) The Index of Industrial Production would be compiled by
the State Governments on a monthly basis with 1999-2000
as the base year preferably by December, 2005.
Response Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,
Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan,
UP and Chandigarh have initiated the process to compile
Index of Industrial Production on monthly basis with base
1999-2000 as the base year. The work of preparation of
items basket and weighting diagram is in progress in these
States. Some of the States like Orissa requested CSO for
supply of month-wise data for construction of IIP on
monthly basis. West Bengal has reported that the revision
of base with 1999-2000 is under consideration. The A&N
Islands have stated that the major wood base industries
have been closed down due to non-availability of materials
as Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has banned extraction
of timber. As such, the IIP has not been compiled by DES.
In Karnataka, the IIP is being compiled on quarterly basis
and efforts will be made to examine compilation on
monthly basis.
Recommendation (ii) The guidelines issued by the CSO for the compilation of
Index of Industrial Production would be followed by the
States.
Response The CSO has sent necessary guidelines and requisite data
for revision of base year of State level IIPs from 1993-94
to 1999-2000 to all States/UTs. Most of the States like;
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal have taken up the preparation
of item basket and weighting diagram as a part of exercise
12

29
of revision of base year. The regional workshops are being
organized to have face-to-face discussions with the States
on this issue.
Recommendation (iii) The State Governments would identify the common items
in the item basket of the State IIP with the item basket of
the Central IIP and communicate the same to the Central
Statistical Organisation. The production data for these
items would be provided by the CSO.
Response Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Orissa, Rajasthan, and UP have
identified the common items in the item basket for
inclusion of the State IIP and the same have been sent to
CSO for consideration. But Kerala has stated that they
are trying to include the same items in the Item basket of
the State IIP. In Karnataka the item basket is being
identified.
5. Economic Census
Recommendation (i-v) The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
would issue the necessary approvals urgently and the State
Governments would get the required manpower for
Economic Census either existing staff or on deputation
basis or on contract basis for two years by December, 2004.
i. The field staff for Economic Census would be
engaged urgently. Either school teachers, municipal
staff or unemployed youth would be engaged by the
States.
ii. The field work of Economic Census would be
completed during two months between January to
June 2005 except in the snow bound areas.
iii. It needs to be ensured that the funds provided for the
scheme would be utilized only for Economic Census
and the funds released by the CSO are transferred to
the DES without delay.
iv. The schedules for Economic Census need to be
printed by the State Governments in good quality
paper to meet the requirement of processing through
ICR technology through private printing presses, if
required.
Response The Fifth Economic Census was carried out in 2005 with
the assistance of State Governments. The field work was
12

30
completed in all the States and UTs. The field work in
Andaman and Nicobar Islands was delayed due to Tsunami
rehabilitation work. For the first time, Intelligent Character
Recognition (ICR) technology is adopted in the processing
of economic Census data. Provisional results of the Fifth
Economic Census are expected to be released shortly.
6. Housing Statistics
Recommendation There is an urgent need for the development of housing
statistics, particularly the statistics of building permits to
facilitate proper urban facility planning. The Ministry of
Urban Development needs to establish a proper statistics
unit in this regard and co-ordinate with the State
Governments.
Response The Statistical Unit is already existing in the National
Buildings Organisation, Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation. The efforts are being made to fill
the vacant posts.
The National Building Organisation is collecting
information on building permits and completion certificate
issued on quarterly basis from the Municipalities having
population of one lakh and above. However, the response
from the States is not very encouraging. This matter was
also taken up with the Technical Advisory Committee on
construction statistics constituted by the Ministry of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation. This Committee
decided to continue the collection of statistics from the
municipalities.
The States of Goa, and Kerala have reported that they are
collecting the housing statistics but they have not clearly
mentioned whether the housing statistics relates to building
permits to facilitate proper urban planning. States like
Haryana, Karnataka & West Bengal are collecting and
compiling such data. Due to lack of infrastructure, funds
and staff, the other States like Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, UP
and Chandigarh are collecting some data on housing
statistics other than building permits. In Andhra Pradesh,
no such data is being collected.
7. Population Statistics & Uniform Area Codes
Recommendation (i) The Office of the Registrar General of India (RGI) should
list the activities requiring the assistance of DES for the
12

31
improvement of Civil Registration System and the matter
should be taken up with the concerned State Governments.
Response This recommendation was brought to the notice of RGI
but the response is awaited. Some of the States like
Haryana and Orissa are ready to provide assistance for
improvement of Civil Registration System (CRS). Some
of the States like Andhra Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar
Islands and Chandigarh are not involved in the work of
the CRS.
Recommendation (ii) The Civil Registration System should be strengthened by
creating public awareness and encouraging the production
of birth, death and marriage certificates for various
educational, employment and inheritance purposes.
Response The States like; Goa, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and UT Chandigarh reported that Civil
Registration System is being strengthened by creating
public awareness through print media and electronic
media.
Recommendation (iii) As far as possible, Panchayats and Nagar Palikas should
be vested with the responsibility for the registration of
births, deaths and marriages.
Response Haryana, Karnataka Rajasthan and West Bengal have
given the responsibility for the registration of births and
deaths to the Panchayat and Nagar Palikas.
Recommendation (iv) A mechanism needs to be evolved to link UFS (Urban
Frame Surveys) used by NSSO and Enumerator Blocks
used by RGI for future censuses.
Response NSSO (CPD), Ministry of Statistics & P.I. reported that
the issue is under correspondence with RGI.
Recommendation (v) The uniform area codes developed by the office of the
RGI need to be used by the survey agencies including the
State Governments.
Response The uniform area codes developed by the Officer of the
RGI are being used by the State of Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, Rajasthan and West Bengal.
8. Education, Labour and Transport Statistics
Recommendation (i) There should be a nodal agency in the State Governments
with adequate statistical manpower, preferably drawn from
the DES, for the collection of education statistics from all
12

32
the relevant Departments. Similarly, the machinery in the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education in the
Ministry of Human Resource Development needs to be
strengthened.
Response The statistics Unit in the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education in the Ministry of HRD has recently
been strengthened by creating SAG level post. In the State
of Rajasthan, the Directorate of Secondary Education is
working as nodal agency for providing education statistics
in the State. Chandigarh and Delhi reported that
Directorate of Economics & Statistics will function as
nodal agency for education on statistics. In Goa, the DES
plays a roll of coordinating agency for educational
statistics. Andhra Pradesh has suggested that an Expert
Committee should be formed with representatives of
education and statistics department with regard to release
of educational data. In the State of U.P., a statistical cell
has been created for education statistics. Haryana has
stated that the decision on education has to be taken by
Ministry of Human Resource Development.
Recommendation(ii) The Directorate of Economics and Statistics are presently
not involved in Education, Labour and Road Statistics in
several States and the situation needs to be addressed
urgently.
Response DES of Kerala and Rajasthan are involved in compilation
of these statistics. In Andhra Pradesh and Haryana these
statistics are compiled by their respective Departments.
9. State Statistical System
Recommendation(i) The Directorates of Economics and Statistics have to be
empowered to enable statistical co-ordination at the State
level. It would include:
(a) Strengthening of DES by elevating it to appropriate
level with a professional statistician or economist as
its Head,
(b) Declaring DES as the nodal agency for statistical
co-ordination and standard setting,
(c) Involvement of DES in various activities relating to
policy formulation and planning,
12

33
(d) Issue of Government directives to all the line
Ministries to co-ordinate with the DES in statistical
matters.
Response The Ministry of Statistics and PI is currently undertaking
a study on strengthening the State Statistical Bureaus and
the State Statistical System. The report is awaited.
However, the present situation in certain States is as
follows:—
(a) As reported by Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, etc., DES is headed by Professional
Statistician or Economist . This is by virtue of their
being in the State Statistical service for which this is
an essential qualification. Gujarat State Government
has formulated a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Principal Secretary of Planning to discuss and
resolve various issues related to the statistical system.
Similarly, West Bengal has constituted a Technical
Committee for coordination and improvement of
statistical system in the State. DES of Uttar Pradesh
has submitted a proposal to the State Government to
elevate the post of Director to the level of Secretary.
Necessary proposals have also been submitted by
DES to the Orissa Government.
(b) DES has been declared as a nodal agency for statistical
coordination and standard setting in States of
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala,
Rajasthan, Andeman & Nicobar Islands and
Chandigarh. The proposal for declaring DES as nodal
agency is under consideration in the states of Assam,
Goa, Gujarat Orissa and U.P.
(c) DES are involved in various activities relating
to policy formation and planning in States of
Andhra Pradesh Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, U.P &
Chandigarh. The DES of Rajasthan is not involved in
policy formulation & planning but it provides
information. In Assam, Gujarat, Orissa, and West
Bengal, the matter is under consideration.
(d) All the line, Departments/Ministries are coordinating
with DES in the statistical matters in the state of
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan & Chandigarh. In the
states of Gujarat, Orissa, UP and West Bengal, the
matter is under consideration.
12

34
Recommendation (ii) Organize annual meetings of statistical agencies in various
Departments of the State Government to discuss issues of
co-ordination and statistical standards.
Response In the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka & Kerala DES
are involved in the annual meeting of Statistical agencies
in various departments to discuss issues of coordination
and statistical standards. In Rajasthan, proposals are being
taken up in new projects such as strengthening of state
plans. Uttar Pradesh, has stated that the matter is under
consideration.
Recommendation (iii) Establish a common cadre of statistical officers under the
control of DES to man statistical posts in different
Departments/Ministries.
Response In Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Rajasthan except
(Animal Husbandry, Medical and Health and Agriculture
Department) a common cadre of statistical Officers under
the control of DES to man statistical posts in different
departments have been established. In UP, and Kerala the
matter is under consideration.
Recommendation (iv) State Governments should provide special dispensation
for filling up all the vacant Posts in DES including District
Statistical Offices.
Response The matter for filling up all the vacant posts in DES
including District Statistical Offices is under consideration
in the States of Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala & Rajasthan.
Recommendation (v) State Governments should consider strengthening of DES,
wherever necessary in terms of men, machinery and
materials.
Response The Government of Karnataka, Kerala and Rajasthan are
considering the matter for strengthening of DES. However,
Haryana stated that the Central Govt. should issue the
necessary instructions to State Governments to do the
needful. UP has already provided computer for
strengthening and imparting training from time to time.
Recommendation (vi) The CSO should provide the required assistance to DES
for capacity building by organizing specialized training
and providing trainers.
12

35
Response The Training Division planned nine training Modules on
various topics for non-ISS Statistical Personnel of Central
and State Departments and Public Sector Undertakings
with course duration of about two-three weeks. Out of
these, seven have been organized till February 2006.
Recommendation (vii) Empower the District statistical offices to obtain data from
different data sources located in the district, computerize
the same and transmit to the DES and other relevant
organisations.
Response In Rajasthan, the District Statistical Offices are empowered
to obtain data from different data sources and transmit the
same to DES and other relevant Organizations. Proposal
for providing computers to each district are under
consideration. However, the states of Haryana, Karnataka,
& UP reported that DSOs are already doing this work.
Kerala has agreed to implement it.
10. Pooling of Central and State Sample Data
Recommendation (i) Efforts have to be made by all the State Governments to
complete the tabulation of State sample data within a year
of completion of field survey by creating the necessary
tabulation capabilities.
Response Efforts are being made to improve the situation by the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Kerala and West Bengal.
In Orissa, steps has already been taken to complete the
tabulation of State Sample data.
Recommendation (ii) Efforts should also be made to pool the Central and State
sample data after examining the poolability of the data
sets so as to derive more reliable estimates at the State
level and to obtain estimates at the sub-State level.
Response In Andhra Pradesh Pooling exercise has already taken
place for 43rd, 45th, 50th, 55th and 56th rounds by
following the methodology of Shri B.S. Minhans and
Shri M.G. Sardana. An attempt has been made to increase
the sample size for 62nd round with the help of NSSO to
generate reliable district level estimates and it is under
process. Orissa and West Bengal reported that effort will
be made in this regard.
Recommendation (iii) The National Sample Survey Organisation should
undertake more exercises to examine the poolability of
12

36
Central and State sample data in respect of consumer
expenditure and employment surveys in some of the larger
States.
Response The NSSO informed that the job of pooling exercise for
three States viz., Maharashtra, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh
has been taken up. State data in the desired format has
been requested from the DESs.
11. State Income Estimates
Recommendation (i) All the States would compile gross fixed capital formation,
advance estimates of State domestic product and district
domestic product, analysis of local bodies as it is being
done in some States.
Response Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,
Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, UP, and West Bengal, and A&N Islands (except
GFCF) have been compiling Gross Fixed Capital
Formation (GFCF) and advance estimates of SDP. Some
of the States are not compiling these estimates for private
sector due to lack of data. Most of the above States are
analyzing annual accounts of local bodies.
Recommendation (ii) CSO would provide the guidelines and procedures for
compiling District Domestic Product.
Response The CSO provided the guidelines and procedures for
compilation of District domestic Product and the States
of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala Orissa,
Rajasthan, UP and West Bengal, reported that CSO
guidelines are being followed. The guidelines are also
available on the Ministry’s website.
Recommendation (iii) CSO would also provide the methodology on estimation
of supra-regional sectors like Railways, Banking, etc. The
time lag in providing the estimates of supra-regional
sectors has to be reduced by strengthening statistical set-
up in relevant sectors.
Response The CSO has provided the methodology and also reduced
the time-lag in providing data to the States on supra-
regional sectors.
Recommendation (iv) The State Governments have to be given constant guidance
for the implementation of various central schemes in the
12

37
States involving large-scale statistical activities, by
providing an interface between the Central Statistical
Organisation and State Statistical System. In order to
achieve the same High Level Co-ordination Committees
be set up in all the States where such Committees do not
exist presently. These Committees may deal with statistics
in respect of all subject areas.
Response High Level coordination Committee has been constituted
in the States of Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh &
Orissa to provide guidelines for implementation of various
Central Schemes involving large-scale statistical activities.
12

APPENDIX
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS
AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
Total % of total
(i) Total number of recommendations 5
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have been 2 40%
accepted by the Government
[Vide Recommendations at
SI. Nos. 2 (para No. 21-22) & 3 (Para Nos. 33-35)]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Nil 00%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies
(Nil)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 3 60%
of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 1 (Para No. 14-15),
4 (Para No. 48) & 5 (Para No. 49)]
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 00%
of which final reply of the Government is still awaited
(Nil)
38