31
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS &
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Nineteenth report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Statistics &
Programme Implementation)]
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 ( Saka)


THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS & PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Nineteenth report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Statistics &
Programme Implementation)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 31
Price : Rs. 38.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the  Government (1, 3, 7
and 10) ........................................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies (2, 4, 8 and 9) ..... 17
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee (5 and 6) .. 24
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited (Nil) .............................................................. 27
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 19 December, 2005 ............................................. 28
APPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by government on
the recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth report of the Standing Committee
on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
Statistics & Programme Implementation. ........... 31
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Thirty-First Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 20 April, 2005. The Government furnished the written
replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 19 July,
2005. The draft action taken report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 19 December, 2005.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 December, 2005 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendation contained in their
Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 April,
2005.
2. The Report contained ten recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the ten
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analysed
and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl.Nos 1, 3, 7 & 10
(Total 4) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Sl.Nos. 2, 4, 8, 9
(Total 4) (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl.Nos. 5 & 6
(Total 2) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
Nil (Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that reply in respect of the
recommendation contained in Chapter I of the Report may be furnished
to them expeditiously.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by Government
on some of their recommendations:
Recommendation No. 4 (Para Nos. 20-21)
Central Statistical Organisation (CSO)-Central Training Facility
5. The Committee had, in their Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry emphasized on the need for ensuring
judicious usage of the allocation of Rs. 8.86 crore earmarked for
constructing the Central Training Facility for the benefit of statistical
personnel by ensuring that the related work was taken up and executed
as per the stipulated schedule. The Committee, were, however,
compelled to take serious note of the fact that no tangible progress
could be made in constructing the building during the year 2004-05,
due to the changes in the dimensions of the plot, consequential
re-registration and failure to obtain the approvals of the authorities
concerned for building plan prepared by the CPWD. As a result, a
very large portion of the budgeted amount of Rs. 8.86 crore for the
year 2004-05 had to be surrendered by the Ministry, with the net
expenditure likely to be incurred on the project during the year being
restricted to an amount of Rs. 25 lakhs with the possibility of an
additional amount of Rs. 45 lakhs being used towards land filling and
associated activities. What the Committee found particularly disturbing
to note was the fact that while the Ministry had, during the year viz.,
2004-05, attributed the delay in executing the project to the failure of
the CPWD adhering to the time schedule for preparing the building
plan, the reasons extended for the delay in 2005-06 related to the
building plan prepared by the CPWD being not in conformity with
the stipulations of Greater Noida Authority.
6. The Committee understood that a revised building plan was
being re-submitted for approval by the Greater Noida Authority and
an amount of Rs. 13.735 crore had been earmarked at the B.E.,
2005-06 for executing the project. As assured by the Secretary during
the course of oral evidence, the Committee trusted that necessary approvals
would be obtained speedily and the amount of Rs. 13.735 crore allocated
for the project during the year, 2005-06, would be utilised with care
and objectivity so that the exercise of revising the budgeted amount to
a much lesser level at the stage of preparation of the Revised Estimates
and the differential between the Estimates and the Actual expenditure
being of a very high order was avoided.

3
7. In their Action Taken Reply , the Ministry have stated as follows:
The construction of Central Training Facility (CTF) has been
entrusted to CPWD. In view of the non-approval of building plan by
Greater Noida Authority , the major work could not be started. The
building plan was re-submitted on 6.6.2005 by the CPWD after
incorporating the changes indicated by Greater Noida Authority. The
building plan has since been approved by the Authority. CPWD has
been asked to go for Tenders. CPWD has been requested to take
measures for utilizing the provisions in BE 2005-06.
8. Further, the Government replied as under:
A revised building plan in conformity with the stipulations of
Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority (GNIDA) was
resubmitted by CPWD on 6th June, 2005. The approval of Greater
Noida Authority has been received on 28th June, 2005. Efforts are
being made for finalization of tenders and commencement of the actual
construction by CPWD which has been asked to take all possible
steps to expedite construction and spend the whole amount of
Rs. 13.735 crore allocated in the BE for 2005-06.
9. Apart from stating that the building plan prepared by the
CPWD for constructing the Central Training Facility (CTF) for the
benefit of statistical personnel has since been approved by the
Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority (GNIDA) on
28 June, 2005, the reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on the
details of the measures taken or proposed for ensuring judicious
usage of the allocated sum of Rs. 13.735 crore for executing the
project. The project has been languishing on account of avoidable
factors such as delays in getting the building plan prepared by
CPWD and obtaining the approval of the Greater Noida Industrial
Development Authority (GNIDA). Now, since the building plan has
been approved, the Committee desire that the Ministry make every
possible effort to ensure that the construction work is commenced
with and the project executed within a planned schedule so as to
avoid a repetition of the shortfall witnessed in the earlier year
2004-05 in utilising the allocated budgetary resources.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 26)
Online Computerised Monitoring System
10. The Committee noted that the major initiative of introducing
the On-line Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) for enabling

4
effective monitoring of project implementation could not materialize
as scheduled in 2003-04 owing to the delay in procuring the computer
hardware and software. The procurements could materialize only in
2004-05, and as informed by the Ministry, the OCMS would become
operational by the end of May, 2005 and would contribute in improving
the quality of project and infrastructure monitoring inter-alia by enabling
on-line collection of information without time lags; on-line
communication between the project enterprises and the Ministry; and
facilitating transfer of project profiles and accruing of sectoral reports.
The Committee felt that no effort should be spared in modernizing
and up-dating the IT infrastructure of the Ministry. When the system
is put in place, the Committee felt, it would not only bring about
revolutionary change in quality of monitoring but would also help in
taking quick remedial measures. The Committee, therefore wished to
be kept apprised of the progress in implementing the OCMS as well
as its effectiveness in strengthening the project monitoring measures.
11. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:
“The launching of OCMS is likely to be started in September, 2005
and completed in October, 2005. The effectiveness in strengthening
of the project monitoring measures as a result of launching of
OCMS may be known only a few months thereafter.”
12. On the current status of implementation of the OCMS Project,
the Ministry, vide communication dated 12 December, 2005 furnished
the following information:
• “Installation of hardware under OCMS has been completed.
• Most of the software has been loaded and checking is in
progress.
• Old data from NIC database has been imported into OCMS.
•P roject Data (including milestones) on experimental basis
will be input into the system by project authorities (PSUs)
by end of February, 2006.
• Once the accuracy of system functioning is certified as per
the original parameters laid down, OCMS will be declared
operational, subsequently.
•T raining will be imparted to members of PSUs having large
projects within a period of 4 to 6 days.
•T raining will be completed within a week.”

5
13. The Ministry also informed that it was hoped that the OCMS
would be operationalised by the end of March, 2006.
14. Apart from stating that the Online Computerised Monitoring
System (OCMS) was likely to be operationalised by October, 2005,
no additional details have been furnished in the reply on the scope,
plan and progress of implementing the project. As informed by the
Ministry earlier, the OCMS Project has been perceived to be a major
initiative towards ensuring effective monitoring of project
implementation. Implementation of the Project could not be executed
in 2003-04, as originally scheduled, owing to delays in procuring the
required computer hardware and software which could materialize
only in 2004-05. Though the Ministry were also categorical in
informing the Committee that the OCMS would be operationalised
in May, 2005, which was later rescheduled to October, 2005, the same
could not be operationalised till date and the delays continue to
hamper the Project. From the additional information furnished on
the current status of the Project, the Committee note that the Ministry
are now hopeful of operationalising the OCMS only by the end of
March, 2006. Considering the significant delays that continue to be
witnessed in implementing the Project, the Committee expect the
Government to analyse the reasons for the same and take appropriate
remedial measures so as to ensure that such happenings do not
reoccur. The Committee take a serious view of frequent shifting of
completion dates and would like to be kept apprised of the progress
in operationalising the OCMS and its efficacy in strengthening
Project monitoring mechanisms.
Recommendation No. 6 (Para Nos. 31 & 31A)
Central Statistical Organisation-Updating the Indices
15. The National Statistical Commission had felt that the current
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with base 1993-94 was deficient in many
respects inter-alia owing to the fact that price changes in the services
sector were not duly accounted for. The Commission had also
concluded that, as at present, WPI was not an adequate  measure of
inflation and there was a need for separate index for measurement of
inflation in the economy. The Committee were given to understand
that a working group  had been constituted to give focused attention
on different aspects related with the revision of WPI series, whose
terms of reference inter-alia  included, exploring the possibility of
inclusion of selected services in a WPI basket and examining the need
for switching over from WPI to a Producer Price Base Index (PPI).

6
Considering the fact that the price indices in the system of economic
statistics were closely watched indicators of macro economic
performances and were important tools in the formulation of the
monitory and fiscal policy, the Committee strongly emphasized on the
need for early completion of the work on the new series of WPI and
Producer Price Index (PPI). The Committee also wished to be kept
apprised of the progress made in this direction.
16. As regards the issue of revision of current series of CPI, the
Committee understood that the Labour Bureau had prepared a detailed
scheme way back in 1996 and the NSSO undertook the related field
survey and the technical details worked out, which had since been
examined by the Technical Advisory Committee. The Labour Bureau
had reportedly convened a meeting in May, 2005 to consider the matter.
The Committee expected the work on the revision of series to be
completed and the new series of CPI released expeditiously.
17. In their reply the Ministry have stated as under:
“Position with regard to Revision of the Wholesale Price Index
The terms of Reference of the Working Group set up under the
Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission
for the revision of the existing series of Wholesale Price Index
(WPI) inter-alia, include the two areas viz. (i) to examine the need
for switching over from wholesale price based price index (WPI)
to producer price based price Index (PPI) and suggested further
improvements based on the IMF’s PPI Manual; and (ii) to explore
possibility of inclusion of selected services in the WPI basket.
The working Group on WPI held three meetings as on date viz.
on 15.01.2004, 22.03.2004 and 27.08.2004. The working Group in
the first meeting deliberated on the issues relating to choice and
selection of the base year and also proposed the constitution of
four Sub-Groups to assess/analyse and recommend base year
selection and also to conduct exercises on the revision of series.
The four Sub-groups are: (i) Analytical and other related Issues;
(ii) Agricultural Commodities; (iii) Manufactured items; and
(iv) Unorganized and unregistered sector.
The second meeting of the Working Group dealt on the choice of
the base year, commodity coverage, availability of data, preparation
of weighing diagram, among others. In the third meeting, the
Working Group after deliberations, selected 2000-01 as the base
year for the new series of the WPI. It further directed to prepare
the Weighing Diagram and finalization of commodity basket.

7
The Sub-Group on Manufactured Items and related matters
submitted its Report. Their recommendations are under
consideration of the Working Group. Works of the other Sub-groups
are in progress.”
18. The Ministry further replied as under:
“Regarding revision of current series of Consumer Price index for
Industrial Workers, a Working Class Family Income and
Expenditure Survey (WCFIES) was carried out in 1999-2000 by
Field Operations Division (National Sample Survey Organization)
at the request of the Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour. Based
upon the consumption pattern of the Industrial Workers, the
weighing diagram (Group/Sub-Group wise) was prepared by
Labour Bureau which was further considered and approved by
the Technical Advisory Committee on Statistics of Prices and Cost
of Living (TAC on SPCL). The Committee in forty-third meeting
held on 15th July, 2004 approved recommendations of the
constituent Sub-Group for revising the base year of the current
series of Consumer price index numbers for industrial Workers.
Recently, a tripartite meeting involving Central Government
Representatives, State Govt. Representatives, Employers and
employees Organisations was held on 19-20th May, 2005 at Shimla
which was chaired by the Secretary, Ministry of Labour. The
recommendations made in the above meeting are under
consideration of Ministry of Labour. The revised Index for
Consumer Price index for Industrial Workers with base 2001=100
shall be released by the Labour Bureau after the recommendations
are considered and approved by the Ministry of Labour.”
19. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply merely
recounts the fact that the Working Group/Sub-Groups constituted
for inter alia examining the feasibility of inclusion of ‘selected
services’ in the WPI basket; and switching over from wholesale price
index (WPI) to Producer Price Base Index (PPI) had deliberated on
the related issues at their meetings held in 2004. No specific details
on the deliberations and findings of the Working Group and its
sub-Groups and the measures taken or proposed for ensuring early
completion of the work on formulating the new series of WPI and
switching over to Producer Price Base Index (PPI) have been
furnished. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific
details of the progress made by the four sub-groups viz. sub-group
on (i) Analytical and other related Issues; (ii) Agricultural
Commodities; (iii) Manufactured items; and (iv) Unorganized and
unregistered sector in the exercise on the revision of WPI series.

8
20. As regards the work on revision of the current series of the
Consumer Price Index (CPI), the Committee note from the reply that
a meeting convened by the Ministry of Labour in May, 2005 which,
inter alia , involved the representatives of the Central and State
Governments and Employers and Employees Organisations had made
the related recommendations, after consideration of which the Labour
Bureau would release the revised index.
21. In view of the fact that the National Statistical Commission
had, inter alia , observed that there were serious deficiencies in the
current series of the price indices, the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the work on the revision and carrying out
necessary modifications in the formation of price indices viz. WPI
series by including ‘selected services’, and CPI series on the basis of
changes in the consumption pattern and basket of goods involved
be completed expeditiously.

9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 7)
Improvement of National Accounts Statistics
The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a
substantial under-utilization of the budgeted amounts under the Head,
‘Improvement of National Accounts Statistics’. While the budgeted
amount under the Head, at the stage of BE for the year 2003-04 was
Rs. 86 lakhs, the amount was revised to Rs. 60 lakhs at the stage of
RE during the year and the actual utilization has only been to the
extent of Rs. 37.99 lakhs. The reasons adduced by the Ministry for the
under-utilization of the budgeted amount, which include, non-receipt
of feasible proposals from the states for conducting type studies, do
not appear to be convincing. Moreover, the allocation under the Head
for the year, 2005-06, has once again been enhanced to Rs. 95 lakhs,
ostensibly due to factors such as the increase in staff wages, conducting
Regional level workshops on State income compilations and
undertaking professional studies. Given the trend witnessed in
budgeting and the actual expenditure incurred in the last three years,
the Committee have grave doubts on the objectivity with which the
budgeting is being done by the Ministry. Hence, they recommend that
every effort should be made to provide realistic budget estimates.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has noted the concerns expressed by the Committee
and will put in every effort to provide realistic budget estimates. During
the year 2004-05, the Ministry conducted six Regional workshops on
State income compilations as planned. Further, two workshops for the
benefit of the newly created States (Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh) were
organised. Besides, the Ministry entrusted 6 studies to the State
Governments, the Ministry of Agriculture and the Indian Council of
Forest Research and Education, for improving the national accounts.
For the year 2005-06, the Ministry has taken necessary steps, like
conduct 6 Regional level workshops and conducting 4 studies through
State Governments, as envisaged in the plan scheme.
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 13)
Institutional Development and Capacity Building Machinery and
Equipment
The Committee regret to observe that there has been a wide
variation in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and the Actual

10
expenditure under the Head, ‘Institutional Development and Capacity
Building’. While allocations of Rs. 1.72 crore and Rs. 4.44 crore were
made at the stage of BE for 2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively, the
amounts were reduced to Rs. 80.00 lakhs and Rs. 77.50 lakhs
respectively at the RE stage and the actuals for the years 2002-03 and
2003-04, totalled to Rs. 62.54 lakhs and Rs. 26.60 lakhs. As informed
by the Ministry, a huge provision of Rs. 4.44 crore was made for the
year 2003-04 mainly for procuring machinery and equipment to furnish
the proposed Central Training Facility (CTF), work on which could
not takeoff. This resulted in reducing the budgeted amount to
Rs. 77.50 lakhs at the RE stage during the year and the actual
expenditure incurred in the year totalled to Rs. 26.60 lakhs. Though
the Committee are in agreement with the fact that certain projects
may not materialize as planned, given the wide variations witnessed
in BE, RE and Actuals under the Head each year, they express the
view that every care should be taken to make realistic and objective
projections at the BE stage so that the funds available are judiciously
distributed and made use of by the various Ministries/Departments.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted by the
Ministry. Steps will be taken to ensure that realistic and objective
projections are made at BE stage by various Divisions of the Ministry.
Recommendation No. 7 (Para Nos. 38 & 39)
Quality and reliability of Statistical Data
The Committee are deeply concerned to note the deficiencies
prevalent in methodology of collection of data at different levels. They
understand that the collection of data at local level is not free from
faults. The deficient data in turn is transmitted to district offices before
being agglomerated at the State level. The State department supplies
the same to the concerned departments and the corresponding
departments in the Central Government. They take note of the
Government’s own admission in this regard that lot has to be done
about quality of data collections. The Committee find that the high
powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Rangarajan has
submitted its report way back in 2001, which have given far reaching
recommendation in this regard. These include inter-alia the appointment
of statistical advisors in important Ministries and departments,
constitution of an organised State Statistical Cadre, launching of a
Centrally-sponsored Scheme with the specific objectives of developing
survey and data processing capabilities in the States, besides setting

11
up of an independent statistical authority-National Commission on
Statistics through an Act of Parliament in respect of policy-making co-
ordination and maintaining quality standards of core-statistics. They
recall that they had recommended for setting up of National Statistical
Commission through an Act of Parliament in their report in 2004-05.
The Committee strongly deplore the undue delay on the part of the
Government in, bringing the Bill, which, as informed is expected to be
introduced shortly. As the future of maintaining and supply of quality
statistics hinges on the fate of this Bill and the Committee want that
all formalities should be completed without further delay so that the
National Statistical Commission may be able to carry its programme
for revamping the statistical system in India.
The Committee are given to understand that with a view to interact
between States and Central Government, there is a Council which
meets once in every two years. They find that the meeting of the
Council has not been held so far. They deplore such delay in holding
the meeting and want that the frequency for holding this meeting
may be reduced to one year instead of the two years so that fruits of
interaction can be realised. The Committee also strongly feel the need
to enhance the quantum of funding to the States for strengthening the
statistical system of the States.
Reply of the Government
In line with the recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission,
it has been decided to set-up a National Statistical Commission and a
notification constituting the Commission has been issued on 1 June,
2005. A copy of the notification is enclosed. It is expected that the
statutory Commission would be set up within a period of one year.
The Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations
(COCSSO) was held in October 2004. The tradition of holding the
Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations in all full
fledged manner has been thus revived and it is proposed to hold it
every year from now.
Recommendation No. 10 (Para Nos. 62 to 68)
Project Monitoring Division—Time and Cost Overruns
The Project Monitoring Division (PMD) plays the all important
role of monitoring implementation of all Central Sector Projects costing
Rs. 20 crore and above. While a two-tier system of monitoring is
followed in respect of all mega projects costing more than Rs. 100
crore, which include, bringing out monthly Flash Reports and two
monthly Exception Reports in cases where significant slippages are

12
noticed in achieving the targeted milestones; Quarterly Project Status
Implementation Status Reports (QPSISR) are brought out by the
Division in respect of all projects costing Rs. 200 crore and above.
The Committee are well aware of the fact that a number of
initiatives have been taken towards ensuring timely and cost-effective
implementation of projects, which include, rigorous quarterly reviews
of implementation of public sector projects by the Ministries concerned;
review of projects experiencing cost and time slippages by the
Committee of Secretaries (CoS); fixation of responsibility for slippages
by the Standing Committees; and incorporation of Govindarajan
Committee’s recommendations on project formulation, appraisal and
implementation of Central projects in the system of Public Investment
Board and Expenditure Finance Commission which, inter-alia, enhance
the powers of the various authorities in granting approvals for central
sector projects.
The Committee also understand that other measures initiated in
ensuring speedy and effective implementation of central projects
include, introduction of ‘Standard Contract Management’ aimed at
minimising contract related disputes, ground level reviews of project
implementation; and introduction of ‘Model Domestic Contract
Documents’.
Despite undertaking these well-thought of and reasoned measures,
what the Committee feel particularly worried to note is the fact that
of the 617 projects on the monitoring list as on 30 September, 2004,
which involve a whopping investment to the tune of Rs. 2,67,067 crore,
as many as 149 projects have reported cost overruns of 22.2% with
respect to the latest approved cost estimates, of these, 8 projects have
reportedly contributed to nearly 79.25% of the total cost overrun of all
projects together viz., Naptha Jhakri Power Corporation, DMRTC,
Dulhasti Hydro Electric Projects; THDC, Udhampur-Srinagar, Baramulla,
Dhauliganga Hydro Electric Project and Panipat Refinery Examination
Project. The Committee strongly recommend that the specific
contributory factors to the cost overruns in respect of these projects
should be gone into in detail and appropriate remedial measures taken
so as to ensure that such happenings, which do not augur well to the
economy, do not recur.
A very disturbing aspect that the Committee wish to bring to the
fore here is the fact that as on January 1, 2005, there were as many
as 23 projects involving an expenditure of Rs. 344.46 crore which were
either frozen or abandoned mid-way due to factors such as fund
constraints and land acquisition problems.

13
Another aspect that the Committee wish to highlight here is the
fact that in the case of a majority of the projects, particularly of the
Railways and Road Transport and Highways, a major contributory
factor for delays and cost escalations relate to problems faced in
acquiring land. The Committee strongly feel the need to give specific
attention to evolving measures for overcoming this problem, possibly
by ensuring that issues relating to acquisition of project related land
are addressed before-hand or in advance to the stage of project related
approvals.
The Committee also note that in a majority of 37 projects, other
than railway any projects, in whose case the time overruns and cost
escalations were reportedly examined by the Standing Committees of
the Ministries and departments concerned, the action taken against
those held responsible for lapses as well as the remedial measures
taken, if any, have not been informed by the Ministry. The Committee
desire that the related details should be furnished to them at the
earliest.
Reply of the Government
Ministry takes note of the recommendation.
Four under-mentioned Ministries were requested to furnish details
concerned with 8 projects keeping in view the observations of the
Committee.
(a) Ministry of Power, (b) Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and Shipping, (c) Ministry of Urban Development, and
(d) Ministry of Railways.
The Ministry of Power concerned with 4 projects has reported
reasons for time and cost overrun as follows:
(1) Naptha Jhakri Hydro Electric Project
(a) Major catastrophic natural calamity such as rockslides (1997),
cloud burst and flash flood-(August, 1997) unprecedented
flash flood (July and August, 2000)
(b) Geological surprises and adverse physical conditions
(c) Additional Rehabilitation packages.
The reasons for cost overrun are as follows:
(i) Price Escalation
(ii) Foreign Exchange Variation

14
(iii) Statutory reasons such as increase in HP Sales Tax/Works
Contract/on material transportation.
(iv) Quantity variation/over and under estimation/change in
design and unforeseen and additional works.
(v) Geological surprises and its remedial measures.
(vi) Cost implication of additional rehabilitation packages.
Adequate measures have been taken by Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam
Ltd. (SJVNL) executing the project to prevent damages on account of
future flash flood and other natural calamities and also by strengthening
the monitoring mechanism at various levels.
(2) Dulhasti HE Project, J&K
Reasons for time and cost overrun
(i) Want of fund
(ii) Serious law and order problems resulting in the abduction
of two engineers of French Consortium and subsequent
suspension of work.
(iii) Balance civil works awarded to new Civil Contractor M/s.
JSA (Jr.) a joint venture of Indian & Norwaygian Company.
(iv) Geological surprises.
(v) Catastrophic rock burst in February, 2000.
(vi) Poor law and order situations, road blockages, adverse
weather conditions.
(vii) Price escalation.
(viii) Additional taxes and duties (Statutory reason).
(ix) Additional Cost on account of manpower, Deployment of
sophisticated machinery.
(x) Foreign Component Exchange Rate Variation.
(xi) Change in scope.
(xii) Increase in quantities and additional new items.
(xiii) Increase in I.D.C.
(xiv) Extension of supply and erection contract security
arrangements, establishment charges, dewatering etc.

15
Adequate measures have been taken to strengthen monitoring
mechanism at various levels.
(3) Tehri Hydro Development Corporation
Tehri Dam & HPP , State-I (1000 MW)
Reasons for Cost and Time Overrun
(i) Escalation in cost and foreign exchange variations
(ii) Design Changes
(iii) Geological surprises and its remedial measures
(iv) Cost escalation of additional rehabilitation package
(v) Various agitations and dharnas resulting in law and order
problem and ban on blasting operations of the Dam.
Measures Taken
(a) THDC has made efforts to get the law and order and land
acquisition problems main forest land resolved by keeping
constant liaison with the State Government through
Commissioner, Garhwal who has been entrusted with all
the powers for resolving the above issues.
(b) Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened at various
levels.
(4) Dhauliganga Stage I HE Project
Reasons for time and cost overrun
(i) Change in the policy of financing the public sector power
project and restriction of the debt equity ratio to 3:1 and
public sector concerned was to finance the project on its
own.
(ii) National Hydro Electric Power Corporation could not
arrange the finance for the project.
(iii) The project could not start after funds were tied up from
JBIC (formerly OECF) under JBIC loan package for 1995-96.
(iv) Delay in the start of the project due to reasons above
resulted in cost escalation.

16
(v) Revised Cost Estimate from 601.98 (1998) to 1578.31 (1999).
(vi) Additional provisions i.e. International Consultancy, GOI
Guarantee fee, JBIC loan service charges, physical
contingency and increase in I.D.C.
Delay in commissioning the associated transmission line of PGCIL.
These projects have been frozen/merged/put on hold due to
demand constraints and other reasons such as:
(i) Geomining/technological problems
(ii) Underground Fire problem (in Jharia Mines)
(iii) Land and fund problems
(iv) Non-finalisation of packages
(v) Court cases
(vi) Change in planning
(vii) Disinvestment
Land acquisition related issues inter-alia were also discussed with
the Secretaries concerned and separately with the Railway Board in
2 meetings of the Committee of Secretaries chaired by the Cabinet
Secretary.
In addition, recently, two main Ministries concerned were requested
to take appropriate measures and send Action Taken Report. Replies
are awaited.
The list of projects which were reviewed by the Standing
Committee has been circulated to get the action taken report with
respect (a) to those being held responsible for lapses and (b) as well
as remedial measures taken to put the project on track, we will keep
the Standing Committee informed.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/2/2005-B&F dated 19th July, 2005]

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 10)
Programme Implementation
The Committee take strong exception to the fact that year after
year, the budgetary provisions under the Head ‘Programme
Implementation’ earmarked for meeting expenditure on salaries,
domestic and foreign travel, office expenses, professional services etc.,
are being revised to a much lower level at the stage of revised
Estimates and the actual expenditure under the Head has been even
much lesser. For instance, while an amount of Rs. 2.35 crore was
allocated at the stage of BE for 2002-03, the amount was revised to
Rs. 1.32 crore at the stage of RE and the actual expenditure was only
to the tune of Rs. 20.60 lakh. Similarly, for the year 2003-04, an amount
of Rs. 2 crore was allocated at the stage of BE, which was revised to
Rs. 1.67 crore at the stage of RE and the actual expenditure has only
been to the extent of Rs. 23.64 lakhs. The Committee understand that
during 2003-04, the utilization was much lower than the estimates as
the proposal to strengthen the Project Monitoring Division was not
approved and the process of engaging consultants for professional
services took much longer time than anticipated. Given the extremely
wide variation in the figures of BE, RE and the actuals for he years,
2002-03 and 2003-04, the Committee cannot help observing that the
outcome in regard to utilization of the amounts earmarked has not at
all been in conformity with the Budget Estimates, which they feel,
needs to be avoided at all costs. They, therefore, recommend that the
Government should take utmost care while finalizing the Budget
Estimates so that large scale variations between BE, RE and Actuals
do not recur.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made to make maximum utilization of the
budgetary provisions for the purpose as under:
(i) The Ministry is developing systems and procedures for
minimizing cost and time overruns in the Central projects
by launching On-line Computerized Monitoring System
(OCMS) and organizing training of officials in O.C.M.S.

18
(ii) The Ministry is conducting 33 studies through the
Consultants in sector specific areas on project management
and also, separately for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit
Programme Projects.
(iii) The Ministry is setting up a Project Management Centre
(PMC) as a co-ordinating agency for the project management
knowledge development.
(iv) The Ministry is organizing specialized training workshops
in the project management of Central and State Governments
and their public enterprises.
Recommendation No. 4 (Para Nos. 20 and 21)
CSO—Central Training Facility
The Committee had, in their Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry emphasized on the need for ensuring
judicious usage of the allocation of Rs. 8.86 crore earmarked for
constructing the Central Training Facility for the benefit of statistical
personnel by ensuring that the related work was taken up and executed
as per the stipulated schedule. The Committee, were, however,
compelled to take serious note of the fact that no tangible progress
could be made in constructing the building during the year 2004-05,
due to the changes in the dimensions of the plot, consequential re-
registration and failure to obtain the approvals of the authorities
concerned for building plan prepared by the CPWD. As a result, a
very large portion of the budgeted amount of Rs. 8.86 crore for the
year 2004-05 had to be surrendered by the Ministry, with the net
expenditure likely to be incurred on the project during the year being
restricted to an amount of Rs. 25 lakhs with the possibility of an
additional amount of Rs. 45 lakhs being used towards land filling and
associated activities. What the Committee find particularly disturbing
to note is the fact that while the Ministry had, during the previous
year viz., 2004-05, attributed the delay in executing the project to the
failure of the CPWD adhering to the time schedule for preparing the
building plan, this year, the reasons extended for the delay relate to
the building plan prepared by the CPWD being not in conformity
with the stipulations of Greater Noida Authority.
The Committee understand that a revised building plan is being
re-submitted for approval by the Greater Noida Authority and an
amount of Rs. 13.735 crore had been earmarked at the B.E., 2005-06
for executing the project. As assured by the Secretary during the course
of oral evidence, the Committee trust that necessary approvals would
be obtained speedily and the amount of Rs. 13.75 crore allocated for

19
the project during the year, 2005-06, would be utilised with care and
objectivity so that the exercise of revising the budgeted amount to a
much lesser level at the stage of preparation of the Revised Estimates
and the differential between the Estimates and the Actual expenditure
being of a very high order is avoided.
Reply of the Government
The construction of Central Training Facility (CTF) has been
entrusted to CPWD. In view of the non-approval of building plan by
Greater Noida Authority , the major work could not be started. The
building plan was re-submitted on 6.6.2005 by the CPWD after
incorporating the changes indicated by Greater Noida Authority. The
building plan has since been approved by the Authority. CPWD has
been asked to go for Tenders. CPWD has been requested to take
measures for utilizing the provisions in BE 2005-06.
A revised building plan in conformity with the stipulations of
Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority (GNIDA) was
resubmitted by CPWD on 6th June, 2005. The approval of Greater
Noida Authority has been received on 28th June, 2005. Efforts are
being made for finalization of tenders and commencement of the actual
construction by CPWD which has been asked to take all possible steps
to expedite construction and spend the whole amount of Rs. 13.735
crore allocated in the BE for 2005-06.
Recommendation No. 8 (Para Nos. 44 & 45)
National Sample Survey Organisation—Delay in Publication of Reports
The Committee are well aware of the fact that the National Sample
Survey Organisation (NSSO) is inter-alia mandated to conduct
nationwide surveys on various socio-economic aspects, Annual Surveys
of Industries (ASI), follow-up surveys of Economic Census and
Supervision of area enumeration and crop estimation, surveys of State
agencies under the ‘Improvement of Crop Statistics’ (ICS) scheme and
organising methodological studies and pilot surveys on important
subjects and collection of price data from rural and urban sectors.
While the 58th round of NSS survey undertaken in July-December,
2002 was inter-alia earmarked for collection of data on disability,
housing condition, village facilities and slum particulars, the 59th round
undertaken in January-December, 2003 was, among other things devoted
to collection of data on land and livestock holding, debt and investment
and household consumer expenditure, and the 60th round undertaken
in January-June, 2004 was devoted to morbidity and healthcare,

20
employment and unemployment and household consumer expenditure.
The 61st round, which commenced in July, 2004 and is to extend upto
June, 2005 is concerned with consumer expenditure, employment and
unemployment and the 62nd round, which is to be undertaken from
July, 2005 to June, 2006 would be on ‘Unorganised Manufacturing’.
While there is no doubt with regard to the vital importance of the
data generated and published by the NSS surveys, what the Committee
feel particularly perturbed to note is the fact that, quite often, significant
delays have been noticed in publishing the NSS Survey Data and
Reports. As admitted by the Secretary during evidence, the report of
the 58th NSS Survey Round, which was completed in 2002 was
published two and half to three years later; the report of the 59th
Round undertaken in 2003 is expected to be released in the period,
May to October, 2005; and the report of the 60th Round executed in
2004 is expected to be published in June, 2005. The Committee cannot
help observing that the lack of IT readiness on the part of the Ministry
has been a major contributory factor for the undue delays, quite often
noticed in publishing the reports of the NSS Surveys rounds, which
are of vital importance to the country. As emphasized time and again,
the Committee expect that the Government would make every possible
effort in ensuring that field survey reports and data are released in a
timely manner so that their relevance is not minimized, if not totally
lost.
Reply of the Government
Apart from the surveys enumerated by the Committee, the NSSO
during the 59th round (January-December 2003) took up a major survey
called the ‘Situation Assessment Survey of Indian Farmers’. Besides
this a pilot survey on ‘Non Profit Institutions Serving Households
(NPISH) was also undertaken in selected States during July-December
2004. Further NSSO conducts the survey on employment and
unemployment and household consumer expenditure in every NSS
round and this will be conducted during the 62nd round also.
After the field data collection of a survey is completed, the process
of releasing survey reports involves (i) data processing, (ii) data
validation, (iii) generation of the tables, (iv) writing of report, (v) getting
comments from the members and Chairman of Governing Council of
NSSO and, (vi) revising the report on the basis of comments received.
The revised report is again sent to the Chairman, Governing Council
for his approval. Thereafter the report is finalized and released. As
per the target set by the Ministry, the first report of a round is released
within one year of completion of the fieldwork. The fieldwork of 58th

21
round was completed in December 2002 and four reports were released
in December 2003, the fifth report in March 2004. The sixth and last
report was drafted in March 2004 but its release was delayed due to
the change of Chairman of the Governing Council, which has been
reconstituted, and the revisions suggested by the new Chairman. The
revised report has been released in May 2005.
The NSS 59th round survey covering debt-investment, land holding,
employment-unemployment and consumer expenditure and the
situation assessment of Indian farmers was one of the largest in terms
of volume of data collected. The data for this round were collected in
two visits and the data processing and validation involved complicated
exercises due to which the generation of reports was delayed. 15 reports
are planned from this round, out of which two have been released in
March and May 2005 and the other 13 are expected to be released by
October 2005.
The NSS 60th round survey fieldwork was completed in June 2004
and the three reports planned are expected to be released in July 2005.
The 61st round the fieldwork were completed in June 2005 and
the reports will be released by June 2006.
After the installation of latest computers and development of in-
house software, the NSSO has now considerably reduced the data
processing time as compared to the past. However all possible steps
would be taken to further minimize the time for release of NSS reports
and data.
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 52)
Modernisation of Statistical System in India
The Committee feel concerned to note that though significant
budgetary allocations are being made in successive years since
2002-03 for implementing the World Bank aided project on modernising
the statistical system in the country, which has now been named as
‘India Statistical Strengthening Project’, the ground reality of the
progress of the project is far from satisfactory. The Committee had in
their 4th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the
year, 2004-05 taken note of the fact that Tier-II, which was the actual
implementation phase of the project, was dependent on the outcome
of Tier-I of project. The Committee had, therefore, emphasised on the
need to ensure that the project schedules were strictly adhered to. To
their dismay, however, the Committee have now learnt that there have

22
been slippages of the time schedules prescribed in respect of all the
components of Tier-I of the project viz., ‘Study on Creation and
Maintenance of Business Register’, Study for identifying specific
Requirements of State Statistical bureaus; Study on Improvement of
Service Sector Statistics; Study for Assessment of Survey Capabilities
of Pvt. Sector; and Establishment of All India Statistical Network. They
take note of the fact that during examination of Demands for Grants
(2004-05), the Government had itself admitted the slippages of the
time schedule but assured to complete the work by the end of 2005.
They are concerned to note that even the revised schedule as proposed
by the Government will not be adhered to and the Tier-I of the project
will be likely to be completed by July, 2006. The Committee strongly
feel that the Government cannot afford to be lethargic in implementing
this project, which would, in the long run, prove to be of a immense
value addition to the country. The Committee, therefore, re-iterate that
no effort should be spared to ensure that the Tier-I of the project is
completed as per the revised planned schedule so that Tier-II of the
project takes off and the project is implemented without further delay.
They also wish to be periodically appraised of the progress made in
this direction.
Reply of the Government
The present status of different components of the Tier-I of the
India Statistical Strengthening Project is given below:
(i) Study on Creation and Maintenance of Business Register
The implementation of the study has been taken up from January
2005. The field work of the pilot study in three district of Andhra
Pradesh has been completed. A workshop was conducted on 17th June,
2005 to discuss the results of the study and to draw up future course
of action. The work on development of proto-type business register
has been started by the consultant.
(ii) Study for Identifying Specific Requirements for Strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus
The study has been launched with effect from 11th April, 2005.
The questionnaire for obtaining detailed information from State
Statistical Bureaus and other departments of the State Governments
dealing with statistics has been finalised and field work started.
(iii) Study on Improvement of Service Sector Statistics
The work on three sub-studies dealing with ‘Goods Transportation
by Road’, ‘Motion Pictures and Video Film Production’ and

23
‘Advertising’ segments of the economy have been launched from
1st April 2005. The designing of survey questionnaires and methodology
has been finalised in consultation with the World Bank Consultants.
The field work for the surveys has been taken up.
(iv) Study for Assessment of Survey Capabilities of Private Sector
The negotiations are in progress with the Indian Agricultural
Statistics Research Institute and the contract for the study is likely to
be signed by end of July 2005.
(v) Study for Establishment of All India Statistical Network
This study will be taken up only when first report of the study on
identifying specific requirements of State Statistical Bureaus is available
in September 2005. The process of seeking proposals from the
Consultants has been initiated and would be completed soon.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation O.M. No.
G-20017/2/2005-B&F dated 19th July, 2005]

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that the major initiative of introducing the
‘On-line Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) for enabling
effective monitoring of project implementation could not materialize
as scheduled in 2003-04 owing to the delay in procuring the computer
hardware and software. The procurements could materialize only in
2004-05, and as informed by the Ministry, the OCMS would become
operational by the end of May, 2005 and would contribute in improving
the quality of project and infrastructure monitoring inter-alia by enabling
on-line collection of information without time lags; on-line
communication between the project enterprises and the Ministry; and
facilitating transfer of project profiles and accruing of sectoral reports.
The Committee feel that no effort should be spared in modernizing
and up-dating the IT infrastructure of the Ministry. When the system
is put in place, the Committee feel, it will not only bring about
revolutionary change in quality of monitoring but will also help in
taking quick remedial measures. The Committee, therefore wish to be
kept apprised of the progress in implementing the OCMS as well as
its effectiveness in strengthening the project monitoring measures.
Reply of the Government
The launching of OCMS is likely to be started in September, 2005 and
completed in October, 2005. The effectiveness in strengthening of the
project monitoring measures as a result of launching of OCMS may be
known only a few months thereafter.
Recommendation No. 6 (Para Nos. 31 & 31A)
The National Statistical Commission had felt that the current
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with base 1993-94 was deficient in many
respects inter-alia owing to the fact that price changes in the services
sector were not duly accounted for. The Commission had also
concluded that, as at present, WPI was not an adequate  measure of
inflation and there was a need for separate index for measurement of

25
inflation in the economy. The Committee understand that a working
group  has been constituted to give focused attention on different
aspects related with the revision of WPI series, whose terms of reference
inter-alia includ, exploring the possibility of inclusion of selected services
in a WPI basket and examining the need for switching over from WPI
to a Producer Price Base Index (PPI). Considering the fact that the
price indices in the system of economic statistics are closely watched
indicators of macro economic performances and are important tools in
the formulation of the monitory and fiscal policy, the Committee
strongly emphasize on the need for early completion of the work on
the new series of WPI and Producer Price Index (PPI). The Committee
also wish to be kept apprised of the progress made in this direction.
As regards the issue of revision of current series of CPI, the
Committee understand that the Labour Bureau had prepared a detailed
scheme way back in 1996 and the NSSO undertook the related field
survey and the technical details worked out, which have since been
examined by the Technical Advisory Committee. The Labour Bureau
has reportedly convened a meeting in May, 2005 to consider the matter.
The Committee expect the work on the revision of series to be
completed and the new series of CPI released expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Position with regard to Revision of the Wholesale Price Index
The terms of Reference of the Working Group set up under the
Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission for
the revision of the existing series of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inter-
alia, include the two areas viz. (i) to examine the need for switching
over from Wholesale price based Price Index (WPI) to Producer price
based Price Index (PPI) and suggested further improvements based on
the IMF’s PPI Manual; and (ii) to explore possibility of inclusion of
selected services in the WPI basket.
The working Group on WPI held three meetings as on date viz.
On 15.01.2004, 22.03.2004 and 27.08.2004. The working Group in the
first meeting deliberated on the issues relating to choice and selection
of the base year and also proposed the constitution of four Sub-Groups
to assess/analyse and recommend base year selection and also to
conduct exercises on the revision of series. The four sub-groups are:
(i) Analytical and other related Issues (ii) Agricultural Commodities
(iii) Manufactured items (iv) Unorganized and unregistered sector.

26
The second meeting of the Working Group dealt on the choice of
the base year, commodity coverage, availability of data, preparation of
weighting diagram, among others. In the third meeting, the Working
Group after deliberations, selected 2000-01 as the base year for the
new series of the WPI. It further directed to prepare the Weighting
Diagram and finalization of commodity basket.
The Sub-Group on Manufactured Items and related matters
submitted its Report. Their recommendations are under consideration
of the Working Group. Works of the other Sub-groups are in progress.
Reply of the Government
Regarding revision of current series of Consumer Price index for
Industrial Workers, a Working Class Family Income and Expenditure
Survey (WCFIES) was carried out in 1999-2000 by Field Operations
Division (National Sample Survey Organization) at the request of the
Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour. Based upon the consumption
pattern of the Industrial Workers, the weighting diagram (Group/Sub-
Group wise) was prepared by Labour Bureau which was further
considered and approved by the Technical Advisory Committee on
Statistics of Prices and Cost of Living (TAC on SPCL). The Committee
in forty-third meeting held on 15th July, 2004 approved
recommendations of the constituent Sub-Group for revising the base
year of the current series of Consumer price index Numbers for
industrial Workers. Recently, a tripartite meeting involving Central
Government Representatives, State Govt. Representative, Employers and
employees Organisations was held on 19-20th May, 2005 at Shimla
which was chaired by the Secretary, Ministry of Labour. The
recommendations made in the above meeting are under consideration
of Ministry of Labour. The revised Index for Consumer Price index for
Industrial Workers with base 2001=100 shall be released by the Labour
Bureau after the recommendations are considered and approved by
the Ministry of Labour.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
O.M. No.G-20017/2/2005-B&F dated 19th July, 2005]

27
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
NIL
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 December, 2005 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

28
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2005 from 1500 to
1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

29
3. The Committee, then considered the draft reports on (i) Action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment), (ii) Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of
Planning, and (iii) Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
4. The Committee adopted the draft action taken reports mentioned
above without any modification/amendment.
5. ** ** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** ** **
6. The Committee thereafter adopted the draft action taken report
on the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report on the
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation with the modifications/amendments shown
in Annexure.
7. While deliberating on the draft action taken reports, the
Committee also decided that separate notes may be called for from
the Ministries/Departments concerned on the following issues:
(i) ** ** ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** ** **
(iv) ** ** ** ** ** **
(v) Revision and Modification of the Price Indices viz., WPI
and CPI.
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
and to make verbal and other consequential changes and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

30
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS  MADE  BY  STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT ACTION TAKEN
REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF
THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON
19 DECEMBER, 2005]
Page Para Line Amendment/modification
11 21 3 For:
the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the work on the
revision of the WPI and CPI series be
completed expeditiously.
Substitute:
“the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the work on the
revision and carrying out necessary
modifications in the formulation of
price indices viz., WPI series by
including ‘selected services’, and CPI
series on the basis of changes in the
consumption pattern and basket of
goods involved be completed
expeditiously.”

31
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN  BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-06) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
Total   % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 4 40
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3,
7 & 10)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 4 40
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 4,
8 & 9)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 2 20
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 & 5)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 00.00
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited
(Nil)