STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006 / Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka)
39

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006 / Jyaistha, 1928 (Saka)

C.O.F. No. 39
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .......................................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
Report ................................................................................................... 1
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations .................................................... 20
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
19th April, 2006........................................................................ 26
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
19th May, 2006 ......................................................................... 29

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G .M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
23. Shri Yashwant Sinha
24. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
25. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
26. Shri Amar Singh
27. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
28. Shri Mangani Lai Mandal
29. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Vacant
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G . Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Thirty-Ninth Report on
the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
2. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation were laid on the Table of the House on the 8th March, 2006. Under
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the
Standing Committee on Finance are required to consider the Demands for Grants of
the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and make reports on the same to
both the Houses of Parliament. Thereafter the Demands are considered by the House
in the light of the reports of the Committee. However, this year, the Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation were passed by
Lok Sabha on the 17th March, 2006 prior to their consideration by the Standing
Committee on Finance. Nonetheless, the Committee examined the Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and issues
arising out of these.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation at their sitting held on 19th April, 2006 in
connection with Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report
at their sitting held on 19th May, 2006.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation for the co-operation extended by them in
furnishing written replies and for placing their considered views and perceptions before
the Committee.
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type.
NEW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 May, 2006 Chairman,
29 V aisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation came into existence
as an independent Ministry on 15.10.1999 after the merger of the Department of
Statistics and the Department of Programme Implementation. The Ministry has two
wings, one relating to Statistics and the other regarding Programme Implementation.
The Statistics Wing consists of the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), the National
Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and the Computer Centre. The Programme
Implementation Wing has four Divisions, namely, (i) Twenty Point Programme Division,
(ii) Infrastructure Monitoring Division, (iii) Project Monitoring Division and
(iv) Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme Division.
2. The overall Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation are covered under Demand No. 89.
In the present Report, the Committee have examined the following issues:
(i) Modernisation of Statistical System in India (India Statistical Strengthening
Project).
(ii) Central Statistical Organisation — Revision of whole sale price indices
and different consumer price indices.
(iii) Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) — Quality and reliability of Statistical
data.
(iv) Project Monitoring Division — Time and Cost overruns.
Review of Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
3. While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation for the previous year, 2005-06, the Committee in their
report presented to Parliament on the 20
th April, 2005 considered the following issues:
(i) Demand No. 90 — Improvement of National Accounts Statistics
(ii) Demand No.90 — Programme Implementation
(iii) Demand No. 90 — Institutional Development and Capacity Building —
Machinery and equipment
(iv) Central Statistical Organisation — Central Training Facility

2
(v) Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS)
(vi) Central Statistical Organisation — Updating the indices
(vii) Central Statistical Organisation — Quality and reliability of Statistical Data
(viii) National Sample Survey Organisation
(ix) India Statistical Strengthening Project (Modernisation of Statistical System
in India)
(x) Project Monitoring Division — Time and Cost Over-run
4. The Report of the Committee (2005-06) contained ten recommendations in
all. In terms of Direction 73A, of the Directions by the Speaker, the Minister of State,
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation made a statement in the Lok Sabha
on 14 March, 2006 on the status of implementation of the recommendations made by
the Committee in the report.
5. As indicated in the Action Taken Report on the report on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) presented to the Parliament on 22 December, 2005, of the ten
recommendations contained in the report, the Committee accepted replies of the
Government on four recommendations pertaining to (i) Demand No. 90 — Improvement
of National Accounts Statistics (ii) Demand No. 90 — Institutional Development and
Capacity Building — Machinery and equipment, (iii) Central Statistical Organisation—
Quality and Reliability of Statistical Data and (iv) Project Monitoring Division —
Time and Cost overruns. The Committee did not desire to pursue four of the
recommendations/observations in view of the replies furnished by the Government
and commented on two of the recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government were not satisfactory viz. (i) Online Computerised Monitoring System
(OCMS) and (ii) Central Statistical Organisation — Updating the Indices.

CHAPTER II
MODERNISATION OF STATISTICAL SYSTEM IN INDIA
(INDIA STA TISTICAL STRENGTHENING PROJECT)
6. A World Bank aided Project, namely, “India Statistical Strengthening Project”
is being implemented by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to
strengthen the information base for planning and policy formulation. The project is
aimed at improving the reliability, timeliness and coverage of statistical system of the
country. The project has been planned in two phases or ‘tiers’. During the year, the
following components of tier-l of the project were under implementation.
(i) Study on identifying specific requirements for strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus;
(ii) Study for creation and maintenance of Business Register;
(iii) Study for improvement of Service Sector Statistics;
(iv) Study for assessing survey capabilities of private sector.
7. In their summary and analysis of Demands for Grants (2006-07), the Ministry
have inter alia stated that targets set for the year 2005-06 under the study on ‘creation
and maintenance of Business Register’ and ‘Improvement of Service Sector Statistics’
have been achieved. Due to delay in preparation of draft reports on existing statistical
activities of the State Statistical Bureaus and efficacy of resource allocation of various
activities by the consultant, achievements of set targets for study on identifying
requirements for strengthening of State Statistical Bureaus have been delayed by about
four months. Under the study on Assessment of Survey Capabilities of the Private
Sector, the achievements of targets have been delayed by about three months due to
late commencement of the study and inclusion of additional work of updating the list
of the survey agencies. Further, the study on Establishment of All India Statistical
Network is yet to commence as the recommendations of the Evaluation Committee on
evaluation of bids has not been accepted by the World Bank.
8. On the progress of implementation of the project components, the Outcome
Budget of the Ministry (2006-07) inter alia reads as under:
a. Identifying specific requirements for strengthening State Statistical
Bureaus –  As per the Quantifiable deliverable/physical outputs the reports
on existing statistical activities of the State Statistical Bureaus and efficacy
of resource allocation for various activities, under the projected outcomes,
it has been mentioned that the proposals for improving the State Statistical
System with financial assistance from the World Bank would be prepared
based on the output reports by September, 2006.
3

4
b. Establishment of All India Statistical Network — As per the Quantifiable
deliverable/physical outputs the reports on the studies bringing out functional
requirements and operational and financial dimension under the projected
outcome it has been mentioned that Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the
establishment of All India Statistical Network involving Central Statistical
Organisation, National Sample Survey Organisation, Ministries/
Departments at the Centre and Directorate of Economics and Statistics
(DES) during Tier-ll of the project by July, 2006.
c. Creation and Maintenance of Business Register — As per the Quantifiable
deliverable/physical outputs the establishment of Business Register Unit
with necessary hardware, software and other facilities, the projected
outcomes for the establishment of Business Register Unit would lead to
creation and maintenance of the Business Register by February, 2007 and
under the Risk Factor it has been mentioned that it depends on the completion
of re-engineering process of the Income Tax Departments.
d. Improvement of Service sector statistics — As per the quantifiable
deliverables/Physical outputs the three reports based on surveys of the
Service Sector namely, 1. Goods and Transportation by Road,
2. Advertisement Sector and 3. Motion Picture, Video Film Production
and Television activities, the projected outcomes of the conceptual and
operational roadmap for obtaining estimates of the contribution of three
important activities of the Service Sector by July, 2006.
e. Assessing survey capabilities of the private sector — As per the Quantifiable
deliverable/physical outputs under the project outcomes, it has been stated
that the report to assess private organisations engaged in sample surveys in
undertakings large surveys including data processing, data analysis, etc. is
targeted to be received by July, 2006. Data base contained in the report
would be used for outsourcing of the survey work, if required.
9. The implementation status of each of the components of the project, as
evidenced from the written reply furnished by the Ministry reveals as follows:
Study on Original Revised Scheduled
Scheduled month month of Completion
of Completion
I. Business Register January, 2005 Completed in December,
2005
II. Identifying Specific November, 2004 Study is going on and will be
Requirements for finalized by May, 2006
strengthening the State
Statistical Bureau
III. Improvement of Service March, 2005 Study has commenced and
Sector Statistics will be completed by
May, 2006

5
IV . Assessment of the Survey September, 2004 IASRI has been conducting
Capabilities of the Private the study and will be
Sector completed by June, 2006
V . All India Statistical January, 2005 The study has not
Network commenced due to tender
problems
10. Mainly two components of the project, namely, Strengthening of State
Statistical Bureaus and Establishment of All India Statistical Network are meant for
providing major inputs for strengthening Central and State Statistical Offices.
11. With regard to these two components viz. strengthening of State Statistical
Bureaus and Establishment of All India Statistical Network, the information furnished
by the Ministry reveals as follows:
“Assessment of inputs for strengthening Central and State Statistical Offices
will be possible only after completion of the Tier-I of these components of the
project. Final output of Tier-I of the study on creation and maintenance of
Business Register (i.e. blue print of the Business Register) has been received
from the consultant.
Under the study on Improvement of Service Sector Statistics, reconnaissance
surveys followed by the pilot surveys for three segments of the Service Sector,
namely, (a) Goods transportation by Road, (b) Advertisement and (c) Motion
Picture, Video Film Production and Television Activities were completed to get
information on list of units being maintained by various agencies and finalize
the methodology and survey instrument for the main surveys. Presently main/
detailed surveys covering above three activities of the Service Sector are under
progress.
Under the study on Identifying Requirements for Strengthening of State Statistical
Bureaus, field work for documenting existing activities and efficacy of allocation
of resources for various activities of all the State Statistical Bureaus has been
completed by the consultant. Draft reports on these aspects have been received
for 28 States/UTs. Consultations are being held with the officers of the State
Statistical Bureaus to finalize these draft reports.”
12. The Ministry in their written reply have also informed as under:
“(i) Under the component III, i.e. study on Improvement of Service Sector
Statistics, reconnaissance surveys followed by the pilot surveys were
completed for following three segments of the Service Sector to get
information on list of units being maintained by various agencies and finalize
the methodology and survey instrument for the main surveys:
(a) Goods transportation by Road,

6
(b) Advertisement, and
(c) Motion Picture, Video Film Production and Television Activities.
Presently main/detailed surveys covering above three activities of the
Service Sector are under progress.
Component (V) of the project, namely, study on Establishment of All India
Statistical Network, has not yet commenced as the recommendation of the
Evaluation Committee on evaluation of bids from prospective consultants
has not been accepted by the World Bank. The view of the Ministry of Law
& Justice on the issue has been sought.
The work of implementation of various components of the projects through
consultancy agencies is being continuously monitored by a Task Force
constituted for each component under the chairmanship of a senior officer
of the Ministry. A Steering Committee under the chairmanship of the
Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation periodically
reviews the implementation of the various components of the project through
consultancy. Implementation of the components is also reviewed by the
World Bank Missions during their periodical visits.
(ii) The concept paper on Tier-II has to be built on the results or broad
anticipated results from implementation of Tier-I. The work of development
of the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-II of the components on Creation and
Maintenance of Business Register and Improvement of Service Sector
Statistics has been initiated. Development of the ‘Concept Paper’ on
remaining three components could not be initiated as broad results/
achievements from the implementation of Tier-I of these components are
not yet fully clear.
13. In the course of tendering evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation stated as follows on the progress of implementation
of the “India Statistical Strengthening Project”:
“With regard to the Indian Statistical Strengthening project, which is a flagship
programme of the Ministry and which we are pursuing with international
externally aided programme, this is envisaged as a Tier-I and a subsequent tier
programme. I am happy to report that important elements of this programme
are on schedule, that is, the creation of a maintenance business register, that has
been completed improvement of service sector statistics would be completed
by May. The assessment of the survey capabilities of the private sector will be
completed by June of this year. The identification of specific requirements for
strengthening State Statistical bureaus was lagging behind the original time
schedule for various reasons. We hope that will be able to catch up on this
work.”

7
14. The Committee had, in their fourth and nineteenth report on the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
of the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively taken note of the fact that Tier II
which was the actual implementation phase of the India Statistical Strengthening
Project was dependent on the results of Tier I of the project. The Committee had,
therefore, emphasised on the need to ensure that the project schedules were strictly
adhered to. From the information furnished, the Committee note that the work
on building the Concept Paper on Tier-ll of the India Statistical Strengthening
Project which is dependent on the broad results implementation of Tier-I of the
project has been hampered. While the work on developing the ‘Concept Paper’
for Tier-ll in respect of components relating to ‘Creation and Maintenance of
Business Register’ and ‘Improvement of Service Sector Statistics’ has been
initiated, the development of the ‘Concept Paper’ on the remaining three
components could not be initiated viz. identifying specific requirements for
strengthening the State Statistical Branches Bureaus, assessment of the survey
capabilities of the private sector and all India Statistical network. The delay in
formulating the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier II of the project has been owing to the
non-availability of the broad results/achievements relating to implementation of
the three components as a part of the Tier- I programme of the project.
15. The Committee, therefore, re-emphasise on ensuring that all efforts
are made to see that the work on the remaining components of Tier I of the India
Statistical Strengthening Project are completed as per the laid down schedules so
that Tier-ll of the project takes off without further delay. They also wish to be
apprised quarterly of the progress made in this direction.
Central Statistical Organisation — Revision of Whole Sale Price Indices
and different Consumer Price Indices
16. On the current status of updating of the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as recommended by the National Statistical
Commission the Ministry informed the Committee as follows:
“The Working Group on WPI constituted four Sub groups viz. (i) Agricultural
Commodities, (ii) Manufactured Items, (iii) Unorganized/ unregistered sector
and (iv) Analytical and other related issues. All the Sub Groups have completed
their deliberations and three Sub Groups have already submitted their draft
reports to the Working Group. The Working Group itself has completed its
deliberations on the major technical issues relating to new series of WPI such as
identification of base year (2000 = 01), product basket and construction of
weighting diagram. The major task now remaining before the Working Group
relates to collection of price information for the product basket of the new series
since April, 2000 onwards. The first time in the history of WPI that it has been
decided to cover the unorganized sector (SSI) and collect prices for the products
(included in the product basket) produced in SSI sector. The work relating to

8
collection of price data from the field covering over 6000 organized units
scattered all over India has already started similar work with respect to the SSI
sector is also currently on including interactive sessions with local industries in
different States in collaboration with local trade associations and Central &
State Government agencies to facilitate smooth flow of data from the field.
As soon as sufficient price quotations are available, a trial run of the new series
will be undertaken to check its overall consistency with the existing series of
WPI. The new series of WPI would be released after such a test run is undertaken
successfully.
The Working Group has already begun work on the conceptual, analytical and
technical issues relating to construction of a Producer Price Index (PPI) for
commodity sectors. The term of the working group has recently been extended
up to 30.06.2006.
The matter was reviewed in the 44th meeting of the Technical Advisory
Committee on Prices and Cost of Living held on 30 Dec., 2005 wherein the
need for reducing the time lag was again emphasized and it was reiterated that
the pending work might be expedited.
With a view to ensure wider acceptance for the new series CPI(IW) , Labour
Bureau Organized a Tripartite Index Users Meeting for release of the new series
at Shimla, during 19-20 May, 2005, which was attended by the representatives
of various Trade Unions, Employer’s Organizations besides representatives from
Central Ministries and State Governments.
As a sequel to this meeting, a second meeting was conveyed on 9th Sept., 2005
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Labour & Employment with the
representatives of the Central Trade Unions including representatives of different
Central Ministries. It was decided therein that three representatives each of the
Central Trade Unions and Employer’s Organizations would be invited in a special
meeting of the TAG on SPCL. Accordingly, 45th meeting of the TAC on SPCL
was held on 17 Feb., 2006 wherein three representatives each from the Central
Trade Unions and Employer’s Organizations participated. It has been decided
therein to release the new series of CPI(IW) on base 2001 = 100.
The recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Finance are being
taken care of while revising the base of the current series of WPI as well as
CPI (IW). While the work relating to revision of CPI(IW) has already been
completed, the same in respect of WPI is at an advanced stage of completion.”
17. Questioned about the time frame within which the new series of CPI was
expected to be released, the Ministry, in reply informed as under:—
“After receiving the list of three representatives of Employer’s Organisations
from Ministry of Labour, 45th Meeting of TAC on SPCL was convened on
17/2/06 wherein besides members of the TAC, three representatives each of

9
Trade Unions and Employer’s Organizations were invited. After detailed
deliberations, it was decided that in view of improvements made in the new
series and also due to an urgent need for an updated base, the CPI (IW)—new
series should be released. Now, the matter pertaining to the release of index on
new base i.e. 2001=100 is under active consideration of the Ministry of Labour.”
18. When the Committee sought to know whether the proposal for revising the
CPI (AL/RI) was placed before the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and if so, to
specify the opinion expressed by the TAC thereon, the Ministry in reply stated :—
“The proposal for revision of Index CPI(AL/RL) by Labour Bureau, Shimla
was placed in the 44th Meeting of the TAC which was held on 30/12/2005. The
TAC decided to form an informal working group under the Chairmanship of Dr.
K.V . Rao, Additional Director General, NSSO (FOD) to consider different
technical issues viz.  selection of villages, market survey etc. The
recommendations of the Working group on proposed revision of CPI (AL/RL)
are expected to be placed in the next meeting of the TAC. In view of paucity of
manpower resources, the market survey for revised series of CPI(AURL) would
be taken up by FOD(NSSO) after completion of market survey for CPI(U).”
19. As regards issues relating to the inability to take up the Family Living Survey
(FLS) among Urban Non-manual employees despite completing the related preparatory
work, the Ministry stated:—
“The Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation had been constantly
pursuing with the M/o Finance for sanction of 209 posts for conducting FLS
under the Plan Scheme. However, M/o Finance did not agree for the creation of
posts and finally advised that the Field Work of FLS may be got done through
some NGO. The Ministry made efforts but could not identify suitable NGO
with technical know how and infrastructure at all-India level, to take this gigantic
work. Finally, it was decided that the field staff may be undertaken by NSSO,
FOD. However, the TAC in its 44th meeting held on 30.12.2005 accepted the
recommendations of the Working Group constituted by Governing Council for
NSSO under the Chairmanship of Prof. B.B. Bhatacharya Vice Chancellor JNU
to continue the current series of CPI (UNME) on base 1984-85=100 for some
more time and instead CPI(U) may be compiled at the national/state level. In
view of above there is no need of conducting fresh FLS for current series of
CPI (UNME) now.”
20. Questioned about the current status of the process of recruitment for filling
up the regular vacancies, the Ministry informed:—
“The recruitment process for filling up the regular vacancies is almost complete.
Interviews for the posts are over in the Staff Selection Commission. Appointment
letters to the successful candidates are being sent. It is expected that the
incumbents would be in position by April-June 2006”

10
21. From the information furnished, the Committee note that the current
series of CPI (UNME) is based on the Family Living Survey (FLS) data collected
during 1982-83. As such, the consumption basket of the current series of CPI
(UNME) needs to be revised. What the Committee find to be particularly
worrisome to note in this regard is that owing to lack of field officers, the Family
Living Survey could not be undertaken. Consequently the Tariff Advisory
Committee (TAC) had to recommend for continuing with the current series of
CPI (UNME) for some more time. The Committee understand that the recruitment
process for filling up the vacant posts of the Field Officers is underway. The
Committee expect that the Family Living Survey will be undertaken immediately
upon completion of the recruitment process so as to anable the revision of CPI
(UNME) series.
22. The Committee had, in their 31st Action Taken Report inter alia
observed that the Government had failed to furnish details of the measures initiated
to ensure early completion of the work on formulating the new series of WPI and
switching over to the Producer Price Index (PPI). From the details now furnished,
the Committee note that in regard to revising the Wholesale Price Index (WPI),
the major task of collecting the price information for the product basket of the
new series applicable from April, 2000 onwards remains to be executed. As regards
the work pertaining to construction of the Producer Price Index (PPI) for
commodity sectors, the Committee note that the Working Group concerned has
commenced with the work on addressing the related conceptual, analytical and
technical issues. With regard to the new series of CPI (IW) on base 2001=100, the
Committee note that the Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) had at its meeting
held in February, 2001, decided to release the new series. The Committee expect
that every possible effort is made to ensure that the work on revising the Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) is executed within a pre-determined time frame. The Committee
also desire that the new series of CPI (IW) on base, 2001=100, which is stated to
be ready and under submission to Ministry of Labour, be released by the Ministry
at the earliest.
Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) Quality and
Reliability of Statistical data
23. A major activity of the Central Statistical Organisation is to coordinate
with the Ministries and Departments of the Central Government, State Governments
and other Statistical Agencies. The CSO also participates in the Committees of the
State Governments and assists in the statistical data generation and dissemination
activities.
24. On the aspect of deficiencies prevalent in collection of data at different
levels, the Committee, in their nineteenth report inter alia observed as follows:—
“The Committee are deeply concerned to note the deficiencies prevalent in
methodology of collection of data at different levels. They understand that the

11
collection of data at local level is not free from faults. The deficient data in turn
is transmitted to district offices before being agglomerated at the State level.
The State department supplies the same to the concerned departments and the
corresponding departments in the Central Government. They take note of the
Government’s own admission in this regard that lot has to be done about quality
of data collections. The Committee find that the high powered Committee under
the Chairmanship of Shri Rangarajan has submitted its report way back in 2001,
which have given far reaching recommendations in this regard. These include,
inter-alia, the appointment of statistical advisors in important Ministries and
departments, constitution of an organised State Statistical Cadre, launching of a
Centrally-Sponsored Scheme with the specific objectives of developing survey
and data processing capabilities in the States, besides setting up of an independent
statistical authority — National Commission on Statistics — through an Act of
Parliament in respect of policy-making co-ordination and maintaining quality
standards of core-statistics. They recall that they had recommended for setting
up of National Statistical Commission through an Act of Parliament in their
report in 2004-05. The Committee strongly deplore the undue delay on the part
of the Government in, bringing the Bill, which, as informed is expected to be
introduced shortly. As the future of maintaining and supply of quality statistics
hinges on the fate of this Bill, the Committee want that all formalities should be
completed without further delay so that the National Statistical Commission
may be able to carry its programme for revamping the statistical system in India.”
25. The Committee had, in the report, also emphasised on ensuring that the
Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisation (COCSSO) was held annually
so that the fruits of interaction could be realised. Further, the Committee also called
for enhancement of the quantum of funding to the States for strengthening the statistical
system of the States.
26. The Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry on this specific issue
reads as under:
“In line with the recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission, it has been
decided to set-up a National Statistical Commission and a notification constituting
the Commission has been issued on 1 June, 2005. A copy of the notification is
enclosed. It is expected that the statutory Commission would be set up within a
period of one year.
The Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations (COCSSO) was
held in October, 2004. The tradition of holding the Conference of Central and
State Statistical Organizations in all full fledged manner has been thus revived
and it is proposed to hoid it every year from now.”
27. Questioned on the mechanisms of coordination between the Central and
State Governments and other Departments in the matter of collection of Statistical

12
data, the Ministry, in repiy, have inter alia stated that their role was mainly advisory
which is exercised through the Advisory Committees who oversee the statistical activities
in the Central Ministries and the State Governments. Examples of such Committees
are, the High Level Coordination Committees functioning in the States, the various
Committees of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and the Technical
Committee for Direction in the case of livestock statistics. Further, the Ministry have
also been organizing meetings of the Central and State Statistical Organizations
(COCSSO) which provide a forum for regular interaction among the Central and State
Statisticians. As informed by the Ministry, the structure of the statistical system in
India ensures that the statistical activities of the States are supervised and coordinated
by the respective administrative Central Ministries. For example, in the sectors of
agriculture, livestock and fisheries statistics, the Ministry of Agriculture ensures that
all the States follow the same concepts, definitions and procedures in collection statistics
at State level.
28. Questioned on aspects relating to variation in the data compiled by
the Central Government and the State Governments, the Ministry, in reply, stated as
under:—
“The Central Government collects data in Census and Sample Surveys from the
State and Sub-State levels and compiles estimates both at national and state
levels. As the agency is the same there are no variation in data compiled. In
cases where the Ministries get the data from the States and compile the same
there is no difference in estimates at national and state levels.
In some cases where the States obtain estimates using State sample data and the
centre obtains estimates through Central sample data, variation in data compiled
will be there due to sampling errors and agency biases.”
29. Asked to specify the recommendations made by the conference of the CSSO
and Chief Secretaries of States/UTs held during October, 2004 the Ministry, in reply,
inter alia submitted as under:—
“The Conference reviewed the statistical system and issues related to Agriculture,
Live Stocks; Health; Industry; Housing; Education; Labour; Road Transport,
etc., with a view to facilitate a better understanding and to carry out in the
improvement of the Statistical System.”
30. As detailed in the Ministry’s reply, the recommendations made at the
conference, inter alia, relate to, using remote sensing technology and data available
for improvement of Crop Statistics Scheme, initiating efforts for minimising the
divergence between the Final Estimates and Fully Revised Estimates of crop production,
evolving a mechanism for consolidating the data sets available from different source
agencies like Auxilliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) and Anganwadi workers, designating
a single agency to co-ordinate all statistical activities relating to health and family

13
welfare and strengthening the District Statistical offices under the DES, and making
them responsible for providing technical assistance and consolidation of statistics from
all the line Departments including health authorities.
31. Questioned about the follow up action taken on the recommendations made
at the Conference, the Ministry informed as under:—
“The recommendations made by this Conference were sent for implementation
to the States/Central Ministries. The progress on the follow-up action taken by
the States on the implementation of the recommendations is being collected.
The progress received so far from the States/Central Ministries are being
processed and facts will be furnished to the Committee.”
32. Questioned further whether the Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organizations was organized annually, the Ministry replied in the negative. It was also
stated as under in this regard:—
“The CSO organizes the Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organizations, prepares the reports of the Conference, coordinates with the State
Statistical Bureaus and Statistical Units in the Central Ministries/Departments
regarding the follow-up action on the recommendations of the Conference.”
33. The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) is expected to play a pivotal
role in co-ordinating with the various Ministries and Departments of the Central
Government, State Governments and other Statistical agencies for enabling
maintenance of quality standards of core statistics relating to sectors of the
agriculture, livestock, health, industry, housing, education, labour, road, transport
etc. and to make such data available to economists, Planning Commission and
others concerned for usage for the benefit of the country as a whole. The
Committee, however, feel constrained to note that the Ministry have, in one of
the replies perceived their role in this regard to be merely of advisory nature.
34. The Committee also note that the Conference of Central and State
Statistical Organisations (CSSO) and Chief Secretaries of the States/Union
Territories held in October, 2004 had made a detailed analysis of issues relating
inter alia to agriculture and livestock statistics, social statistics, health and family
welfare statistics and economic census. The Conference had, inter alia identified
areas of weaknesses in compiling quality data and suggested remedial measures
for overcoming the problems. The Committee, however, note with concern that
the Ministry do not have ready information on the follow up action taken on
implementation of the recommendations made by the Conference. As per the
assurance given, the Committee expect the Government to process the related
information on the progress made in implementing the recommendations and
apprise them of the facts relating thereto at the earliest.

14
35. For enabling effective interaction between the Central and
State Governments for addressing issues relating to the quality of statistical
data, the Committee had, in their Nineteenth Report, recommended that
the Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisation (CSSO) be held at
annual intervals. This was agreed to by the Government. The Committee, however,
feel seriously concerned to note that the practice of convening the conference
annually is not being adhered to. The Committee reiterate the need for invariably
holding the Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisations at annual
intervals.
Project Monitoring Division Time and Cost overruns
36. At the beginning of the third quarter of the year, there were 660 projects
with an anticipated cost of Rs. 281769.81 crore on the monitor of the Ministry. For the
purpose of monitoring, the projects are grouped into three categories viz. (i) mega
projects, each costing Rs. 1000 crore and above, (ii) major projects, costing Rs. 100
crore and above and (iii) medium projects costing between Rs. 20 crore and 100 crore
each.
37. Aspects relating to implementation of the projects, as detailed by the Ministry
inter alia reveal as follows:
“An analysis of the total 683 projects at the end of the 2
nd quarter shows that
77 projects have contributed to both time as well as cost overruns w.r t. their
original schedule. While the time overrun accounted by these projects ranges
from 2-252 months, the cost has resulted in 90.7% increase w.r.t. original cost.
The total numbers of delayed projects are 265 w.r.t. their original schedule.
The delay for these projects ranges from 1 to 252 months. Of the 265 delayed
projects 85 (32.08%) projects belonging to road and high ways sector are
being implemented with range of 1-60 months delay. These 265 delayed projects
have accounted for a cost over run of Rs. 28662 crore. ”
38. On issues relating to time and cost overrun of projects, the Ministry’s
response inter alia states.
“Time and cost overruns have been a major problem affecting the implementation
of central sector projects. Due to close monitoring and systems improvement
brought out mainly by the Ministries concerned with the support of the Ministry
of Statistics & Programme Implementation, the time overrun could be controlled
up to an extant which has resulted in reducing the cost overrun of the projects.
An analysis of the trend in the last14 years shows that the cost overrun has come
down from 62% in March, 1991 to 18.1% in September, 2005 resulting in
savings.”

15
39. Detailing the specific initiatives taken to improve monitoring of project
implementation, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“Proposals relating to amendment of Land Acquisition Act, 1894, after
examination of all the relevant issues, have been incorporated in a Bill
prepared by the Ministry of Rural Development for approval of the Parliament.
Keeping in view the importance of Rehabilitation and resettlement issues in
project implementation, a National Policy or Resettlement and Rehabilitation
has been finalized and it is being formulated in shape of legislation.
The issues relating to standardisation of Contract documents have been
examined in the light of constraints faced in a ward of contracts, reasons for
failure of contracts, poor performance record in contract management in the
public sector, etc. A Standard Contract Management System consisting of
Standard Contract Clauses and Standard General conditions of Contract
has been devised and circulated, as guidelines for adoption. Minister of
State for Statistics & Programme Implementation visited 18 projects viz.
Tollyganj Garia MRTS Project in Kolkata, Ernakulam Tiruvananthapuram
Railway Electrification Project of Sourthern Railway, Construction of
New Runway at Mangalore Airport, National Highway Development Project
in Karnataka among others and reviewed the status of implementation at site.
In addition, the officers of the Ministry visited projects in Different parts of
the country and reviewed the status of implementation at site. Standing
Committees have been set up by the Ministries/ Departments to fix
responsibility for time and cost overrun of central sector projects. These
measures, alongwith frequent reviews at higher levels, has helped in
bringing down the incidence of delays in project implementation.  The other
initiatives of the Division areas follows:—
(i) The Flash Reporting system has been modified to focus on the constraints
faced in implementation and to relate the monitoring of progress with
reference to completion of major milestones on the monitor.
(ii) The Project Monitoring Division has taken the initiative for introduction
of On-line Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS). It is to be made
operationalised by 31 March, 2006. Consultants have been appointed
to study various aspects of 32 projects in different sectors to study
the implementation process. The results of the study will be consolidated
and manual on project implementation would be reviewed for
guidance and future planning, to improve the project Implementation
scenario.
(iii) Follow up action on the recommendations of the Govindaraian
Committee for simplification of extant procedures for project approvals
and evaluation.”

16
40. The Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) follows a two
tier system of monitoring project implementation. While all projects are monitored
on quarterly basis, the major projects costing Rs 100 crore are monitored on
monthly basis through Flash Report System. An Exception Report in respect of
projects which are showing progressive slippage in achieving the milestones, is also
issued. The Exception Report concentrates on the exceptional issues and problems
responsible for future delays. The critical issues requiring action at higher levels are
brought into the focus. The emphasis is on exceptions and problems that need to
be addressed without delay. Besides this, Special PMO Report on projects costing
Rs. 500 crore and above, is also released every quarter.
41. The other initiatives taken towards strengthening project implementation
measures include rigorous quarterly reviews of implementation of public sector
projects by the Ministry concerned, the review of projects experiencing cost overrun
and slippage in commissioning by the Committees of Secretaries; fixation of
responsibility for slippages by the Standing Committees and incorporation of
Govindarajan Committee’s recommendation on project formulation, appraisal and
implementation of Central projects etc.
42. The initiatives taken by the Ministry, along with the policy measures initiated
by the administrative Ministries is said to have contributed significantly in reducing
the cost overruns in respect of Central Sector projects. As regards the cost overrun
with respect to the original cost of approval, was 67.7% during early 1990s as against
18.1% during April-September, 2005.
43. The reasons for delayed implementation of the Central Sector Projects can
be delineated follows:
(i) Financial constraints and inadequate funding,
(ii) Land acquisition
(iii) Shifting of utilities
(iv) Clearances from Forest, Environment and Pollution Agencies
(v) Tender related delays
(vi) Equipment procurement delays
44. A major programme initiated by the Government for strengthening Project
Monitoring Mechanism is the ‘On line computerised monitoring system; Implementation
of the programme witnessed significant delays, reasons for which, as furnished in the
Action Taken Note reveal as follows:—
(a) Restrictions imposed by the World Bank in the tendering process
Subsequently resorted to procurement of equipment through NICSI.

17
(b) Delay in supply of equipment by NICSI a Govt. of India undertaking.
(c) Change in the requirement of the Ministry in so far as the contents of the
reports so as to curtail delay in release of reports.
(d) Delay in the software development by TERI.
45. The milestones for operationalising the OCMS programme are as:—
• Project Data (including milestones) on experimental basis will be
entered into the system by project authorities (PSUs) by end of
February, 2006.
• Once the accuracy of the system functioning is certified as per the original
parameters laid down, OCMS will be declared operational.
• Training will be imparted to members of PSUs having large projects within
a period of 4 to 6 days. Training manual suitable for project authorities in
PSUs will be printed and circulated before hand.
• The OCMS will be operationalised by end of August, 2006.
• We hope to receive data directly from project authorities and process on
the OCMS by the end of September, 2006.
46. As per the Outcome Budget, 2006-07, the On-line Computerised Monitoring
System (OCMS) is to be made operative by September, 2006.
47. Asked to specify whether the programme implementation wing of
the Ministry was suitably equipped in terms of knowledge, manpower etc. to
monitor infrastructure projects the Ministry in their post evidence reply submitted
as under:—
“The Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division is headed by Joint Adviser
with two supporting Deputy Advisers and one Director. The officers
currently in position have adequate knowledge to monitor projects in various
actors. However, the present manpower structure in the IPMD is in a very
precarious shape. Out of 4 sanctioned Deputy Advisers, only 2 are available
in position and currently on extended period of deputation. In the existing
Recruitment Rules for Deputy Advisers, there is no scope for absorption of
the officers who, with adequate experience of project monitoring, wish to
be absorbed in the IPMD. At the same time, officers with requisite experience
are not willing to join the IPMD despite repeated advertisements in national
dailies. The selection process by UPSC is very time consuming and has not
resulted in any new officer joining IPMD in last five years.

18
The IPMD could be in a state of sudden vacuum if the recruitment rules for
Deputy Advisers in the IPMD are not amended so as to get the willing
officers absorbed for smooth functioning leading to monitor Central Sector
Infrastructure Projects meaningfully. Moreover, the experience of supporting
staff especially at the level of Under Secretaries and Section Officers is not
commensurate with the nature of technical work handled in this Division. As a
result, regular field visits to projects which are suffering time overrun and cost
overrun could not be undertaken by the officers. Hence the efficacy of monitoring
has been diluted to a large extent.
In view of the above, it may be noted that IPMD is running short of manpower
to handle the existing workload, it is also not possible to monitor the projects
effectively using all the management tools available at present.”
As per an article titled Budget Strategy for 2006-07 - Consolidate, optimise,
deliver which appeared in the Hindu Business Line dated 6.12.2005 inter alia
states that the Finance Minister had declared the shocking detail that 340 bigger
projects with a total investment of Rs. 18,000 crore and 620 projects each with an
investment of over Rs. 20 crore were still dragging on, gobbling up resources many
times more than envisaged, it has been pointed out that the multiple effect
of commissioning projects on time and making them work as per specifications will
by itself be the equivalent of adding two percentage points to the GDP.
48. The Committee note from the information furnished that of the
683 projects on the monitor of the Ministry, 77 projects have witnessed time as
well as cost overruns. While the time overrun witnessed in the implementation of
the projects stretches from 2 to 253 months, the resultant cost escalation has been
to the extent of 90.7%. Though the cost overrun in regard to implementing
projects is stated to have gone down from 67.6% in the 1990s to 18.1% in the
period, April-September, 2005, it has also been brought to light that the precarious
position of the manpower structure in the Infrastructure Project Monitoring
Division (IPMD) has diluted the efficiency of the project monitoring task to a
significant extent. Bringing down time and cost overruns in implementing projects
is by itself expected to contribute to as much as 2% of the GDP. The Committee,
therefore again emphasise on ensuring that sustained and focussed attention be
given to implement adequate measures for minimising the cost and time escalations
in project implementation
49. The Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) which is
perceived to be a major initiative towards ensuring effective monitoring of project
implementation has itself, as pointed out in the earirer reports of the Committee
witnessed repeated episodes of delays. As per the information furnished to the
Committee, the system is now set to be operationalised by July, 2006. However, as

19
per the Outcome Budget, 2006-07, the project is likely to become operative only
by September, 2006. The Committee take strong exception to the frequent shifting
of the time schedule for ope-rationalising the OCMS project. They expect that no
effort would be spared in ensuring that the project is made operational definitely
by September, 2006 and any proposal for extension beyond that will be intimated
to the Committee along with sufficient reasons for the same.
NEW DELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 May, 2006 Chairman,
29 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

20
STA TEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN
THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT (2006-2007)
Sl. Para No. Ministry/Department Conclusions/Recommendations
No. Concerned
12 3 4
1. 14, 15 Ministry of Statistics The Committee had, in their fourth and
and Programme nineteenth report on the Demands for
Implementation Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation of the years
2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively taken
note of the fact that Tier II which was the
actual implementation phase of the India
Statistical Strengthening Project was
dependent on the results of Tier I of the
project. The Committee had, therefore,
emphasised on the need to ensure that the
project schedules were strictly adhered to.
From the information furnished, the
Committee note that the work on building
the Concept Paper on Tier-ll of the India
Statistical Strengthening Project which is
dependent on the broad results
implementation of Tier-I of the project has
been hampered. While the work on
developing the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier-ll
in respect of components relating to
‘Creation and Maintenance of Business
Register’ and ‘Improvement of Service
Sector Statistics’ has been initiated, the
development of the ‘Concept Paper’ on the
remaining three components could not be
initiated viz.  identifying specific
requirements for strengthening the State
Statistical Branches Bureaus, assessment of
the survey capabilities of the private sector
and all India Statistical network. The delay

21
12 3 4
in formulating the ‘Concept Paper’ for Tier
II of the project has been owing to the non-
availability of the broad results/
achievements relating to implementation of
the three components as a part of the
Tier- I programme of the project.
The Committee, therefore, re-emphasise on
ensuring that all efforts are made to see that
the work on the remaining components of
Tier I of the India Statistical Strengthening
Project are completed as per the laid down
schedules so that Tier-ll of the project takes
off without further delay. They also wish
to be apprised quarterly of the progress
made in this direction.
2. 21, 22 Ministry of Statistics From the information furnished, the
and Programme Committee note that the current series of
Implementation CPI (UNME) is based on the Family Living
Survey (FLS) data collected during
1982-83. As such, the consumption basket
of the current series of CPI (UNME) needs
to be revised. What the Committee find to
be particularly worrisome to note in this
regard is that owing to lack of field officers,
the Family Living Survey could not be
undertaken. Consequently the Tariff
Advisory Committee (TAC) had to
recommend for continuing with the current
series of CPI (UNME) for some more time.
The Committee understand that the
recruitment process for filling up the vacant
posts of the Field Officers is underway. The
Committee expect that the Family Living
Survey will be undertaken immediately
upon completion of the recruitment process
so as to enable the revision of CPI (UNME)
series.
The Committee had, in their 31st Action
Taken Report inter alia observed that the

22
Government had failed to furnish details
of the measures initiated to ensure early
completion of the work on formulating the
new series of WPI and switching over to
the Producer Price Index (PPI). From the
details now furnished, the Committee note
that in regard to revising the Wholesale
Price Index (WPI), the major task of
collecting the price information for the
product basket of the new series applicable
from April, 2000 onwards remains to be
executed. As regards the work pertaining
to construction of the Producer Price Index
(PPI) for commodity sectors, the
Committee note that the Working Group
concerned has commenced with the work
on addressing the related conceptual,
analytical and technical issues. With regard
to the new series of CPI (IW) on base
2001=100, the Committee note that the
Tariff Advisory Committee (TAC) had at
its meeting held in February, 2001, decided
to release the new series. The Committee
expect that every possible effort is made to
ensure that the work on revising the
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is executed
within a pre-determined time frame. The
Committee also desire that the new series
of CPI (IW) on base, 2001=100, which is
stated to be ready and under submission to
Ministry of Labour, be released by the
Ministry at the earliest.
3. 33, 34 & 35 Ministry of Statistics The Central Statistical Organisation
and Programme (CSO) is expected to play a pivotal role in
Implementation co-ordinating with the various Ministries
and Departments of the Central
Government, State Governments and other
Statistical agencies for enabling
maintenance of quality standards of core
statistics relating to sectors of the
agriculture, livestock, health, industry,
12 3 4

23
housing, education, labour, road, transport
etc. and to make such data available to
economists, Planning Commission and
others concerned for usage for the benefit
of the country as a whole. The Committee,
however, feel constrained to note that the
Ministry have, in one of the replies
perceived their role in this regard to be
merely of advisory nature.
The Committee also note that the
Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organisations (CSSO) and Chief
Secretaries of the States/Union Territories
held in October, 2004 had made a detailed
analysis of issues relating inter alia  to
agriculture and livestock statistics, social
statistics, health and family welfare
statistics and economic census. The
Conference had, inter alia identified areas
of weaknesses in compiling quality data and
suggested remedial measures for
overcoming the problems. The Committee,
however, note with concern that the
Ministry do not have ready information on
the follow up action taken on
implementation of the recommendations
made by the Conference. As per the
assurance given, the Committee expect the
Government to process the related
information on the progress made in
implementing the recommendations and
apprise them of the facts relating thereto at
the earliest.
For enabling effective interaction between
the Central and State Governments for
addressing issues relating to the quality of
statistical data, the Committee had, in their
Nineteenth Report, recommended that the
Conference of Central and State Statistical
Organisation (CSSO) be held at annual
12 3 4

24
intervals. This was agreed to by the
Government. The Committee, however,
feel seriously concerned to note that the
practice of convening the conference
annually is not being adhered to. The
Committee reiterate the need for invariably
holding the Conference of Central and State
Statistical Organisations at annual intervals.
4. 48, 49 Ministry of Statistics The Committee note from the
and Programme information furnished that of the 683
Implementation projects on the monitor of the Ministry,
77 projects have witnessed time as well as
cost overruns. While the time overrun
witnessed in the implementation of the
projects stretches from 2 to 253 months,
the resultant cost escalation has been to the
extent of 90.7%. Though the cost overrun
in regard to implementing projects is stated
to have gone down from 67.6% in the 1990s
to 18.1% in the period, April-September,
2005, it has also been brought to light that
the precarious position of the manpower
structure in the Infrastructure Project
Monitoring Division (IPMD) has diluted
the efficiency of the project monitoring task
to a significant extent. Bringing down time
and cost overruns in implementing projects
is by itself expected to contribute to as
much as 2% of the GDP. The Committee,
therefore again emphasise on ensuring that
sustained and focussed attention be given
to implement adequate measures for
minimising the cost and time escalations
in project implementation
The Online Computerised Monitoring
System (OCMS) which is perceived to be
a major initiative towards ensuring effective
monitoring of project implementation has
itself, as pointed out in the earlier reports
of the Committee witnessed repeated
12 3 4

25
episodes of delays. As per the information
furnished to the Committee, the system is
now set to be operationalised by July, 2006.
However, as per the Outcome Budget,
2006-07, the project is likely to become
operative only by September, 2006. The
Committee take strong exception to the
frequent shifting of the time schedule for
operationalising the OCMS project. They
expect that no effort would be spared in
ensuring that the project is made
operational definitely by September, 2006
and any proposal for extension beyond that
will be intimated to the Committee along
with sufficient reasons for the same.
12 3 4

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- SECOND SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 19th April, 2006 from 1030 to 1315 hrs. and
1430 to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
6. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Smt. P.K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Part - I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
26

27
Part-II
(1200 to 1315 hrs.)
Witnesses, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
1. Shri J. Hari Narayan, Secretary
2. Dr. R.C. Panda, Special Secretary
3. Dr. K.V . Rao, DG & CEO, NSSO
4. Dr. Rita Sharma, AS & FA (S&PI)
5. Dr. Shanker K. Pal, Director, ISI, Kolkata
6. Dr. S.K. Nath, ADG , Trg.
7. Shri Vishnu Kumar, ADG , NAD/Computer Centre
8. Shri K.A.D. Sinha, ADG , CSO
9. Shri A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary, S & PI
10. Shri J. Dash, DDG
11. Dr. P.C. Tangri, DDG, CPD
12. Dr. A.K. Yogi, DDG, FOD
13. Shri Ramesh Kolli, DDG (NAD)
14. Shri D.K. Joshi, DDG (Trg.)
15. Shri A.K. Mehra, DDG , ISD
16. Shri V .K. Malhotra, DDG , SDRD
17. Shri V .K. Aroa, DDG , DPD
18. Shri M.V .S. Ranganadham, Director (Admn.)
19. Shri A.K. Ganeriwala, Director, MPLADS
20. Shri Deepak Rastogi, Director
21. Mrs. J. Jurian, Director (IFD)
22. Dr. C. Rangarajan, Jt. Advisor, IPMD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme implementation to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of representatives of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation on issues arising out of Budget Proposals
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and other related
matters .
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation to furnish notes on certain points raised by the Members
to which replies were not readily available with them during the discussion.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.

28
Part-III
(1430 to 1630 hrs.)
]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE THE COMMITTEE SAT ON WEDNESDAY , 19 MAY , 2006
FROM 0930 TO 1030 HRS.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
10.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. Smt. P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G . Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.
3. ] ] ] ] ] ] ] ]
] ] ] ] ] ] ] ]
4. The Committee then took for consideration draft Reports on the
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the following Ministries/Departments and
29

30
adopted the same subject to the modification as shown in Annexure-I in respect of the
draft Report at SI. No. (v) :—
(i) ]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
(ii) ]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
(iii) ]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
(iv) Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
(v) ]  ] ]  ]]  ]]  ]
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light
of modification as also to make verbal and other consequential changes arising out of
the factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.